Often this poet, strolling through the noisy splintered glare of a Manhattan noon, has paused at a sample Olivetti to type up thirty or forty Jines of ruminations, or pondering more deeply has withdrawn to a darkened ware­ or firehouse to limn his computed misunder­ standings of the eternal questions of life, co-existence and depth, while never forgetting to eat Lunch his favorite meal. ... $8.95 ISBN 978-087286-035-3 50 895> 9 780872 860353 LUNCH POEMS Frank O'Hara The Pocket Poets Series : Number 19 T CITY LIGHTS BOOKS San Francisco LUNCH POEMS Frank O'Hara The Pocket Poets Series : Number 19 CITY LIGHTS BOOKS San Francisco ©1964 by Frank O'Hara All Rights Reserved Some of these poems have appeared previously in Yugen, Evergreen Review, Poetry, Locus So/us, The Beat Scene, Big Table, Signal, Nugget, The New American Poetry, and City Lights Journal, to all of whom the author and publisher offer their thanks. Library of Congress Number: 64-8689 ISBN: 0-87286-035-3 ISBN-13: 978-0-87286-035-3 Visit our website: www .cltylights.corn CITY LIGHTS BOOKS are edited by Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Nancy). Peters and published at the City Lights Bookstore, 261 Columbus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94133. CONTENTS Music ......................................... ............................................. I Alma ........................................................................................ 3 On Rachmaninoff's Birthday ................................................ 7 Poem ........... ............................................................................ 8 On the Way to the San Remo ............................................... I I 2 Poems from the Ohara Monogatari .................................. 13 A Step Away from Them ....................................................... 15 Cambridge ........................ ...................................... ................ 18 Poem ................................................. ...................................... 19 Three Airs .......................................... : ................................... 20 Image of the Buddha Preaching ........................................... 22 Song .................... ..................................................................... 24 The Day Lady Died ............................. .................................... 25 Poem ........................ ............................................ ................... 27 Poem ................................ ....................................................... 28 Naphtha .... ............................. ................................................. 30 Personal Poem ............... ........................................................ 32 Adieu to Norman, Bonjour to Joan and jean-Paul ............ 34 Rhapsody ................................................................................. 37 HOtel particulier ..................................................................... 40 Cornkind ........ ............................... .......................................... 42 How To Get There ................................................................. 44 A Little Travel Diary .................................................... ........... 4 7 Five Poems .. ............................................................................ 49 Ave Maria ...................................... .......................................... 51 Pistachio Tree at Ch:iteau No ir ............................................. 53 At Kamin's Dance Bookshop ................................................. 55 Steps ................................................................................ ........ 56 Mary Desti's Ass .............. .................. ......... ......... .............. .. ..... 59 St. Paul and All That ........................ .......... . .... .............. ......... 62 Memoir of Sergei 0 ............... ........... ................. ......... ........... 64 Yesterday Down at the Canal ......................................... . ....... 66 Poem en forme de saw .......................... ................................. 67 For the Chinese New Year & For Bill Berkson ............ ......... 69 Poem ......................... .............................................................. 78 Galanta .................................................................................... 79 Fantasy ....................................... .............................................. Bl to Joseph LeSueur MUSIC If I rest for a moment near The Equestrian pausing for a liver sausage sandwich in the Mayflower Shoppe, that angel seems to be leading the horse into Bergdorf's and I am naked as a table cloth, my nerves humming. Close to the fear of war and the stars which have disappeared. I have in my hand only 25¢, it's so meaningless to eat! and gusts of water spray over the basins of leaves like the hammers of a glass pianoforte. If I seem to you to have lavender lips under the leaves of the world, I must tighten my belt. It's like a locomotive on the march, the season of distress and clarity and my door is open to the evenings of midwinter's lightly falling snow over the newspapers. Clasp me in your handkerchief like a tear, trumpet of early afternoon! in the foggy autumn. As they're putting up the Christmas trees on Park Avenue I I shall see my daydreams walking by with dogs in blankets, put to some use before all those coloured lights come on t But no more fountains and no more rain, and the stores stay open terribly late. 1953 2 ALMA "Est-elle almie? .. . aux premieres heures blmes Se ditruira-t-elle comme /es fleurs feues . ... • -Rimbaud I The sun, perhaps three of them, one black one red, you know, and her dancing all the time, fanning the purple sky getting purple, her fancy white skin quite unorien­ tal to the dirty children's round eyes standing in circles munching muffins, the cock-roaches like nuggets half hid in the bran. Boy! how are you, Prester John? the smile of the river, so searching, so enamelled. 2 What mention of the King? the spinning wheel still turns, the apples rot to the singing, Alct/Ste on winter-sojourns is nice at Nice. Wander, my dear sacred Pontiff, do dare to murder minutely and ponder what is the bloody affair 3 inside the heart of the weak dancer, whose one toe is worth inestimable, the gang, the cheek of it! it's too dear, her birth amidst the acorns with nails stuck through them by passionate parents, castanets! Caucasian tales! their prodigality proportionate: "Sacred Heart, oh Heart so sick, make Detroit more wholly thine, all with greeds and scabs so thick that Judas Priest must make a sign." Thus he to bed and we to rise and Alma singing like a loon. Her dancing toenails in her eyes. Her pa was dead on the River Ga boon. 3 Detroit was founded on the great near waterways next to Canada which was friendly and immediately gained for herself the appellation "the Detroit of Thermopylaes,'' 4 a name which has stuck to this day wherever ballroom dancing is held in proper esteem. Let me remind you of that great wrist movement, the enjambement schizo­ phrene, a particularly satisfying variation of which may be made l:iy adding a little tomato paste. Great success. While in Detroit accused of starting the Chicago fire. Millions of roses from Russians. Alma had come a long way, she opened a jewelry shop, her name became a household word, she'd invented an arch-supporter. l How often she thought of her father! the castle, the kitchen-garden, the hollihocks and the mill stream beyond curving gently as a parenthesis. Many a bitter tear was shed by her on the boards of this theatre as she pondered the inscrutable meagerness of divine Providence, always humming, always shifting a little, never missing a beat. She guested one season at the height of her nostalgia with the Metropolitan Opera Ballet in Salammb6; her father seemed very close in al th!lt oriental splendor of bamboo and hotel palms and stale sweat and bracelets, an engagement of tears. In the snow, in her white fox fur wraps, how more beautiful than Mary Garden! 5 4 Onward to the West. ''Where I came from, where I'm going. Indian country." Gold. Oh say can you see Alma. The darling of Them. All her friends were artists. They alone have memories. They alone love flowers. They alone give parties and die. Poor Alma. They alone. She died, and it was as if all the jewels in the world had heaved a sigh. The seismograph at Fordham University registered, for once, a spiritual note. How like a sliver in her own short fat muscular foot. She loved the Western World, though there are some who say she isn't really dead. 1953 6 ON RACHMANINOFF'S BIRTHDAY Quick! )l last poem before I go off my rocker. 0 h Rachmaninoff1 pnset, Massac husetts. Is it the fig-newton playing the horn? Thundering windows of hell, will your tubes ever break into powder? Oh my palace of oranges, junk shop, staples, umber, basalt; I'm a child again when I was really miserable, a grope pizzicato. My pocket of rhinestone, yoyo, carpenter's pencil, amethyst, hypo, campaign button, is the room full of smoke? Shit on the soup, let it burn. So it's back. You'll never be mentally sober. 1953 7 POEM I watched an armory combing its bronze bricks and in the sky there were glistening rails of milk. Where had the swan gone, the one with the lame back? Now mounting the steps I enter my new home full of grey radiators and glass ashtrays full of wool. Against the winter I must get a samovar. embroidered with basil leaves and Ukranian mottos to the distant sound of wings, painfully anti-wind, a little bit of the blue summer air will come back as the steam chuckles in the monster's steamy attack and I'll be happy here and happy there, full of tea and tears. I don't suppose I'll ever get to Italy, but I have the terrible tundra at least. 8 My new home will be full of wood, roots and the like, while I pace in a turtleneck sweater, repairing my bike. I watched the palisades shivering in the snow of my face, which had grown preternaturally pure. Once I destroyed a man's idea of himself to have him. If I'd had a samovar then I'd have made him tea and as hyacinths grow from a pot he would love me and my charming room of tea cosies full of dirt which is why I must travel, to collect the leaves. 0 my enormous piano, you are not like being outdoors though it is cold and you are made of fire and wood! I lift your lid and mountains return, that I am good. 9 The stars blink like a hairnet that was dropped on a seat and now it is lying in the alley behind the theater where my play is echoed by dying voices. 1954 10 I am really a woodcarver and my words are love which willfully parades in its room, refusing to move. ON THE WAY TO SAN REMO The black ghinkos snarl their way up the moon growls at each blinking window the apartment houses climb deafeningly into the purple A bat hisses northwards the perilous steps lead to a grate suddenly the heat is bearable The cross-eyed dog scratches a worn patch of pavement !)is right front leg is maimed in the shape of a V there's no trace of his nails on the street a woman cajoles ' . She is very old and dirty she whistles her filthy hope that it will rain tonight The 6th Avenue bus trunk-lumbers sideways it is full of fat people who cough as at a movie they eat each other's dandruff in the flickering glare 11 The moon passes into clouds so hurt by the street lights of your glance oh my heart The act of love is also passing like a subway bison through the paper-littered arches of the express tracks the sailor sobers he feeds pennies to the peanut machines Though others are in the night far away lips upon a dusty armpit the nostrils are full of tears High fidelity reposed in a box a hand on the windowpane the sweet calm the violin strings tie a young man's hair the bright black eyes pin far away their smudged curiosity 1954 12 Yes you are foolish smoking the bars are for rabbits who wish to outlive the men 2POEMSFROM THE OHARA MONOGATARI ]· My love is coming in a glass the blood of the Bourbons saxophone or cornet qu 'impotte oii? green of glass flowers dans le Kentucky and always the same handkerchief at the same nose of damask turning up my extravagant collar tossing my scarf about my neck the Baudelaire of Kyoto's never-ending pureness is he cracked in the head? 13 2 After a long trip to a shrine in wooden clogs so hard on the muscles the tea is bitter and the breasts are hard so much terrace for one evening there is no longer no ocean I don't see the ocean under my stilts as I poke along hands on ankles feet on wrists naked in thought like a whip made from sheerest stockings the radio is on the cigarette is puffed upon by the pleasures of rolling in a bog some call the Milky Way in far-fetched Occidental lands above the trees where dwell the amusing skulls 1954 14 A STEP AWAY FROM THEM It's my lunch hour, so I go for a walk among the hum-colored cabs. First, down the sidewalk where laborers feed their dirty glistening torsos sandwiches and Coca-Cola, with yellow helmets on. They protect them from falling bricks, I guess. Then onto the avenue where skirts are flipping above heels and blow up over grates. The sun is hot, but the cab� stir up the air. I look at bargains in wristwatches. There are cats playing in sawdust. On to Times Square, where the sign blows smoke over my head, and higher the waterfall pours lightly. A Negro stands in a doorway with a toothpick, languorously agitating. A blonde chorus .girl clicks: he smiles and rubs his chin. Everything 15 16 suddenly honks: it is 12:40 of a Thursday. Neon in daylight is a great pleasure, as Edwin Denby would write, as are light bulbs in daylight. I stop for a cheeseburger at]ULIET'S CORNER. Giulietta Masina, wife of Federico Fellini, e bell' attrice. And chocolate malted. A lady in foxes on such a day puts her poodle in a cab. There are several Puerto Ricans on the avenue today, which makes it beautiful and warm. First Bunny died, then John Latouche, then Jackson Pollock. But is the earth as full as life was full, of them? And one has eaten and one walks, past the magazines with nudes and the posters for BULLF1GHT and the Manhattan Storage Warehouse, which they'll soon tear down. I used to think they had the Armory Show there. A glass of papaya juice and back to work. My heart is in my pocket, it is Poems by Pierre Reverdy. 1956 17 CAMBRIDGE It is still raining and the yellow-green cotton fruit looks silly round a window giving out on winter trees with only three drab leaves left. The hot plate works, it is the sole heat on earth, and instant coffee. I put on my warm corduroy pants, a heavy maroon sweater, and wrap myself in my old maroon bathrobe. Just like Pasternak in Marburg (they say Italy and France are colder, but I'm sure that Germany's at least as cold as this) and, lacking the Master's inspiration, I may freeze to death before I can get out into the white rain. I could have left the window closed last night? But that's where health comes from! His breath from the Urals, drawing me into flame like a forgotten cigarette. Burn! this is not negligible, being poetic, and not feeble, since it's sponsored by the greatest living Russian poet at incalculable cost. Across the street there is a house under construction, abandoned to the rain. Secretly, I shall go to work on it. 1956 18 POEM Instant coffee with slightly sour cream in it, and a phone call to the beyond which doesn't seem to be coming any nearer. "Ah daddy, I wanna stay drunk many days" ob the poetry of a new friend my life held precariously in the seeing hands of others, their and my impossibilities. Is this love, now that the first love has finally died, where there were no impossibilities? 1956 19 THREE AIRS ta Norman Bluhm 1. So many things in the air! soot, elephant balls, a Chinese cloud which is entirely collapsed, a cat swung by its tail and the senses of the dead which are banging about inside my tired red eyes 2. In the deeps there is a little bird and it only hums, it hums of fortitude and temperance, it is managing a foundry how firmly it must grasp things! tear them out of the slime and then, alas! it mischievously drops them into the cauldron of hideousness there is already a sunset naming the poplars which see only, watery, themselves 20 3. Oh to be an angel (if there were any!), and go straight up into the sky and look around and then come down not tp be covered with steel and aluminum glaringly ugly in the pure distances and clattering and buckling, wheezing but to be part of the treetops and the blueness, invisible, the iridescent darknesses beyond, 1958 silent, listening to the air becoming no air becoming air again 21 IMAGE OF THE BUDDHA PREACHING I am very happy to be here at the Villa Hugel and Prime Minister Nehru has asked me to greet the people of Essen and to tell you how powerfu,lly affected we in India have been by Germany's philosophy, traditions and mythology though our lucidity and our concentration on archetypes puts us in a class by ourself "for in this world of storm and stress" - 5,000 years of Indian art! just think of it, oh Essen! is this a calmer region of thought, "a reflection of the mind through the ages"? Max Miiller, 11primus inter pares" among Indologists remember our byword, Mokshamula, I rejoice in the fact of 900 exhibits I deeply appreciate filling the gaps, oh Herr Doktor Heinrich Goetz! and the research purring onward in Pakistan and Ceylon and Afghanistan soapstone, terracotta- Indus, terracotta- Maurya. terracotta Sunga, terracotta-Andhra, terracotta fragments famous Bharhut Stupa 22 Kushana, Ghandara, Gupta, Hindu andJain, Secco, �an ta, Villa Hiigel! Anglo-German trade will prosper by Swansea-Mannheim friendship waning now the West Wall by virtue of two rolls per capita and the flagship BERLIN is joining its "white fleet" on the Rhine though better schools and model cars are wanting, still still oh Essen Nataraja dances on the dwarf and unlike their fathers Germany's highschool pupils love the mathematics which is hopeful of a new delay in terror I don't think 1959 23 SONG Is it dirty does it look dirty that's what you think of in the city does it just seem dirty that's what you think of in the city you don't refuse to breathe do you someone comes along with a very bad character he seems attractive. is he really. yes. very he's attractive as his character is bad. is it. yes that's what you think of in the city run your finger along your no-moss mind that's not a thought that's soot and you take a lot of dirt off someone is the character less bad. no. it imyroves constantly you don't refuse to breathe do you 1959 24 THE DAY LADY DIED It is 12:20 in New York a Friday three days after Bastille day, yes it is 1959 and I go get a shoeshine because I will get off the 4:19 in Easthampton at 7:15 and then go straight to dinner and I"<lon't know the people who will feed me I walk, up the muggy street beginning to sun and have a hamburger and a malted and buy an ugly NEW WORLD WRITING to see what the poets in Ghana are doing these days I go on to the bank and Miss Stillwagon (first name Linda I once heard) doesn't 'even look up my balance for once in her life and in die GOLDEN GRIFF1N I get a little Verlaine for Patsy with drawings by Bonnard although I do think of Hesiod, trans. Richmond Lattimore or Brendan Behan's new play or Le Balcon or Les Negres of Genet, but I don't, I stick with Verlaine after practically going to sleep with quandariness 25 and for Mike I just stroll into the PARK LANE Liquor Store and ask for a bottle of Strega and then I go back where I came from to 6th Avenue and the tobacconist in the Ziegfeld Theatre and casually ask for a carton of Gauloises and a carton of Picayunes, and a NEW YORK POST with her face on it and I am sweating a lot by now and thinking of leaning on the john door in the 5 SPOT while she whispered a song along the keyboard to Mal Waldron and everyone and I stopped breathing 1959 26 POEM Wouldn't it be funny if The Finger had designed us to shit just once a week? all week long we'd get fatter and fatter and then on Sunday morning while everyone's in church ploop! 1959 27 POEM Khrushchev is coming on the right day! the cool graced light is pushed off the enormous glass piers by hard wind and everything is tossing, hurrying on up this country has everything but politesse, a Puerto Rican cab driver says and five different girls I see look like Piedie Gimbel with her blonde hair tossing too, as she looked when I pushed her little daughter on the swing on the lawn it was also windy last night we went to a movie and came out, Ionesco is greater than Beckett, Vincent said, that's what I think, blueberry blintzes and Khrushchev was probably being carped at in Washington, no politesse Vincent tells me about his mother's trip to Sweden Hans tells us 28 about his father's life in Sweden, it sounds like Grace Hartigan's painting Swedm so I go home to bed and names drift through my head Purgatorio Merchado, Gerhard Schwartz and Gaspar Gonzales, all unknown figures of the early morning as I go to work where does the evil of the year go when September takes New York and turns it into ozone stalagmites deposits of light so I get back up make·coffee, and read Fran�ois Villon, his life, so dark New York seems blinding and my tie is blowing up the street I wish it would blow off though it is cold and somewhat warms my neck as the train bears Khrushchev on to Pennsylvania Station and the light seems to be eternal and joy seems to be inexorable I am foolish enough always to find it in wind 1959 29 NAPHTHA Ahjean Dubuffet when you think of him doing his military service in the Eiffel Tower as a meteorologist in 1922 you know how wonderful the 20th century can be and the gaited I�oquois on the girders fierce and unflinching-footed nude as they should be slightly empty like a Sonia Delaunay there is a parable of speed somewhere behind the Indians' eyes they invented the century with their horses and their fragile backs which are dark we owe a debt to the Iroquois and to Duke Ellington for playing in the buildings when they are built we don't do much ourselves 30 but fuck and think of the haunting Metro and the one who didn't show up there while we were waiting to become part of our century just as you can't make a hat out of steel and still wear it who wears hats anyway it is our tribe's custom to beguile how are you feeling in ancient September I am feeling·like a truck on a wet highway how can you you were made �n the image of god I was not I was made in the image of a sissy truck-driver and Jean Dubuffet painting his cows "with a likeness burst in the memory" apart from love (don't say it) I am ashamed of my century for being so entertaining but I have to &mile 1959 31 PERSONAL POEM Now when I walk around at lunchtime I have only two charms in my pocket an old Roman coin Mike Kanemitsu gave me and a bolt-head that broke off a packing case when I was in Madrid the others never brought me too much luck though they did help keep me in New York against coercion but now I'm happy for a time and interested I walk through the luminous humidity passing the House of Seagram with its wet and its loungers and the construction to the left that closed the sidewalk if I ever get to be a construction worker I'd like to have a silver hat please and get to Mori4rty's where I wait for LeRoi and hear who wants to be a mover and shaker the last five years my batting average is .016 that's that, and LeRoi comes in and tells me Miles Davis was clubbed 12 times last night outside BIRDLAND by a cop a lady asks us for a nickel for a terrible 32 disease but we don't give her one we don't like terrible diseases, then we go eat some fish and some ale it's cool but crowded we don't like Lionel Trilling we decide, we like Don Allen we don't like Henry James so much we like Herman Melville we don't want to be in the poets' walk in San Francisc<i even we just want to be rich and walk on-girders in our silver hats I wonder if one person out of the 8,000,000 is thinking of me as I shake hands with LeRoi and buy a sfu\p for my wristwatch' and go back to work·happy at the thought possibly so 1959 33 ADIEU TO NORMAN, BON ]OUR TO JOAN AND JEAN-PAUL It is 12:10 in New York and I am wondering ifl will finish this in time to meet Norman for lunch ah lunch! I think I am going crazy what with my terrible hangover and the weekend coming up at excitement-prone Kenneth Koch's I wish I were staying in town and working on my poems at Joan's studio for a new book by Grove Press which they will prc;ibably not print but it is good to be several floors up in the dead of night wondering whether you are any good or not and the only decision you can make is that you did it yesterday I looked up the rue Fremicourt on a map and was happy to find it like a bird flying over Paris et ses environs which unfortunately did not include Seine-et-Oise which I don't know as well as a number of other things and Allen is back talking about god a lot 34 and Peter is back not talking very much and Joe has a cold and is not coming to Kenneth's although he is coming to lunch with Norman I suspect he is making a distinction well, who isn't I wish I were reeling around Paris instead of reeling around New York I wlsh I weren't reeling at all it is �pring the ice has melted the Ricard is being poured we are all happy and young and toothless it is the same as old age the enly thing to do is simply continue is that simple yes, it is simple because it is the only thing to do can you do it yes, you can because it is the only thing to do blue light over the Bois de Boulogne it continues the Seine continues the l.61,lvre stays open it continues it hardly closes at all the Bar Americain continues to be French de Gaulle continues to be Algerian as does Camus 35 Shirley Goldfarb continues to be Shirley Goldfarb and Jane f!azan continues to be Jane Freilicher (I think!) and Irving Sandler continues to be the balayeur des artistes and so do I (sometimes I think I'm "in love" with painting) and surely the Piscine Deligny continues to have water in it and the Flore continues to have tables and newspapers and people under them and surely we shall not continue to be unhappy we shall be happy but we shall continue to be ourselves everything continues to be possible Rene Char, Pierre Reverdy, Samuel Beckett it is possible isn't it I love Reverdy for saying yes, though I don't believe it 1959 36 RHAPSODY 515 Madison Avenue door to heaven? portal stoppea realities and eternal licentiousness or at least the jungle of impossible eagerness your marble is bronze and your lianas elevator cables swinging from the myth of ascending I would join or declining the challenge of racial attractions they zing on (into the lynch, dear friends) while evei;ywhere love is breathing draftily like a doo[way linking 53rd with 54th the eawbound with the west-bound traf!ic by 8,000,000s o midtowr! tunnels and the tunnels, too, of Holland where is the summit where all aims are clear the pin-point light upon a fear of Just as agony's needlework grows up around the unicorn and fences _nim for milk- and yoghurt-work when I see Gianni I know he's thinking qf John Ericson playing the Rachmaninoff 2nd or Elizabeth Taylor taking sleeping-pills and Jane thinks of Manderley 37 and Irkutsk while I cough lightly in the smog of desire and my eyes water achingly imitating the true blue a sight of Manahatta in the towering needle multi-faceted insight of the fly in the stringless labyrinth Canada plans a higher place than the Empire State Building I am getting into a cab at 9th Street and 1st Avenue and the Negro driver tells me about a $120 apartment "where you can't walk across the floor after 10 at night not even to pee, cause it keeps them awake downstairs" no, I don't like that "well,'1 didn't take it" perfect in the hot humid morning on my way to work a little supper-club conversation for the mill of the gods you were there always and you know all about these things as indifferent as an encyclopedia with your calm brown eyes it isn't enough to smile when you run the gauntlet you've got to spit like Niagara Falls on everybody or 38 Victoria Falls or at least the beautiful urban fountains of Madrid as the Niger joins the Gulf of Guinea near the Menemsha Bar that is what you learn in the early morning passing Madison Avenue ' where you've never spent any time and stores eat up light I have always wanted to be near it though the day is long (and I don't mean Madison Avenue) lying in a hammock on SL Mark's Place sorting my poems in the rancid nourishment of this mountainous island they are coming and we holy ones must go is Tibet historically a part of China? as I historically belong to the enormous bliss of American death 1959 39 HOTEL PARTICULIER How exciting it is not to be at Port Lligat or learning Portuguese in Bilbao so you can go to Brazil Erik Satie made a great mistake learning Latin the Brise Marine wasn't written in Sanskrit, baby I had a teacher one whole summer who never told me anything and it was_ wonderful and then there is the Bibliotheque Nationale, cuspidors, glasses, anxiety you don't get crabs that way, and what you don't know will hurt somebody else how clear the air is, how low the moon, how flat the sun, et cetera, just so you don't coin a phrase that changes can be "rung" on 40 like les neiges d' antan and that sort of thing (oops!), (roll me over)! is this the hostel where the lazy and fun-loving start up the mountain? 1960 41 CORNKIND So the rain falls it drops all over the place and where it finds a little rock pool it fills it up with dirt and the corn grows a green Bette Davis sits under it reading a volume of William Morris oh fertility! beloved of the Western world you aren't so popular in China though they fuck too and do I really want a son to carry on my idiocy past the Horned Gates poor kid a staggering load yet it can happen casually and he lifts a little of the load each day as I become more and more idiotic and grows to be a strong strong man and one day carries as I die my final idiocy and the very gates into a future of his choice 42 but what of William Morris what of you Million Worries what -of Bette Davis in AN EVENING WITH WILLIAM MORRIS or THE WORLD OF SAMUEL GREENBERG what of Hart Crane what of phonograph records and gin what of ''what of' you are of me, that's what and that's the meaning of fertility hard and moist and moaning 1960 43 HOW TO GET THERE White the October air, no snow, easy to breathe beneath the sky, lies, lies everywhere writhing and gasping clutching and tangling, it is not easy to breathe lies building their tendrils into dim figures who disappear down corridors in west-side apartments into childhood's proof of being wanted, not abandoned, kidnapped betrayal staving off loneliness, I see the fog lunge in and hide it where are you? here I am on the sidewalk under the moonlike lamplight thinking how precious moss is so unique and greenly crushable if you can find it on the north side of the tree where the fog binds you and then, tearing apart into soft white lies, spreads its disease through the primal night of an everlasting winter which nevertheless has heat in tubes, west-side and east-side 44 and its intricate individual pathways of white accompanied by the ringing of telephone bells beside which someone sits in silence denying their own number, never given out! nameless like the ,sound of troika bells rushing past suffering in t� e first storm, it is snowing now, it is already too late the snow will go away, but nobody will be there police cordons for lying political dignitaries ringing too the world becomes a jangle from the index finger to the vast empty houses filled with people, their echoes of lies and the tendrils of fog trailing softly around their throats now the phone can be answered, nobody calling, only an echo all can confess to be home and waiting, all is the same and we drift into the clear sky enthralled by our disappointment 45 never to be alone again never to be loved sailing through space: didn't I have you once for my self? West Side? for a couple of hours, but I am not that person 1960 46 A LITTLE TRAVEL DIARY Wending our way through the gambas, angulas, the merfozas that taste like the Sea Post on Sunday and the �eat quantities of huevos they take off Span\sh Naval officers' uniforms and put on plates, and reach the gare de Francia in the gloaming with my ton of books and John's ton of clothes bought in a wild fi,t-of enthusiasm in Madrid; all jumbled together like life is a Jumble Shop of the theatre in Spain they said nothing for foreigners and we head in our lovely 1st class coach, shifting and sagging, towards the northwest, while in other comparunents Dietrich and Erich von Stroheim share a sandwich of chorizos and a bottle of Vichy Catalan, in the dining car the tra,velling gentleman with linear mustache and many many rings rolls his cigar around and drinks Martini y gineI?ra, and Lillian Gish rolls on over the gorges with a tear in her left front eye, comme Picasso, 47 through the night through the night, longitudinous and affected with stars; the riverbeds so far below look as a pig's tongue on a platter. and storms break over San Sebastian, 40 foot waves drench us pleasantly and we see a dead dog bloated as a fraise lolling beside the quai and slowly pulling out to sea to Irun and Biarritz we go, sapped of anxiety, and there for the first time since arriving in Barcelona I can freely shit and the surf is so high and the sun is so hot and it was all built yesterday as everything should be what a splendid country it is full of indecision and cognac and bikinis, sens plastiques (ugh! hooray!); see the back of the head of Bill Berkson, aux Deux Magots, (awk!) it gleams like the moon through the smoke of the·Renfe as we passed through the endless tunnels and the silver vistas of our qu'est for the rocher de Ia'Vierge and salt spray 1960 48 FIVE POEMS Well now, hqld on maybe I won't go to sleep at all and it'll be a beautiful white night or else 1;11 collapse completely from nerves and be calm as a rug or a bottle of pills or suddenly !'!(be off Montauk swimming and loving it and not caring where • an invitation tb !Unch HOW DO YOU LIKE THAT? when I only have 16 cents and 2 packages of yoghurt there's a lesson in that, isn't there like in Chinese poetry when a leaf falls? hold off on the yoghurt till the very· last, when everything may improve • at the Rond-Point they were eating an oyster, but here we were dropping by sculptures 49 and seeing some paintings and the smasheroo-grates of Cadoret and music by Varese, too well Adolph Gottlieb I guess you are the hero of this day along with venison and Bill I'll sleep on the yoghurt and dream of the Persian Gulf • which I did it was wonderful to be in bed again and the knock on my door for once signified "hi there" and on the deafening walk through the ghettos where bombs have gone off lately left by subway violators I knew why I love taxis, yes subways are only fun when you're feeling sexy and who feels sexy after The Blue Angel well maybe a little bit • I seem to be defying fate, or am I avoiding it? 1960 50 AVE MARIA Mothers of America . let your kids go to the movies! get them out of the house so they won't know what you're up to it's true that fresh air is good for the body but what about the soul that grows in darkness, embossed by silvery images and when you grow old as grow old you must they won't hate you they won't criticize you they won't know they'll be in some glamorous country they first saw on a Saturday afternoon or playing hookey they may, even be grateful to you for their first sexual experieru:e which only cost you a quarter and didn't upset the peaceful home they will know where candy bars come from and gratuitous bags of popcorn as gratuitous as leaving the movie before it's over with a pleasant stranger whose apartment is in the 51 Heaven on Earth Bldg near the Williamsburg Bridge oh mothers you will have made the little tykes so happy because if nobody does pick them up in the movies they won't know the difference and if somebody does it'll be sheer gravy and they'll have been truly entertained either way instead of hanging around the yard or up in their room hating you prematurely since you won't have done anything horribly mean yet except keeping them from the darker joys it's unforgivable the latter so don't blame me if you won't take this advice and the family breaks up and your children grow old and blind in front of a TV set seeing movies you wouldn't let them see when they were young 1960 52 PISTACHIO TREE AT CHATEAU NOIR Beaucoup de musique classique et moderne Guillaume and not ' as one may, ima� ne it sounds not in the ear what went was.attributed to wandering aimlessly off what came arrived simply for itself and inflamed me yet I do not explain what exactly makes me so happy today any more than I can explain the unseasonal warmth of my unhabitual heart pumping vulgarly the blood of another I loved another and now my love is other my love is in the movies downstairs and yesterday bought ice cream and looked for a pigeon-menaced owl mai�, Guillaume, oii es-tu, Guillaume, comme Jes musiques and like, the set for Rigoletto like the set for Roma like so, many sets one's heart is torn like Berman's spacious haunt where tenors walk in pumps and girls in great big hats or none at all "or perhaps he recorded the panorama of hills and valleys before the strangely naked" and rain is turning the set into a dumpling 53 wherever I see a ''while" I seem to lose a little time and gradually my feet dragging I slow down the damn bus it is because of you so I can watch you smile longer that's what the Spring is and the elbow of noon walks where did you go who did you see the children proclaim and they too gradually fill the sepulchre with dolls and the sepulchre jumps and jounces and turns pink with wrath 1961 54 AT KAMIN'S DANCE BOOKSHOP to Vincent Warren Shade of fanny Elssler! I dreamt that you passed over me last night in sleep / was it you who " was asleep or was it me? sweet shade " shade shade shill spade agony freak geek you were not nor were you made of ribbons but of warm moving flesh & tulle you were twining your left leg around your right as if yciur right were me I've never felt so wide awake I seemed to be wearing tights entwined with your legs and a big sash over my crotch and a jewel in my left ear for luck (to help me balance) and you were pulling me toward the floor reaching for stars it seemed to me that I was warm at last and palpable not just a skein of lust dipped in the grand appreciation of yours where are you Fanny Elssler come back! 1961 55 STEPS How funny you are today New York like Ginger Rogers in Swingtime ancj St. Bridget's steeple leaning .a little to the left here I have just jumped out of a bed full ofV-days (I got tired ofD-days) and blue you there still accepts me foolish and free all I want is a room up there and you in it and even the traffic halt so thick is a way for people to rub up against each other and when their surgical appliances lock they stay together for the rest of the day (what a day) I go by to check a slide and I say that painting's not so blue where's Lana Turner she's out eating and Garbo's backstage at the Met everyone's taking their coat off so they can show a rib-cage to the rib-watchers 56 and the parl,<.'s full of dancers and their tights and shoes in Ii ttle bags who are often mistak�n for worker--outers at the West Side Y why not the Pittsburgh Pirates shout because they won and in a sense we're all winning we're alive the apartment was vacated by a gay couple who moved to the country for fun they moved a day too soon even th!" stabbings are helping the population explosion thougn'in the wrong country and all· those liars have left the UN the Seagram Building's no longer rivalled in interest not that we need liquor (we just like it) and the little box is out on the sidewalk next to the delicatessen so the old man can sit on it and drink beer and get knocked off it by his wife later in the day while 'the sun is still shining 57 oh god it's wonderful to get out of bed and drink too much coffee and smoke too many cigarettes and love you so much 1961 58 MARYDESTl'S ASS In Bayreuth once we were'Very good friends of the Wagners and I-stepped in once for Isadora so perfectly she would never allow me to dance again that's the way it was in Bayreuth the way it was in Hackensack was different there one never did anything and everyone hated you anyway it was 'fun, it was clear you knew where you stood in Boston you were never really standing I was usually lying it was amusing to be lying all the time for everybody it was like exercise it means so� ething to exercise in Norfolk Virginia it means you've been to bed with a Nigra 59 well it is exercise the only difference is it's better than Boston I was walking along the street of Cincinnati and I met Kenneth Koch's mother fresh from the Istanbul Hilton she liked me and I liked her we both liked Istanbul then in Waukegan I met a furniture manufacturer and it wiped out all dreams of pleasantness from my mind it was like being pushed down hard on a chair it was like something horrible you hadn't expected which is the most horrible thing and in Singapore I got a dreadful disease it was amusing to have bumps except they went into my veins and rose to the surface like Vesuvius getting cured was like learning to smoke yet I always loved Baltimore the porches which hurt your ass 60 no, they were the steps well,you have a wet ass anyway if they'd only stop scrubbing and Frisco where I saw Toumanova "tbe baby ballerina" except she looked like a cow I didn't know the history of the ballet yet not that that taught me much now if you feel like you want to deal with Tokyo • you've really got something to handle it's like Times Squar� at midnight you don'.t know where you're going but you ,know and then in Harbin I knew how to behave it was glorious that was love sneaking up on me through the snow and I felt it was because of all the postcards and the smiles and kisses and the grunts that was love but I kept on traveling 1961 61 ST. PAUL AND ALL THAT Totally abashed and smiling it's April no May it's May I walk in sit down and face the frigidaire such little things have to be established in morning after the big things of night do you want me to come? when I think of all the things I've been thinking of I feel insane simply "life in Birmingham is hell" simply "you will miss me but that's good" when the tears of a whole generation are assembled they will only fill a coffee cup just because they evaporate doesn't mean life has heat "this various dream of living" I am alive with you 62 full of anxious pleasures and pleasurable anxiety hardness and softness listening while you talk and talking while you read I read what)'ou read you do not read what I read which is'right, I am the one with the curiosity you read for some mysterious reason I read simply because I am a writer the sun doesn't necessarily set, sometimes it just disappears when you're not here someone walks in and says "hey, there's no dancer in that bed" 0 the Polish summers! those drafts! those black and white teeth! you never come when you say you'll come but on the other hand you do come 1961 63 MEMOIR OF SERGEI 0 .... My feet have never been comfortable since I pulled tbem out of tbe Black Sea and came to your foul country what fatal day did I dry tbem off for, travel loathesome travel to a world even older tban tbe one I grew up in what fatal day meanwhile back in France tbey were stumbling towards the Bastille and the Princesse de Lamballe was shuddering as shudderingly as I with a lot less to lose I still hated to move sedentary as a roach of Tiflis never again to go swimming in the nude publicly little did I know how awfulness could reach perfection abroad I even tbought I would see a Red Indian all I saw was lipstick everytbing covered witb grass or shrouds pretty shrouds shot with silver and plasma even tbe chairs are upholstered to a smothering perfection of inanity and there are no chandeliers and tbere 64 are no gates to the parks so you don't know whether you're going in them or coming out of them that's not relaxing and:so you' can't really walk all you can do is sit and drink coffee and brood over the lost leaves and refreshing scum of1 � �orgia Georgia of my heritage an� dismay meanwhile back in my old couritry they are renaming everything so I can't even tell any more which ballet "'-Company I am remembering with so much pain and the same thing has started here American Avenue Park Avenue South Avenue of Chester Conklin Binnie Barnes Bqulevard Avenue of Toby Wing Barbara N�chols Street where am I what is it I can't even find a pond small enough to drown in without being ostentatious you are ruining your awful country and me it is not new to do this it is terribly democratic and ordinary and tired 1961 65 YESTERDA Y DOWN AT THE CANAL You say that everything is very simple and interesting it makes me feel very wistful, like reading a great Russian novel does I am terribly bored sometimes it is like seeing a bad movie other days, more often, it's like having an acute di�sease of the kidney god knows it has nothing to do with the heart nothing to do with people more interesting than myself yak yak that's an amusing thought how can anyone be more amusing than oneself how can anyone fail to be can I borrow your forty-five I only need one bullet preferably silver if you can't be interesting at least you can be a legend (but I hate all that crap) 1961 66 POEM EN FORME DE SAW I ducked out of sight behind the saw-mill nobody saw me because of the falls the gates the sluice the tourist boats the children were trailing their fingers in the water and the swans, regal and smarty, were nipping their "little" fingers I heard one swan remark 'That was a good nip tlJ!'ugh they are not as interesting as sausages" and another reply ''Nor as tasty as those peasants we got away from the elephant that time" but I didn't really care for conversation that day I wanted to be alone which is why I went to the mill in the first place now I am alone and hate it I don't want to just make boards for the rest of my life I'm distressed the water is very beautiful but you can't go into it because of the gunk and the dog is always rolling over, I like dogs on their "little" feet I think I may scamper off to Winnipeg to see Raymond 67 but what'll happen to the mill I see the cobwebs collecting already and later those other webs, those awful predatory webs if I stay right here I will eventually get into the newspapers like Robert Frost willow trees, willow trees they remind me of Desdemona I'm so damned literary and at the same time the waters rushing past remind me of nothing I'm so damned empty what is all this vessel shit anyway we are all rushing down the River Happy Times ducking poling bumping sinking and swimming and we arrive at the beach the chaff is sand alone as a tree bumping another tree in a storm that's not really being alone, is it, signed The Saw 1961 68 FOR THE CHINESE NEW YEAR & FOR BILL BERKSON One or another Is lost, since we fall apart End/,essly, in one motion depart From each other. - D. H. Lawrence Behind New York there's a face and it's not Sibelius's with a cigar it was red it was strange and hateful and then I became a child again like a nadir or a zenith or a nudnik what do you think this is my youth and the aged future that is sweeping me away �arless and gasless under the Sutton and Beekman Places towards a hellish rage it is there that face I fear under ramps it is perhaps the period that ends the problem as a proposition of days of days just an attack on the feelings that stay 69 poised in the hurricane's center that eye through which only camels can pass but I do not mean that tenderness doesn't linger like a Paris afternoon or a wart something dumb and despicable that I love because it is silent oh what difference does it make me into some kind of space statistic a lot is buried under that smile a lot of sophistication gone down the drain to become the mesh of a mythical fish at which we never stare back never stare back where there is so much downrigh t forgery under that I find it restful like a bush some people are outraged by cleanliness I hate the lack of smells myself and yet I stay it is better than being actually present and the stare can swim away into the past can adorn it with easy convictions rat cow tiger rabbit dragon snake horse sheep monkey rooster dog and pig "Flower Drum Song" 70 so that nothing is vain not the gelded sand not the old spangled lotus not my fly which I have thought about but never really looked at well that's a certain orderliness c\Lpersonality "if you're brought up Protestant enough a Catholic" oh shit on the beaches so what if I did look up your trunks and see it II then the parallel becomes an eagle parade of Busby Berkeleyites matching marching half-toe I suppose it's the happiest moment in infinity Decause we're dissipated and tired and fond no I don't think psychoanalysis shrinks the spleen here we are and what the hell are we going to do With it we are going to blow it up like daddy did only us I really think we should go up for a change I'm tired of always going down what price glory it's one of those timeless priceless words like come well now how does your conscience feel about that would you rather explore tomorrow with a sponge 71 there's no need to look for a target you're it like in childhood when the going was aimed at a sandwich it all depends on which three of us are there but here come the prophets with their loosening nails it is only as blue as the lighting under the piles I have something portentous to say to you but which of the papier-mache languages do you understand you don't dare to take it off paper much less put it on yes it is strange that everyone fucks and every- one mentions it and it's boring too that faded f!oor how many teeth have chewed a little piece of the lover's flesh how many teeth are there in the world it's like Harpo M;arx smiling at a million pianos call that Africa call it New Guinea call it Poughkeepsie I guess it's love I guess the season of renunciation is at "hand" the final fatal hour of turpitude and logic demise is when you miss getting rid of something delouse is when you don't louse something up which way is the inn 72 III I'm looking for a million-dollar heart in a carton of frozen strawberries like the Swedes where is sunny England and those fields where they still-birth the wars why did Jhey suddenly stop playing why is Venice a Summer Festival and not New York were you born in America the inscrutable passage of a lawn-mower punctuates the newly installed Muzack in the Shubert Theatre am I nuts or is this the happiest moment of my life who's arguing it's 'I mean 'tis lawd sakes it took daddy a long time to have that accident so Ant Grace could get completely into black dian't you know we was all going to be Zen Buddhists after what we did you sure don't know much about war-guilt or nothin and the peach trees continued t'"o rejoice around the prick which was for once authorized by our Congress 73 though inactive what if it had turned out to be a volcano that's a mulatto of another nationality of marble it's time for dessert I don't care what street this is you're not telling me to take a tour are you I don't want to look at any fingernails or any toes !just want to go on being subtle and dead like life I'm not naturally so detached but I think they might send me up any minute so I try to be free you know we've all sinned a lot against science so we really ought to be available as an apple on a bough pleasant thought fresh air free love cross-pollenization oh oh god how I'd love to dream let alone sleep it's night the soft air wraps me like a swarm it's raining and I have a cold I am a real human being with real ascendancies and a certain amount of rapture what do you do with a kid like me if you don't eat me I'll have to eat myself 74 it's a strange curse my "generation" has we're all like the flowers in the Agassiz Museum perpetually ardent don't touch me because when I tremble it makes a noise like a Chinese wind-bell it's that I'm seismographic is all and when a Jesuit has stared you down for ever after you clink I wonder if I've really scrutinized this experience like you're supposed to have if you can type there's not much soup left on my sleeve energy creativity guts ponderableness lent is coming in imponderableness "I'd like to die smiling" ugh and a very small tiptoe is crossing the threshold away whither Lumumba whither oh whither Gauguin I have often tried to say goodbye to strange fan toms I read about in the newspapers and have always succeeded though the ones at "home" are dependent on Dependable 75 Laboratory and Sales Company on Pulaski Street sttange I think it's goodbye to a lot of things like Christmas and the Mediterranean and halos and meteorites and villages full of damned children well it's goodbye then as in Strauss or some other desperately theatrical venture it's goodbye to lunch to love to evil things and to the ultimate good as "well" the strange career of a personality begins at five and ends forty minutes later in a fog the rest is just a lot of stranded ships honking their horns full of joy-seeking cadets in bloomers and beards it's okay with me but must they cheer while they honk it seems that breath could easily fill a balloon and drift away 76 scaring the locusts in the straggling grey of living dumb exertions ·then the useful noise would come of doom of data turned to elegant decoration like a strangling prince once ordered no there is no precedent of history no history nobody came before nobody�ll ever come before and nobody ever was that man you will not die not knowing this is true this year 1961 77 POEM Lana Turner has collapsed! I was trotting along and suddenly it started raining and snowing and you said it was hailing but hailing hits you on the head hard so it was really snowing and raining and I was in such a hurry to meet you but the traffic was acting exactly like the sky and suddenly I see a headline LANA TURNER HAS COLLAPSED! there is no snow in Hollywood there is no rain in California I have been to lots of parties and acted perfectly disgraceful but I never actually collapsed oh Lana Turner we love you get up 1962 78 GAL ANT A A strange den or music room childhood dream of ' Persian grass configured distilled first hardon milky mess the about-to-be e� dead surroμnding t]ie already surrounded folk- hero with a veil of automobile accidents broken cockiail glasses oh Sally is still acting the ,mise en scene of her great grandmother's embroidered graveyard while I my asiatic tendencies have taken me to the Baghdad of'neurasthenia and false objectivity faint hope for a familial contrast for a far-reaching decadence which presupposes unnatural unselfishness your sweet yellow hair among the mosques the faint tribal twitch of your altered blue eyes 79 when Canaan was reached you called me France we threw sand in our eyes and ran naked down the street of our awful progenitors when life is fantastic there is no chance for make-believe how lucky the French bourgeois pain could be if we were children again and everything uninteresting you never had a chance to be Emma Bovary nor I Julien Sorel in that attic in the States and now I remember you only through American Folk Art opening near the Fonda de! Sol where are you Sally with your practicality and bottles of fireflies blinking on and off for footlights 1962 80 FANTASY (dedicated to the health of Allen Ginsberg) How do ( you like the music of Adolph Deutsch? I like it, I liky,it better than Max Steiner's. Take his score for Northern Pursuit, the Helmut Dantyne theme was .. . \ and then the window fell on my hand. Errol Flynn was. skiing by. Down down down went the grim grey submarine under the "cold" ice. Helmut was safely ashore, on the ice. What dreams, what incredible fantasies of snow farts will this all lead to? I don't know, I have stopped thinking like a sled dog. The main thing is t<;> tell a story. It is almost very important. Imagine throwing away the avalanche 81 so early in the movie. I am the only spy left in Canada, but just because I'm alone in the snow doesn't necessarily mean I'm a Nazi. Let's see, two aspirins a vitamin C tablet and some baking soda should do the trick, that's practically an Alka Seltzer. Allen come out of the bathroom and take it. I think someone put butter on my skis instead of wax. Ouch. The leanto is falling over in the firs, and there is another fatter spy here. They didn't tell me they sent him. Well, that takes care of him, boy were those huskies hungry. Allen, are you feeling any better? Yes, I'm crazy about Helmut Dantyne but I'm glad that Canada will remain free. Just free, that's all, never argue with the movies. 1964 82 DEDICATION For Finnegan and Cassius CONTENTS Dedication Introduction: Let’s Get Lost 1: The Social Network 2: The Walking Dead 3: Our Browser History Is the New Memoir 4: Archiving Is the New Folk Art 5: Dream Machines and Eternidays 6: I Shoot Therefore I Am 7: Lossy and Jaggy 8: The Writer as Meme Machine Coda: The Revolution Will Be Mobilized Appendix: 101 Ways to Waste Time on the Internet Acknowledgments Endnotes About the Author Praise Also by Kenneth Goldsmith Credits Copyright About the Publisher INTRODUCTION Let’s Get Lost I’m wasting time on the Internet. I click to the New York Times front page to see the latest headlines and today a major nuclear deal with Iran was signed. The banner headline screams HISTORY and even though I haven’t really been following the story, I click on it. I’m taken to a page with an embedded video that features Thomas Friedman asking Obama to explain what he thinks the United States gained from the nuclear deal with Iran. I check the time on the video—three and a half minutes—and figure that’s not too long to listen to the president speak. He speaks; I watch. He continues to speak; I scroll through my Twitter feed but I still listen. I click back on the Times window and watch again. Somewhere about the three-minute mark, I start to think, Am I really wasting time on the Internet? This is important stuff that I’ve stumbled on to. I’m struggling to see what’s so shameful about this. The video ends and, impressed by what the president was saying, I start to read Friedman’s lengthy article about this beneath the video. I read the first few paragraphs carefully, then scroll down and read some more. It’s starting to get too granular for me. But my interest is piqued. Although I’m not going to read this piece to the end, I’m going to start following this story as it unfurls over the next few days. I stumbled on it and got hooked. Is my engagement deep? Not right now. But judging by the way these things tend to go, as I start to follow the story, my appetite for the topic will most likely become voracious. I can’t see this event—one that happens several times a day—as being anything other than good. Because of it, I’m better informed, more engaged, and perhaps even a bit smarter. After I finish with this article, I click over to Facebook and find myself watching a video of Keith Richards discussing how he gets ideas for his songs. He says that when he’s in restaurants and overhears conversation coming from the next table, he simply writes down what they’re saying. “Give me a napkin and a pen,” he says, smiling. “You feel that one phrase could be a song.” Although the video is only a minute long, it’s packed with wisdom. Really? Could his process be that simple, that pure? After listening to Keith, I feel inspired. After all, I feel like I spend tons of time eavesdropping on Facebook conversations. Might I be able to wring a song or a poem out of those as well? I’m back on Facebook, and the next thing I know I’m looking at this incredible black-and-white photo from 1917 of a full-size battleship being built in New York’s Union Square. The picture is huge and brimming with details. I click on it and I’m taken to a website. As I scroll down, there’s a short explanatory text about how this came to be, followed by a dozen more giant, rich photos of the ship being built in progress. It’s fascinating. I just wrote a book about New York City and I’m floored that I somehow missed this but grateful to know about it. I bookmark the page and move on. What is wasting time on the Internet? It’s not so easy to say. It strikes me that it can’t be simply defined. When I was clicking around, was I wasting time because I should’ve been working instead? But I had spent hours working—in front of the same screen —and quite frankly I needed a break. I needed to stop thinking about work and do a bit of drifting. But, unlike the common perception of what we do when we waste time on the Internet, I wasn’t watching cat videos—well, maybe one or two. I was actually interested in the things that I stumbled on: the president, the rock star, and the battleship. I had the choice not to click on these things, but I chose to do so. They seemed to me to be genuinely interesting. There were many more things that I didn’t click on. Listening to Internet pundits tell it, you’d think we stare for three hours at clickbait—those web pages with hypersensational headlines that beg you to click on them—the way we once sat down and watched three hours of cartoons on Saturday morning TV. But the truth is most of us don’t do any one thing on the Internet for three hours. Instead, we do many things during that time, some of it frivolous, some of it heavy. Our time spent in front of the computer is a mixed time, a time that reflects our desires—as opposed to the glazed-eyed stare we got from sitting in front of the television where we were fed something we ultimately weren’t much interested in. TV gave us few choices. Naturally, we became “couch potatoes” and many of us truly did feel like we wasted our time—as our parents so often chided us—“rotting away” in front of the TV. I’m reading these days—ironically, on the web—that we don’t read anymore. People often confess this same thing to me when they hear I’m a poet. The other day, I was opening up a bank account and the associate working at the bank, when he found out what I did, sighed and admitted that he doesn’t read as much as he used to. I asked him whether he had a Facebook account, which he did, and a Twitter, which he also did. I asked him whether he sent and received e-mails. Yes, he said, many every day. I told him that he was, in fact, reading and writing a lot. We’re reading and writing more than we have in a generation, but we are doing it differently— skimming, parsing, grazing, bookmarking, forwarding, and spamming language—in ways that aren’t yet recognized as literary, but with a panoply of writers using the raw material of the web as the basis for their works it’s only a matter of time until it is. I keep reading that in the age of screens we’ve lost our ability to concentrate, that we’ve become distracted, unable to focus. But when I look around me and see people riveted to their devices, I’ve never seen such a great wealth of concentration, focus, and engagement. I find it ironic that those who say we have no concentration are most bothered by how addicted people are to their devices. I find it equally ironic that most of the places I read about how addicted we are to the web is on the web itself, scattered across numerous websites, blog posts, tweets, and Facebook pages. On those blogs, I read how the Internet has made us antisocial, how we’ve lost the ability to have a conversation. But when I see people with their devices, all I see is people communicating with one another: texting, chatting, IM’ing. And I have to wonder, In what way is this not social? A conversation broken up into short bursts and quick emoticons is still a conversation. Watch someone’s face while they’re in the midst of a rapid-fire text message exchange: it’s full of human emotion and expression—anticipation, laughter, affect. Critics claim that even having a device present acts to inhibit conversation, and that the best antidote to our technological addiction is a return to good old-fashioned face-to-face conversation. They say, “Conversation is there for us to reclaim. For the failing connections of our digital world, it is the talking cure.” But this seems to ignore the fact that smartphones are indeed phones: two-way devices for human-to-human conversations, replete with expressive vocal cadence and warmth. Is conversation over the telephone still—140 years after the phone was invented—somehow not considered “intimate” enough, lessened because it is mediated by technology? But beyond that, life is still full of attentive, engaged face-to-face conversations and close listening, be it at the many conferences, lectures, or readings I attend where large audiences hang on every word the speakers say, or my own therapy sessions—nothing more than two people in a room—the tenor and intensity of which hasn’t changed in decades despite several technological revolutions. When a student comes and finds me during office hours, that student— normally tethered to their device—can still go deep without one. Even my seventeen-year-old son, awash in social media, still demands that we “talk” in the darkness of his bedroom each night before he goes to sleep, just as we have done his entire life. It’s a ritual that neither of us are willing to forgo in spite of our love of gadgets. Everywhere I look—on the street, in restaurants and cafés, in classrooms, or waiting in line for a movie—in spite of dire predictions, people still seem to know how to converse. Our devices, if anything, tend to amplify our sociability. Sometimes we converse face-to-face, other times over our devices, but often, it’s a combination of the two. I’m in a hotel lobby and I’m watching two fashionable women in their twenties sitting next to each other on a modernist sofa. They are parallel with one another: their shoulders are touching; their legs are extended with their feet resting on a table in front of them. They’re both cradling their devices, each in their own world. From time to time, they hold their phones up and share something on-screen before retreating into their respective zones. While they peck away at their keyboards, shards of conversation pass between them, accompanied by laughter, head nods, and pointing. Then, at once, they put their phones in their purses, straighten up their bodies, angle toward one another, and launch into a fully attentive face-to-face conversation. They’re now very animated, gesticulating with their hands; you can feel the words being absorbed into their bodies, which are vehicles for augmenting what they’re saying. It’s fascinating: just a moment ago it was parallel play; now it’s fully interactive. They continue this way for several more minutes until, as if again on cue, they both reach into their purses, take out their phones, and resume their previous postures, shoulders once again touching and legs outstretched. They’re no longer conversing with each other, but are now conversing with someone unseen. Our devices might be changing us, but to say that they’re dehumanizing us is simply wrong. The Internet has been accused of making us shallow. We’re skimming, not reading. We lack the ability to engage deeply with a subject anymore. That’s both true and not true: we skim and browse certain types of content, and read others carefully. Oftentimes, we’ll save a long form journalism article and read it later offline, perhaps on the train home from work. Accusations like those tend to assume we’re all using our devices the same way. But looking over the shoulders of people absorbed in their devices on the subway, I see many people reading newspapers and books on their phones and many others playing Candy Crush Saga. Sometimes someone will be glancing at a newspaper one moment and playing a game the next. There’s a slew of blogs I’ve seen recently which exhaustively document photos of people reading paper books on the subway. One photographer nostalgically claims that he wanted to capture a fading moment when “books are vanishing and are being replaced by characterless iPads and Kindles.” But that’s too simple, literally judging a book by its cover. Who’s to say what they’re reading? Often we assume that just because someone is reading a book on a device that it’s trashy. Sometimes it is; sometimes it isn’t. Last night I walked into the living room and my wife was glued to her iPad, reading the Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass. Hours later, when I headed to bed she hadn’t moved an inch, still transfixed by this 171-year-old narrative on her twenty-first-century device. When I said good night, she didn’t even look up. And while these critics tell us time and again that our brains are being rewired, I’m not so sure that’s all bad. Every new media requires new ways of thinking. How strange it would be if in the midst of this digital revolution we were still expected to use our brains in the same way we read books or watched TV? The resistance to the Internet shouldn’t surprise us: cultural reactionaries defending the status quo have been around as long as media has. Marshall McLuhan tells us that television was written off by people invested in literature as merely “mass entertainment” just as the printed book was met with the same skepticism in the sixteenth century by scholastic philosophers. McLuhan says that “the vested interests of acquired knowledge and conventional wisdom have always been by- passed and engulfed by new media . . . The student of media soon comes to expect the new media of any period whatever to be classed as pseudo by those who have acquired the patterns of earlier media, whatever they may happen to be.” I’m told that our children are most at risk, that the excessive use of computers has led our kids to view the real world as fake. But I’m not so sure that even I can distinguish “real” from “fake” in my own life. How is my life on Facebook any less “real” than what happens in my day-to-day life? In fact, much of what does happen in my day-to- day life comes through Facebook—work opportunities, invitations to dinner parties, and even the topics I discuss at those dinner parties often comes from stuff I’ve found out about on Facebook. It’s also likely that I met more than a few of my dinner companions via social media. I’m reading that screen time makes kids antisocial and withdrawn, but when I see my kids in front of screens, they remind me of those women on the couch, fading in and out, as they deftly negotiate the space of the room with the space of the web. And when they’re, say, gaming, they tend to get along beautifully, deeply engaged with what is happening on the screen while being highly sensitive to each other; not a move of their body or expression of emotion gets overlooked. Gaming ripples through their entire bodies: they kick their feet, jump for joy, and scream in anger. It’s hard for me to see in what way this could be considered disconnected. It’s when they leave the screens that trouble starts: they start fighting over food or who gets to sit where in the car. And, honestly, after a while they get bored of screens. There’s nothing like a media-soaked Sunday morning to make them beg me to take them out to the park to throw a football or to go on a bike ride. It’s Friday night and my teenage son has invited about a dozen of his buddies—boys and girls—over to the house. They’re sprawled out on the couch, mostly separated by gender, glued to their smartphones. Over by the TV, a few kids are playing video games that along with their yelps and whoops are providing the soundtrack for the evening. The group on the couch are close, emotionally and physically; they form a long human chain, shoulders snuggled up against their neighbor’s. Some of the girls are leaning into the other girls, using them as pillows. The boys are physical with each other, but differently: they reach out occasionally to fist bump or high-five. One couple, a boyfriend and girlfriend, are clumped in the middle of the couch, draped on top of one another, while at the same time pressed up against the others. There’s an electric teenage energy to the group. They’re functioning as a group, yet they’re all independent. They spend long periods in silence; the only noises emanating from the gang are the occasional sounds that are emitted from their devices—pings, plonks, chimes, and tinny songs from YouTube pages. Bursts of laughter are frequent, starting with one person and spreading like wildfire to the others. As they turn their devices toward one another, I hear them saying, “Have you seen this?” and shrieking, “Oh my god!” Laughter ripples again, dying out quickly. Then they plunge back into concentrated silence. Out of the blue, one of the kids on the couch playfully says to the other, “You jerk! I can’t believe you just sent me that!” And it’s then that I realize that as much as they’re texting and status updating elsewhere on the web, a large part of their digital communication is happening between these kids seated on the same couch. They’re constantly taking pictures of themselves and of each other. Some are shooting videos, directing their friends to make faces, to say outrageous things to the camera, or to wave hello. And then, it’s right back to the devices, where those images are uploaded to social media and shared among the group, as links are blasted out—all within a minute. Suddenly, the girls shriek, “I look so ugly!” or “You look so pretty!” and “We need to take this one again.” I hear someone say, “That was so funny! Let’s watch it again.” They count likes and favorites as they pile up and read comments that are instantly appearing from both inside and outside the room. This goes on for hours. In a sense, this is as much about creativity as it is about communication. Each photo, posed and styled, is considered with a public response in mind. They are excited by the idea of themselves as images. But why wouldn’t they be? From before the moment they were born, my kids have been awash in images of themselves, beginning with the fuzzy in utero sonograms that they now have pinned to their bedroom walls. Since then, our cameras— first clumsy digital cameras and now smartphones—have been a constant presence in their life, documenting their every move. We never took just one picture of them but took dozens in rapid-fire fashion, off-loaded them to the computer, and never deleted a single one. Now, when I open my iPhoto album to show them their baby pictures, the albums look like Andy Warhol paintings, with the same images in slight variations repeated over and over, as we documented them second by second. Clearly we have created this situation. There is no road map for this territory. They are making it up as they go along. But there’s no way that this evening could be considered asocial or antisocial. Their imaginations are on full throttle and are wildly engaged in what they’re doing. They are highly connected and interacting with each other, but in ways that are pretty much unrecognizable to me. I’m struggling to figure out what’s so bad about this. I’m reading that screen addiction is taking a terrible toll on our children, but in their world it’s not so much an addiction as a necessity. Many key aspects of our children’s lives are in some way funneled through their devices. From online homework assignments to research prompts, right on down to where and when soccer practice is going to be held, the information comes to them via their devices. (And yes, my kids love their screens and love soccer.) After reading one of these hysterical “devices are ruining your child” articles, my sister-in-law decided to take action. She imposed a system whereby, after dinner, the children were to “turn in” their devices—computers, smartphones, and tablets—to her. They could “check them out” over the course of the evening, but only if they could explain exactly what they needed them for, which had to be for “educational purposes.” But if there was no reason to check them out, the devices stayed with my sister-in-law until they were given back the next day for their allotted after-school screen time, which she also monitors. Upon confiscating my nephew’s cell phone one Friday night, she asked him on Saturday morning, “What plans do you have with your friends today?” “None,” he responded. “You took away my phone.” On a family vacation, after a full day of outdoor activities that included seeing the Grand Canyon and hiking, my friend and her family settled into the hotel for the evening. Her twelve-year-old daughter is a fan of preteen goth girl crafting videos on YouTube, where she learns how to bedazzle black skull T-shirts and make perfectly ripped punk leggings and home-brewed perfumes. That evening, the girl selected some of her favorite videos to share with her mother. After agreeing to watch a few, her mother grew impatient. “This is nice, but I don’t want to spend the whole night clicking around.” The daughter indignantly responded that she wasn’t just “clicking around.” She was connecting with a community of girls her own age who shared similar interests. Her mother was forced to reconsider her premise that her daughter wasn’t just wasting time on the Internet; instead, she was fully engaged, fostering an aesthetic, feeding her imagination, indulging in her creative proclivities, and hanging out with her friends, all from the comfort of a remote hotel room perched on the edge of the Grand Canyon. In theorizing or discussing our time spent online, we tend to oversimplify what is an extraordinarily nuanced experience, full of complexity and contradiction. The way we speak about technology belies our monolithic thinking about it. During his recent run for president, a number of Donald Trump’s legal depositions were scrutinized by the New York Times, which intended to show how Trump spoke when he wasn’t in the spotlight. During a series of questions about the ways he used technology, he was asked about television, to which he replied, “I don’t have a lot of time for listening to television.” I was struck by the phrase “listening to television.” You don’t really listen to television; you watch it. You listen exclusively to radio. Born in 1946, it’s safe to assume that Trump spent his formative years listening to radio. My father, roughly the same age as Trump, says similar things. Growing up, he used to berate us kids for watching TV, saying that it took no imagination. Waxing nostalgic, he’d say, “When I was a boy listening to radio, you had to make up everything in your mind. You kids have it all there for you.” For my father—and I can imagine Trump, too—although they watched television, I don’t think they really understood it. Certainly, Trump’s statement belies a basic misapprehension of the medium. Trump’s comment is a textbook example of Marshall McLuhan’s theory which states that the content of any medium is always another medium: “The content of writing is speech, just as the written word is the content of print, and print is the content of the telegraph.” For Trump, the content of TV is radio. It’s common for people to pick up everything they know about a previous medium and throw it at a newer one. I’m often reminded of Trump’s comment when I hear complaints about how we’re wasting time on the Internet. To them, television is the content of the web. What they seem to be missing is that the web is not monolithic, but instead is multiple, diverse, fractured, contradictory, high, and low, all at the same time in ways that television rarely was. It’s a Sunday morning and I go downstairs to get the New York Times. In the travel section is a piece entitled “Going Off the Grid on a Swedish Island.” It’s about a woman who takes a digital detox on a remote island as a reminder that she is not, in fact, “merely the sum of my posts and tweets and filter-enhanced iPhone photos.” She checks herself into a “hermit hut”—an isolated cabin without electricity or running water—and gives her phone to her husband who locks it with a pass code. As she settles into the hut, bereft of her technology, she suddenly discovers herself connected to nature, listening to the sound of waves folding by the nearby shore. She also rediscovers the pleasure of reading books. She becomes introspective, remarking, “Now, disconnected from the imposed (or imagined) pressures from followers and friends loitering unseen in the ether of the Web, I found myself reaching for a more authentic, balanced existence for myself, online and off.” She takes long walks. But each natural experience she has is filtered through the lens of technology. While listening to the sounds of nature, she muses, “Without a Spotify playlist to lose myself in . . . What else had I been blind to while distracted by electronics, I wondered?” She sees marvelous things: towering wind turbines, whose “graceful blades whoosh audibly overhead,” and congratulates herself when she resists the urge to record and share the scene on social media. She conveniently forgets the fact that these turbines are wholly designed and driven by digital interfaces. She nostalgically finds older, predigital technologies—ironically littering the landscape—charming. Seeing an upturned rotting car that “looks like a bug,” she can’t resist: “I pulled out my camera and took a photo, one that I knew would never get a single ‘like’ from anyone but me. And that was just fine.” On these sojourns, she mechanizes nature, describing it with tech metaphors: “Along the way, the only tweets I encountered were from birds.” On her final evening on the island, she has a cosmic epiphany whilst musing on the stars in the night sky, one that is served with a dose of self- flagellation for her previous misdeeds: “Those spellbinding heavens are always hiding in plain sight above us, if only we would unplug long enough to notice.” Even in such lighthearted Sunday morning fare, her words are laced with an all-too-pervasive, unquestioning guilt about technology. Try as she might, the writer is enmeshed with technology to the point that she is unable to experience nature without technological mediation. She may have left her devices at home, but she’s still seeing the world entirely through them. Her brain, indeed, has become differently wired and all the nature in the world on a weekend digital detox won’t change that. What was accomplished by this trip? Not much. Far away from her devices, all she did was think obsessively about them. Returning from her trip, it’s hard to imagine that much changed. I can’t imagine that in the spirit of her adventure she wrote her piece out longhand in number 2 pencils on legal pads by candlelight, only to sit down at a Remington typewriter bashing out the final draft, and filing it via carrier pigeon. No. Instead, the morning her piece appeared, she retweeted a link to the article: “.@ingridkwilliams goes off the grid on a charming Swedish island.” What these types of articles tend to ignore is the fact that technology has been entwined with nature for as long as humans have been depicting it. French landscape painters such as Claude Lorrain (1600–1682) often painted what they called ideal landscapes, which rendered nature in pitch-perfect states that never existed. So you get classical ruins nestled in dense, thick jungles that couldn’t possibly grow in the rocky Greek soil. These painters claimed that architecture was a kind of technology, one that either represented the spoiling of nature or its conquest by man. Even Thoreau’s cabin on Walden Pond was within earshot of the rattle and hum of a busy East Coast railroad line that ran about a kilometer away from his “hermit hut.” Another article in this morning’s newspaper—this time in the business section—sends an identical message. It’s called “Put Down the Phone.” The piece focuses on various types of software and apps that monitor and restrict the time you spend on social media. These technologies include wearable clothing—with a sweep of an arm you can silence your phone—and suggests twelve-step-style parlor games you can play with your friends: the winner is the one who looks at their phone the least. There’s also a review of an app that turns your smartphone back into a “dumb phone” circa 1999 that does nothing more than make and receive calls. But the highlight of the article is a plastic facsimile of a smartphone that is a piece of plastic that does absolutely nothing. It’s touted as “a security blanket for people who want to curb their phone addiction but are afraid to leave home without something to hold on to.” And yet in psychoanalytic theory, a security blanket is known as a transitional object, one that represents “me” and “not me” simultaneously. That definition—me and not me simultaneously— seems to be a more realistic assessment of our online lives than the tirade of pleas for a return to some long-lost, unified “authentic” self. Online, I am me and not me at the same time. Surely, the way I portray myself on Facebook isn’t really me; it’s an image of myself as I wish to project it to the world. Sometimes that image is true. Other times it’s a complete lie. The article concludes with a quote from a psychology professor at the University of Kansas, who disparagingly says, “Smartphones are a potent delivery mechanism for two fundamental human impulses: our quest to find new and interesting distractions, and our desire to feel that we have checked off a task.” But I find that to be positive. That quote sums up the complex balancing act we perform with our devices. We’re productive—we’re checking off tasks—and we’re distracted in new and interesting ways. (Since when are new and interesting pejorative?) It’s that frisson of opposites—bacon- infused chocolate or salted caramel ice cream—that makes it zing. The professor goes on to bemoan the fact that “with these devices you can get that sense of accomplishment multiple times a minute. The brain gets literally rewired to switch—to constantly seek out novelty, which makes putting the phone down difficult.” It sounds great to me. Novelty and accomplishment. They work together. When I used to watch TV, “likes” weren’t really part of the game. Sure, I liked one show better than another, but I was forced to choose from a tiny set of options, seven channels, to be specific. Today, “like” has come to mean something very different. We can support something, expressing ourselves by clicking Like or we can download something we like. In this way, we build a rich ecosystem of artifacts around us based on our proclivities and desires. What sits in my download folder—piles of books to be read, dozens of movies to be watched, and hundreds of albums to be heard—constitutes a sort of self-portrait of both who I am in this particular point in time, and who I was in earlier parts of my life. In fact, you’ll find nestled among the Truffaut films several episodes of The Brady Bunch, a show I really “liked” back in the day. Sometimes I’m in the mood to watch Truffaut; other times I’m in the mood to watch The Brady Bunch. Somehow those impulses don’t contradict one another; instead, they illuminate the complexities of being me. I’m rarely just one way: I like high art sometimes and crap others. While I could discuss any number of musical epiphanies I’ve personally experienced over the past half century, all of them would pale in comparison to the epiphany of seeing Napster for the first time in 1999. Although prior to Napster I had been a member of several file-sharing communities, the sheer scope, variety, and seeming endlessness of Napster was mind-boggling: you never knew what you were going to find and how much of it was going to be there. It was as if every record store, flea market, and thrift shop in the world had been connected by a searchable database and flung their doors open, begging you to walk away with as much as you could carry for free. But it was even better because the supply never exhausted; the coolest record you’ve ever dug up could now be shared with all your friends. Of course this has been exacerbated many times over with the advent of torrents and MP3 blogs. But the most eye-opening thing about Napster was the idea that you could browse other people’s shared files. It was as if a little private corner of everyone’s world was now publicly available for all to see. It was fascinating—perhaps even a bit voyeuristic—to see what music other people had in their folders and how they organized it. One of the first things that struck me about Napster was how impure and eclectic people’s tastes were. Whilst browsing another user’s files, I was stunned to find John Cage MP3s alphabetically snuggled up next to, say, Mariah Carey files in the same directory. It boggled the mind: how could a fan of thorny avant-garde music also like the sugary pop of Mariah Carey? And yet it’s true. Everyone has guilty pleasures. But never before have they been so exposed—and celebrated—this publicly. To me, this was a great relief. It showed that online—and by extension in real life—we never have been just one way, all the time. That’s too simple. Instead, we’re a complex mix, full of contradictions. The web is what Stanford professor Sianne Ngai calls “stuplime,” a combination of the stupid and the sublime. That cat video on BuzzFeed is so stupid, but its delivery mechanism—Facebook—is so mind-bogglingly sublime. Inversely, that dashboard cam of the meteor striking Russia is so cosmically sublime, but its delivery mechanism—Facebook—is so mind-bogglingly stupid. It’s this tension that keeps us glued to the web. Were it entirely stupid or were it entirely sublime, we would’ve gotten bored long ago. A befuddling mix of logic and nonsense, the web by its nature is surrealist: a shattered, contradictory, and fragmented medium. What if, instead of furiously trying to stitch together these various shards into something unified and coherent—something many have been desperately trying to do—we explore the opposite: embracing the disjunctive as a more organic way of framing what is, in essence, a medium that defies singularity? Shattered by technology, modernism embraced the jagged twentieth-century media landscape and the fragmentation it brought, claiming it to be emblematic of its time. Not to overstretch the analogy—it’s a new century with new technologies—but there are bits and pieces salvageable from the smoldering wreckage of modernism from which we might extract clues on how to proceed in the digital age. In retrospect, the modernist experiment was akin to a number of planes barreling down runways—cubist planes, surrealist planes, abstract expressionist planes, and so forth—each taking off, and then crashing immediately, only to be followed by another aborted takeoff, one after another. What if, instead, we imagine that these planes didn’t crash at all, but sailed into the twenty-first century, and found full flight in the digital age? What if the cubist airplane gave us the tools to theorize the shattered surfaces of our interfaces or the surrealist airplane gave us the framework through which to theorize our distraction and waking dream states or the abstract expressionist airplane provided us with a metaphor for our all-over, skein-like networks? Our twenty-first-century aesthetics are fueled by the blazing speed of the networks, just as futurist poems a century ago were founded on the pounding of industry and the sirens of war. Literary modernism provides insights as well. Could we theorize our furious file sharing through Freud’s ideas about the archive, our ROM and RAM through his perception-consciousness system? Could we imagine the web as the actualization of Jorge Luis Borges’s infinite library of Babel, as described in his famous 1941 short story of the same name? Could we envision Twitter’s 140- character constraint as being a direct descendent of Hemingway’s brilliant one-line novel: “For sale: baby shoes, never worn.” Are Joseph Cornell’s boxes palm-sized, handheld pre-Internet devices, replete with icons and navigational systems? Is Finnegans Wake a wellspring of hashtags? Postmodernism’s sampling and remixing— so predominant in mainstream culture from karaoke to gaming to hip-hop—are also foundational to the mechanics of the web. If the Internet is one big replication device, then every artifact flowing through it is subject to its bouncy reverberatory gestures (the retweet, for example), a situation where an artifact’s primary characteristic, to quote Roland Barthes, is “a tissue of quotations drawn from the innumerable centers of culture,” while at the same time remaining a container of content. When futurist poet F. T. Marinetti famously wrote in a 1909 manifesto that “we will destroy the museums, libraries, academies of every kind,” he could not have foreseen the double-edged sword of web-based structures. On one hand, artists are embracing the meme’s infinitesimal life span as a new metric (think: short attention span as a new avant-garde), constructing works not for eternity but only for long enough to ripple across the networks, vanishing as quickly as they appear, replaced by new ones tomorrow. On the other hand, our every gesture is archived by search engines and cemented into eternally recallable databases. Unlike Marinetti’s call to erase history, on the web everything is forever. The Internet itself is a giant museum, library, and academy all in one, comprised of everything from wispy status updates to repositories of dense classical texts. And every moment you spend wasting time on the Internet contributes to the pile—even your clicks, favorites, and likes. Read through a literary lens, could we think of our web sojourns as epic tales effortlessly and unconsciously written, etched into our browser histories as a sort of new memoir? Beyond that, in all its glory and hideousness, Facebook is the greatest collective autobiography that a culture has ever produced, a boon to future sociologists, historians, and artists. This accretion of data is turning us into curators, librarians, and amateur archivists, custodians of our own vast collections. The web’s complex ecosystem of economies—both paid and pirated— offer us more cultural artifacts than we can consume: There are more movies on Netflix than I will ever be able to see, not to mention all the movies I’ve simultaneously downloaded from file-sharing which languish unwatched on my hard drive. The fruits of what’s known as “free culture”—the idea that the web should be a place for an open exchange of ideas and intellectual materials, bereft of over- restrictive copyright laws—create a double-edged sword. Abundance is a lovely problem to have, but it produces a condition whereby the management of my cultural artifacts—their acquisition, filing, redundancy, archiving, and redistribution—is overwhelming their actual content. I tend to shift my artifacts around more than I tend to use them. And all of those artifacts—jaggy AVIs, fuzzy PDFs, lossy MP3s—are decidedly lo-res. I’ve happily swapped quality for quantity, uniqueness for reproduction, strength for weakness, and high resolution for super compression in order to participate in the global cornucopia of file sharing and social media. And what of consumption? I’ve outsourced much of it. While I might only be able to read a fraction of what I’ve downloaded, web spiders—indexing automatons—have read it all. While part of me laments this, another part is thrilled at the rare opportunity to live in one’s own time, able to reimagine the status of the cultural object in the twenty-first century where context is the new content. The web ecology runs on quantity. Quantity is what drove the vast data leaks of Julian Assange, Aaron Swartz, Chelsea Manning, and Edward Snowden, leaks so absurdly large they could never be read in their entirety, only parsed, leaks so frighteningly huge they were derided by the mainstream media as “information vandalism,” a critique that mistook the leak’s form for function—or malfunction—as if to say the gesture of liberating information is as important as what’s actually being moved. To Assange, Swartz, Manning, and Snowden, what was being moved was important—a matter of life and death. But then again to many of us, our devices are a matter of life and death. The ubiquity of smartphones and dashboard and body cams, combined with the ability to distribute these images virally, have shed light on injustices that previously went unnoticed. When critics insist we put down our devices because they are making us less connected to one another, I have to wonder how the families of Tamir Rice or Laquan McDonald might react to that. This book attempts to reconcile these contradictions and embrace these multiplicities as a means of reenriching, reenlivening, recuperating, and reclaiming the time we spend in front of screens— time that is almost always dismissed as being wasted. Scrawled across the walls of Paris in May 1968, the slogan “live without dead time” became a rallying cry for a way of reclaiming spaces and bureaucracies that suck the life from you. I’d like to think our web experience can be nearly bereft of dead time if only we had the lens through which to see it that way. I don’t mean to paint too rosy a picture. The downsides of the web are well known: trolling, hate, flame wars, spam, and rampant stupidity. Still, there’s something perverse about how well we use the web yet how poorly we theorize our time spent on it. I’m hearing a lot of complaints, but I’m not getting too many answers, which makes me think perhaps our one- dimensional approach has been wrongheaded. Befitting a complex medium, one that is resistant to singularities, let’s consider a panoply of ideas, methods, and inspirations. The word “rhizomatic” has been used to describe the web to the point of cliché, but I still find it useful. The rhizome, a root form that grows unpredictably in all directions, offers many paths rather than one. The genie will not be put back in the bottle. Walking away is not an option. We are not unplugging anytime soon. Digital detoxes last as long as grapefruit diets do; transitional objects are just that. I’m convinced that learning, interaction, conversation, and engagement continues as it always has, but it’s taking new and different forms. I think it’s time to drop the simplistic guilt about wasting time on the Internet and instead begin to explore—and perhaps even celebrate—the complex possibilities that lay before us. CHAPTER 1 The Social Network One crisp Saturday morning in the fall of 2014, I announced a new course on my modest Twitter feed: “My class, called Wasting Time on the Internet, will be offered @Penn next semester,” along with a link to the course description: We spend our lives in front of screens, mostly wasting time: checking social media, watching cat videos, chatting, and shopping. What if these activities—clicking, SMSing, status updating, and random surfing—were used as raw material for creating compelling and emotional works of literature? Could we reconstruct our autobiography using only Facebook? Could we write a great novella by plundering our Twitter feed? Could we reframe the Internet as the greatest poem ever written? Using our laptops and a Wi-Fi connection as our only materials, this class will focus on the alchemical recuperation of aimless surfing into substantial works of literature. Students will be required to stare at the screen for three hours, only interacting through chat rooms, bots, social media, and LISTSERVs. To bolster our practice, we’ll explore the long history of the recuperation of boredom and time wasting through critical texts. Distraction, multitasking, and aimless drifting is mandatory. A few hours later, when I checked back, the tweet had gone viral, accompanied by comments like: “Wait I believe I already have a PhD in that” and “I’d ace it.” In my feed was a request from Vice for an interview, which I gave a day later. Shortly afterward, I found a message in my inbox from the Washington Post also requesting an interview, which I gave. From then on, I was inundated daily with interview requests, all of which—with the exception of some mainstream television shows—I declined. With a shortage of new chum in the waters from me, what ensued was a media feeding frenzy, which ultimately ended up consuming itself. After the two interviews in Vice and the Washington Post, I noticed a spate of second-tier news sites that basically reprinted the Vice and Post pieces in their entirety, slapped on new opening and concluding sentences, gave it a new title, and added a byline. A few days later, a bunch of third-tier sites did the same thing to the text of the second-tier sites. It was a massive game of copy and paste, far from what we consider to be upholding standards of original journalism. It was an object lesson not only on how information travels in a world of cut and paste but also how quickly it can devolve into distorted disinformation. With the torrents of press—good and bad—the waiting list for the class had swelled to more than one hundred students for only fifteen seats. After much anticipation, the class finally convened in January 2015 in an oak-paneled Ivy League room. The surroundings—which included a huge oval antique wooden table around which the class gathered—were incongruous with the task at hand. Yet this distinguished room was equipped with racks of audio, video, and Internet equipment, as well as a flat-screen monitor that adorned an otherwise empty wall above the classical wainscoting. An antique chandelier hovered over the table. Because of its location on the university backbone of the Internet, the Wi-Fi in the room was industrial strength. The students filtered into the room, opened their laptops, and—without a word—began wasting time on the Internet. Few instructions were given other than the fact that “something” needed to be written and submitted, culled from these sessions. From the start, it was a disaster. The students drifted aimlessly for three hours barely using the social media and LISTSERVs that had been set up for them. With no one to guide or critique them, the writing they produced at the end of each session was dreadful, reflecting the unfocused experience they were having in this class. During cigarette breaks, the students looked isolated, exhausted, and irritated. I wasn’t sure what to do. In my decade of teaching at Penn, I had never seen a group of students as demoralized as these. Clearly, my experiment was failing. After one of those breaks, I was sitting at a table outside the room trying to figure out how to solve this mess with my TA when, from out of nowhere, music started blasting from behind the closed doors in the classroom. When we got up to see what was going on, we found all fifteen students, up out of their chairs, dancing madly to Khia’s X-rated rap song “My Neck, My Back,” which was blaring from all fifteen laptops streaming the identical YouTube video. One student commandeered the huge screen on the wall by jacking his computer into it, playing the video on the monitor, and pumping the sound through the room’s speakers. The room resembled a cross between a television showroom—where all the TVs are lined up in a row playing the same show—and a disco. I wasn’t sure what happened, but something had changed. As it turns out, one of the students sent a request to the LISTSERV in silence, asking everyone to participate in a writing exercise she needed help with. Her idea was for everyone in the room to pick a song and play it aloud. She would then listen to the cacophony of lyrics and write down snippets from random lyrics she heard, coming up with an audio portrait in words. The students obliged, but the cacophony of fifteen computers each playing a different song proved to be too overwhelming for her to extract anything worthwhile. Instead, breaking the rules, the class began a lively discussion, brainstorming on how they could help make her project better. They decided to see what would happen if they all played the same song at the same time, which was, in short, how they stopped writing and started dancing. As soon as that song ended, they began debating the next song to play. The video was queued, and on the count of three, everyone pushed Start. The next song began, and the dancing resumed. For the next two hours, until the class ended, all they did was dance. The next week in class, fully energized and working as a group, they began to throw around other ideas for wasting time on the Internet that they could do together. Gone was the lethargy; gone was the silence. In their place, dozens of ideas flew around the room, which were debated and tested. Some were great; many failed. One particularly provocative idea was for everybody to open their laptops and pass them to the person seated to their left. For the next minute, that person could open anything on the laptop—any document, folder, or file. The only rules were that nothing could be altered or deleted and, for transparency’s sake, no windows that had been opened could be closed. At the end of a minute, the laptops would be passed again to the person sitting to the left of them, and so forth, until every machine had traveled around the table and fifteen different people had a turn with everybody’s computer. Upon hearing this proposition, my students’ faces went white. I could feel the fear rippling through the room. There was hesitation. Some expressed reservations: “My whole life is on that laptop!” or “I’ve never allowed anyone to touch my laptop before.” But once they realized that everyone was in the same position of radical vulnerability, they agreed to cautiously proceed. What transpired was both fascinating and a bit anticlimactic. I saw one woman hesitantly eyeing someone’s laptop, which had landed in front of her. She pecked at a few keys, opened a couple of windows, and passed it on. I watched another student as he dug a few levels deep into a directory, found a Word document, opened it, glanced quickly at it, and proceeded to dig around some more. Finally, when your laptop made its way back to you, you saw exactly what everyone had looked at. My laptop returned with my iPhoto open, several of my downloaded videos playing, and a bunch of financial spreadsheets cracked. Someone had gone through my e- mails; someone searched for the word “porn”; someone else took a peek at my book in progress. Upon inspecting their computers, they had a variety of responses, mostly of amusement. As it turns out, even if, for example, somebody’s diaries were found, there hadn’t been enough time to uncover the juicy parts. After all, there wasn’t much to see in a minute’s time, and revenge awaited: they’d have a turn with your laptop soon enough. The exercise was demystifying. It began to dawn on everybody that what we have on our laptops is, by and large, the same as what everyone else has on their laptops—a jumble of documents and files that mean a lot to us—but unless someone was looking for something very specific, our stuff didn’t matter much to anybody else. Afterward, I could feel a palpable sense of relief in the room. I could see my students’ bodies relaxing and the tension draining from their faces as they began connecting with their neighbors, sharing what other people opened, and laughing about it. What they feared —a massive invasion of privacy—didn’t happen in the ways they feared it would. Instead, the opposite happened: the room felt deeply connected, physically and emotionally, through those interactions with machines. They took a risk and as a result found themselves having crossed a certain threshold, one that allowed new levels of trust and intimacy and permitted them to move forward as a group into uncharted waters. The stakes got higher: they began doing “data duels,” in which two people would get up in front of the class, exchange laptops, stand back-to-back, walk ten paces, turn around, face each other, and, at the count of three, each would delete one document from the other’s computer and empty the trash. Before handing the laptops back, all windows were closed so they’d never know which document was deleted. A year later, I still have no idea which documents I lost, which reminds me that maybe my data isn’t as precious as I thought it was. Over the months, the class evolved into an idea generator on how a group of people in a room could waste time on the Internet together: Venmo $100 to the person to your right. They must then Venmo $100 to the person to their right and so on until your money goes full circle and returns to you. Work in a group to invent a rumor. Spread the rumor on as many social media sites as possible. Do a background check on the person to your left. Find every detail about them: addresses, schools, e-mail, hobbies, groups, publications, work, criminal record, family members, etc. Find everything you can by any means necessary. Hack into their accounts if necessary. Save what you find in a document. Send it to them. In a group, have everyone put their addresses in a bowl in the middle and each person draws one at random. Go to eBay and buy that person a present for less than one dollar. As a group, choose a popular album of music. Find the worst possible versions of each song on the web, be it a terrible cover on YouTube, a bad-quality download, a virus-laden download, a misheard lyrics version, or a horrible remix. Reconstruct the album out of these new versions. One week, a challenge was made to see who, after fifteen minutes, could tally the largest dollar amount by adding things to their Amazon shopping cart. When it was finished, the winner tallied $23,475,104.18 by clicking on vintage postage stamps, sports memorabilia, and expensive jewelry. Most people quickly emptied everything in their cart, fearing that they’d mistakenly hit a Buy button, putting them into debt for thousands or even millions of dollars. I forgot to empty mine, whereupon the next day at work, I got a panicked call from my wife, freaked out that someone had hacked our Amazon account to the tune of $2.5 million. I had some explaining to do. After each exercise, everyone in the room would restart their computer—a ceremonial cleansing that became a ritual. As computer start-up chimes tolled throughout the room, it was a sign that it was time to begin a new activity. And so it went, week after week. I soon dropped the writing requirement, for the experience of wasting time on the Internet together in the same room far surpassed any artifact that would result from it. We came to the conclusion that when we waste time on the Internet, we usually do it alone or as a parallel activity—like in a dorm or a library—which is why the first few classes failed. By inserting the network and machine into the midst of physically based social interaction, new forms of communal activity were possible. The class was remarkably close to the experience of playing Twister, in which physical commands are decreed by an apparatus—the spinner—which tells you where to put your hands and feet. Because you must follow the edicts of the machine (the spinner is a primitive machine) your body ends up in places it normally wouldn’t. Even when those positions are awkward—your nose ends up in somebody’s crotch—no offense is taken because it’s the machine that dictates where the body goes. Arguably, that’s what makes it fun. (It’s been said that Twister was the first board game to ever use human beings as pieces.) We all agreed to play together and play by the rules, whatever the outcome may be. The presence of machines at the center of our social interactions seemed to temper whatever emotional responses we had to what were, at times, some white- knuckle moments. Like Twister, if things got too uncomfortable, we could always blame it on the machine rather than on a fellow student. Emotionally, the tone stayed cool, often verging on flat and mechanical, even when they were having fun. The dancing was wild, but wholly self-conscious; after all, this was an Ivy League university not a nightclub. There was no catharsis; we never had a group hug. Instead, there was a lot of affect flying around the room. Affect is the powerful but often invisible emotional temperature in any given social situation, for instance, when you walk into a room that feels so tense you could “cut it with a knife,” although there are no visible signs of that tension. It’s similar to being afraid and noticing your palms are sweating, a palpable reaction that—with the exception of a handshake—is mostly invisible to others. Sweaty palms are an affective pre-emotion, as opposed to the full-blown emotions of screaming, laughing, or crying. Perhaps the most famous instance of affect is Pavlov’s dog salivating. Affect is an inventory of shimmers, nuances, and states. Contagious, leaping from one body to another, affect infects those nearby with microemotions and microfeelings, pulsating extensions of our bodies’ nervous systems. Our online lives are saturated with affect, our sensations amplified and projected by the network. Our Wi-Fi networks—carriers of affect—are invisible but ubiquitous, transmitting pulses and sensations through the air that have the potential to convert to emotions when displayed on our screens. This goes a long way to explain how hyperemotional social networking is, even on such a cold platform. Affect accounts for why things go viral on the networks. An invisible force, affect makes everything contagious. When I e-mail a resume to apply for a job, my affectual state flickers somewhere between nervousness and hope. When I receive a response from that query, my affect is anticipation that will undoubtedly convert to emotion once I open the mail. Because of the time lag—an interval of even microseconds—online communications are affective in every way; most likely the receiver of that e-mail is also in an affective state. Watching someone await a response to a text message is a demonstration of anticipatory affect in that interval. In this way, the web is telepathic: we send an e-mail, post a status update, send a Facebook message, and then we wait, anticipating the nature of the response. Web communication is like fishing; dropping a line in the water and hoping that something will bite. But because we are addressing the entire world—an unprecedented situation—we don’t really know to whom we are speaking, which sometimes results in tragic misunderstanding and miscommunication: we thought we were doing one thing but it turns out we were doing something else. Still, it is telepathy that makes the vast connections possible—between writers and readers, coders and viewers, followers and friends, not to mention members of online communities—all of which is transmitted by affect. The content of Wi-Fi is radio, an earlier affectual wireless transmission technology. Ezra Pound, writing in 1934, famously called the artist “the antennae of the race.” Pound used a new technological metaphor—the radio antenna—in order to propose a visionary occult use for it. As few artists were exclusively using radio as their medium, Pound was using new technology to describe very old media: sculpture, painting, and poetry. In this way, Pound was referring to what has become known as “hauntology,” a term invented by Jacques Derrida to describe “the figure of the ghost as that which is neither present, nor absent, neither dead nor alive,” which also describes the way newer media is haunted by the old. In the nineteenth century, séances used machines such as the Ouija board through which voices and ideas, many of them long dead, were transmitted to the living—literally as “ghosts in the machine”; our twenty-first-century Wi-Fi transmissions bear eerie similarities. Like the occult, affect works against narrative: it isn’t conclusive or curative; instead, it’s static, continual, hovering, and conditional. As a result, my class had no denouement or dramatic conclusion. In a room full of machines and gadgets it was, ironically, the body and its small human gestures—the affective gestures—that drove the class. People say that technology creates distance between people, but we found it to be just the opposite: our physical and emotive experiences were intensified through our devices. By merging our bodies with the network, we became highly attuned and acutely sensitive to everyone in the room. The class’s success was predicated on our bodies being together in the same space. Telecommuting or a MOOC (massive online open course) would simply have reified typically distanced ways of being online; our experience was, to put it mildly, rather atypical. In that room, every action was a transmission. Something as simple as students turning their laptops around to share with the class what they discovered while wasting time on the Internet triggered a series of electric responses, ones that pierced every body and mind in the room. It was, literally, a meatspace social network. I’m in a large room in Berlin—where I’ve been brought to lead a four- hour workshop—on a gray, rainy Saturday afternoon wasting time on the Internet with a hundred people. They’ve all been required to bring their laptops and devices, which are connected to a lightning- speed Wi-Fi connection. I start by telling the group a story about how I once had a student who did a project in which he took his bank PIN code, blew it up huge on a flag, and ran it up a flagpole in the center of campus in the middle of the night when no one was looking. The next day, his PIN—his most private information—was there for all to see. Of course, nobody knew the meaning of this strange string of numbers, and even if someone could figure out that it was a PIN, they’d have no idea to which account it was attached. Within a few hours, the flag was removed. His finances were untouched. Extending the laptop data-invasion exercise I did with my class, I proposed the following: might we be able to go a step further and share our passwords with one another? I ask if anyone wants to share their password with the group. My request is met with dead silence. I can see I’m not going to get too far with this one. So instead, I demonstrate the way I construct my passwords. I crack open a Word document and make the font really big, which is projected on a screen behind me. I explain to one hundred total strangers the formula I use to create my passwords. I show them how every password I make begins with the names of the site beginning with a capital letter—Yahoo, for instance—which is then followed by a scientist’s first and last name, trailed by the last four digits of one of my old landline numbers, ending with two exclamation points. So, a typical password of mine would be YahooStephenHawking6830!! or AmazonMaxPlanck2448!! The elements I chose are indicative of who I am, including my nerdy fascination for science and nostalgia for the many phone numbers I’ve had throughout my life, each one evoking a flood of memories every time I type them. I ask anyone else if they would like to come up in front of the workshop and demonstrate how they make their passwords. A woman volunteers, showing us her technique, which always includes the number 410. When asked why, she said that when she was a child growing up in Denmark, 4:10 was the time her favorite television show aired. Suddenly, the room lights up with conversation. It turns out that this particular show was aired all over Europe at that identical time and many of these international participants have deep connections to this show as well. The animated memories and chatter go on for quite a while before another gentleman steps up and proceeds to walk us through his passwords. It’s very confusing and no one in the room can understand it at all, which is his intention. As he explains it to us, he is a trained cryptographer, a lover of puzzles. His passwords are completely logical, but it’s a different type of logic. What’s beginning to emerge among the participants is that passwords are much more than something we use to get into locked rooms: they are tiny self- portraits constructed with fragments of autobiographical data that unwittingly convey who we are and how we think. Even those generic security questions you get asked are steeped in awkwardly intimate autobiography: “What is the first name of the person you first kissed?” or “What is the last name of the teacher who gave you your first failing grade?” Next, taking a page from my Penn class, I ask everyone to cue up one song on YouTube, then full-screen it. At the same moment, everyone hits Play. The room fills up with a cacophony of one hundred different songs played from tinny speakers. Afterward, people get up to speak about what song they chose, why they chose it, and by doing so, what sort of message they were trying to project about themselves to the others. As it turns out, everyone has a reason for choosing the song they did. One man played a rap video from Tyler the Creator that his sixteen-year-old son had showed him that morning over breakfast; another woman played a current earworm, one she claimed to be her soundtrack for the summer, already laden with memories on this early mid-June day; an older gentleman played an alternative British national anthem, one he said expressed his strong political sentiments. One song rises above the din. It’s Taylor Swift’s “Shake It Off,” the one song everyone in the room seems to know, and because of its iconic pop hooks the one song ringing in everyone’s ears long after all the other videos have been turned off. I have everyone cue up the same YouTube video of “Shake It Off.” Again, at the count of three, everyone hits Play at the identical instant. One hundred laptops are displaying the first moment of the video, a row of ballet dancers at a barre doing stretches to the heavy drumbeat that begins the song. The row of dancers in the video extends to infinity across this large room like an endless Rockettes kick line. On a hundred screens, a hundred Taylor Swifts emerge from the clusters of dancers, turn toward the camera, and sing, “I stay up too late, got nothing in my brain, that’s what people say.” But then a lovely computer glitch happens. Due to the various laptop processing speeds and the way they connect differently to the Internet, the videos begin to play off-kilter, with some laptops ten seconds ahead and others ten seconds behind. The room becomes a large echo chamber and as the four-minute video unfurls, the asynchronization becomes more and more pronounced. The pop song is starting to sound like one of Steve Reich’s early tape-loop pieces, in which two reel-to-reel recorders play an identical tape loop simultaneously. As they play, they gradually fall out of sync with one another due to microscopic differences in the machines’ playback speeds, resulting in psychedelic echoes and overlays, which is what’s happened to poor Taylor Swift. Gradually, the room grows quieter as each video winds down at a different speed, then ends. Finally, the slowest laptop in the room finishes—a solo performance that mimics the final shot of the video, with Taylor Swift dropping to the ground among a troupe of perfectly poised ballerinas. It’s simply poetic. Next, I have everyone open their laptops and log on to Facebook, then walk away from their computers. For the next fifteen minutes, anyone can approach any laptop and enter whatever they like in the status update windows. There’s great trepidation as the participants gingerly eyeball the laptops. I see them think for a moment, then timidly type something in the window and move on to another computer. But within a few minutes, they’re fully engaged, banging words into other people’s lives. Some enter benign comments: “Have a nice day!” Others are more self-reflective: “You know this is not me.” “I am wasting time on the Internet.” “Kenneth Goldsmith made me do this.” Others yet are laden with moral sentiment: “This feels so wrong to be typing into someone else’s Facebook page.” Several people type surrealistic sentences, nonsensical words, and spontaneous poems in the boxes. Like graffiti taggers, a few participants enter the identical cryptic phrase into each and every computer, marking their territory. When it’s over, I ask several people to read what other people wrote. The room is tense. Some people smile knowingly when they hear their words read aloud; others are horrified as they read what’s been scrawled on their walls. The room becomes an emotive echo chamber, with feelings zooming around the room, bouncing off Facebook pages, and back into the room again. The affect also extends outside of the room: sure enough, phones start buzzing with friends and family contacting the participants to ask if everything is alright, and if they know their Facebook accounts have been hacked. Everyone has a lot of explaining to do. Next I ask for volunteers to come to the front of the room and waste time on the Internet publicly for all to see on the computer, which is projected on a large screen behind them. A young man approaches, his hands trembling as he logs on to Facebook. His cursor jitters, a digital manifestation of his physical condition. He hesitates, then checks his e-mail, looks at his work schedule, and deletes a wad of spam. He scrolls through Facebook, zooming past many items, slowing down to play each and every video for a split second. His web activity is an extension of his mind: we can almost see what he is thinking when he zooms past certain items on his feed or when he lingers on others. He’s been silent the entire time, but increasingly looks out at us to gauge our reaction. The more he looks at us, the more self- conscious of his actions we feel him become. He goes to YouTube and searches through a comedy feed he subscribes to and clicks on a long video by the Canadian comedian Russell Peters, which he expands to full screen. Leaning back in his chair, he folds his arms and watches the video along with us. We titter; he smiles. The video is mildly funny and sort of entertaining; he’s just letting it roll. It’s going on for a little too long. I can feel the affect in the form of impatience rising in our room; after all, we were here to watch him waste time on the Internet—to see how he, specifically, wastes time —but now we’re stuck watching an interminable mediocre video. While he is indeed wasting time on the Internet, he’s not playing along to some set of invisible rules the group seems to have invented on the spot. People begin grumbling. Finally, affect converts to full-blown emotion when a woman in the audience challenges him: “You’re not wasting time on the Internet! You’re just trying to entertain us. We came here to watch the way you waste time!” The young man appears to feel her words deeply. He bows his head and apologizes: “This is pretty nerve wracking. I’m sorry but I thought you’d be bored if I wasted time on the Internet the way I normally do. I feel guilty that I wasn’t being entertaining enough, so I thought you’d enjoy this video.” Defeated, he heads back to his seat. A nerdy hipster dude in black thick-rimmed glasses struts up to the podium. He sits down with confidence—perhaps even with a bit of smugness—cracks a browser and goes to a password-protected academic site where he downloads an essay by Heidegger. Next he opens Spotify, where he starts streaming some atonal string quartets by Schoenberg. You can feel the eyes beginning to roll in the room. Could this guy be more pretentious? He goes further by streaming a clip of a Godard interview with the sound turned off, at which point people start begging him to sit down. He’s been caught in his performance, which, while it might not have been exactly how he wastes time on the Internet—doesn’t he check his Facebook like the rest of us?—belies some grain of truth. He knew his stuff and probably chose to perform a certain curated aspect of his personality. In its own way, what he did was take the opportunity to create a performance by curating a set of cultural artifacts that spoke perhaps of who he was, who he wasn’t, or who he wanted us to think he was. Chances are it was a combination of all three. The final time waster is a graduate student who begins admitting her nervousness by stating: “My pulse is jumping.” She settles in and logs on to Facebook. Scrolling through her feed, she pauses and says, “I feel guilty, like I’m exposing my friends on Facebook by doing this in front of one hundred strangers.” I make a mental note about how much guilt is inscribed in these exercises. She then cracks another tab, checks her Yahoo e-mail, and begins streaming Mumford and Sons’ “Little Lion Man” (radio edit) on Pandora, which resembles a soundtrack for a spaghetti Western and gives her performance a cinematic quality; we now feel like we’re watching a movie. Her browsing style is restless and jumpy. Quickly, she is back on Facebook, where she full-screens a clip from Ellen DeGeneres for a brief moment, then closes it. By now, she’s losing her self- consciousness and her surfing becomes rhythmic: first she checks her e-mail, then Facebook, then back to YouTube, over and over. Both structured and restless, this cycle continually repeats with slight variations over the next ten minutes. Her ease and lack of self- consciousness is infectious: I can see the other participants’ body postures change; some have stretched out on the carpeted floor as they watch, their faces open and relaxed. Her online habits have a regularity, which remind me of breathing—drawing breath in, holding it, and expelling it in regular intervals—as she rhythmically circulates from one site to another. As she has gotten into her groove, her time wasting has become organic; everyone’s become nearly silent. We’re in a trance. This banal room, housed in the bowels of a brutalist concrete room in Berlin has now been transformed into something resembling a yoga studio, with one hundred strangers harmoniously enraptured, swaying together in a state of buzzing electronic tranquility. CHAPTER 2 The Walking Dead A few weeks after returning from Berlin, I’m walking down Park Avenue on a beautiful midsummer evening. Armies of people are streaming out of their offices, most with their smartphones in hand. I am reminded of US Supreme Court Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr.’s comment on the central role our devices play in the contemporary world: “They are such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life that the proverbial visitor from Mars might conclude they were an important feature of human anatomy.” Part human, part machine, these masses peck away at their smartphones, deftly navigating the packed sidewalk the way colonies of bats traverse the night sky. Gazing out on this technology-soaked urban landscape, I am also reminded of how fond the surrealists were of sleeping in public. Inspired by Freud, they wanted to bring dreams out of the bedroom and onto the streets. While most of us deem sleep to be a necessary remedy, a state of repair and restoration, the surrealists felt that having to be awake was an unwelcome interruption to sleep. Their greatest wish was to exist in a continual dream state. “I believe in the future resolution of these two states, dream and reality,” wrote André Breton, “which are seemingly so contradictory, into a kind of absolute reality, a surreality.” In his never-ending search to join these two disparate states, Breton started attending séances, which became required attendance for all aspiring surrealists. During the séances, Breton noticed several of his acolytes nodding off. One in particular, the poet René Crevel, revealed himself as a sleep talker, babbling nonsense in the twilight of consciousness. In Crevel’s dozing, Breton discovered a sort of portable séance, one that could be whisked out of the tomb-like silence of the parlor and dropped into noisy public spaces, inserting the dreamer into the midst of the crowd. From then on, he convinced Crevel to start falling asleep in cafés where, once he was presumed to be fast asleep—there was always some doubt that this was just theater—he was peppered with questions by a circle of awake poets, who transcribed these conversations as the basis for future poems. Breton was delighted with the results: Crevel’s answers were perfectly surreal; his responses never quite matched up with the questions, which he took as direct manifestations culled from the subconscious, a balancing act between wakefulness and sleep. Rivalries grew among the surrealist poets as to who could be the best public sleeper. Commenting on this, Breton wrote: “Every day they want to spend more time sleeping. Their words, recorded, intoxicate them. Everywhere, anywhere, they fall asleep . . . In the cafés, and amid the beer-glasses, the saucers.” One aspiring sleeper posted a note on his door each night before going to bed that read: THE POET IS WORKING. Proposing sleepwalking as an optimal widespread societal condition, Breton once asked, “When will we have sleeping logicians, sleeping philosophers?” It seems the surrealist vision of a dream culture has been fully realized in today’s technologies. We are awash in a new electronic collective unconscious; strapped to several devices, we’re half-awake, half-asleep. We speak on the phone while surfing the web, partially hearing what’s being said to us while simultaneously answering e-mails and checking status updates. I can’t help notice that we’ve become very good at being distracted. Breton would be delighted. After a long day’s work, I decide to go for a run. I throw on some shorts and sneakers, strap on some headphones, grab my iPhone, and I’m out the door. When I run I generally don’t set out with a plan. Instead, I let the city take me: the traffic flows and crowds of Manhattan determine where I go. Getting going is always tough at first, but about ten minutes into it, I feel a breakthrough. Some seventies dub—King Tubby, streaming over Spotify—is rolling through my headphones, and I’m starting to get my groove. As I start to feel the rhythm of the music and the rhythm of the run, good thoughts about the structure of a book I’m working on start to emerge. Wanting to catch them during my run, I take my iPhone out of my pocket, open up the Notes app, click on Siri’s voice recognition, and begin to dictate. My speech is sent over the cell network to a server, where it’s shot back to my phone in the form of text. To most people passing by on the street, I look like any other jerk multitasking. They grimace at me and shake their heads as if to say, “Why can’t you just run? Must you always be tethered to that device, gossiping?” Little do they know that I am actually writing a book. I’m in a semiconscious state: my feet are moving and my body is sweating. The thoughts are really flowing now, so much so that I almost forget I’m running as I float effortlessly above the pavement on a runner’s high. In addition to the rhythms of the city, my run is determined by my interactions with technology. Every time I click voice recognition, King Tubby is paused. I change the way I speak to accommodate Siri. I want her to be able to recognize everything I’m saying, so I slow down my speech and tend to overpronounce words. I say the word “comma” every time I want to insert a comma and the word “period” every time I want to end a sentence. I say “new paragraph” when I wish to start a new thought. I happily adjust my speech to the constraints of the machine, which is now enmeshed with my heavy breathing and the system of traffic lights on Manhattan’s grid. I pause self-consciously for a moment as I’m describing the way I’m again speaking and am embarrassed when I recall a voice message that I left for a friend recently, where I said the words “comma” and “period” just as if I were speaking to Siri. As I’m running, I’m also throwing off data to the cloud even though I don’t wear a smartwatch or a fitness band. Instead, my phone is tracking every move my body makes and where I am. My Health app shows that I ran 4.49 miles today. In fact, my phone shows me every move I make in five-minute intervals all day long, every day. Today, for instance, from 5:05 to 5:10 P.M., I ran 0.5687 miles, whereas in the next five minutes, I ran 0.4918 miles. The app also shows me that I’ve taken 8,306 steps so far today and that on a typical day in 2015, I took 10,129 steps. And all of this information is stored deep in my privacy settings in the form of maps, which shows me gorgeously rendered visual representations of every single place I’ve been around the world over the past few years, along with the date and time I was there. On top of that, my phone’s GPS is tracking every move I’ve made on this run and how fast I’ve been going. Since I’ve been running mostly in the streets, my data will be fed into the traffic reports on Google Maps. Since Google Maps can’t tell whether I am in a car or running on the streets—to them, I’m just another pulsing GPS—my pathetic running speed will probably skew the results toward gridlock. Of course I am free to turn off these features but they’re so buried I haven’t bothered. I can assume that most of this data, if not all of it, is being sold to marketers and scooped up by government agencies like the NSA. So my run, which I took to clear my head, is much more complicated than I thought. I’m not just running; I’m throwing off an enormous amount of data, navigating the physical urban landscape, while structuring and writing my book. If I thought I was only doing one thing—running—I would be naïve. Even in my leisure, when strapped to a web-enabled device, I’m furiously multitasking and, in a very positive way, highly distracted. Could we say that the act of running or walking in the city is what the act of speech is to language? Could we think of our feet as our mouth, articulating stories as we journey through the urban jungle? And in what ways are these stories written and communicated? When we walk, we tread upon a dense palimpsest of those who have traveled these same sidewalks before us, each inscribing on those pavements their own narratives. In this way, when we walk in the city, we are at once telling our own stories and retelling tales of those who came before us. Walking the city invokes a text, one that is instantaneously written and read at once. The urbanist philosopher Michel de Certeau says, “They walk—an elementary form of this experience of the city; they are walkers, Wandersmänner, whose bodies follow the thicks and thins of an urban ‘text’ they write without being able to read it.” Walking, then, is an act of reading the city with our feet. The city itself is an epic novel: each building a word, each street a sentence, and each block a paragraph. De Certeau’s claim for unreadability is hinged on three facts: the blur of motion, the speed at which the tale is unwinding, and the sheer immensity of the text. When we speak of hypertexts, we usually mean those that exist online, but we might think of the city as the ur-hypertext, a dynamic, analog, predigital model of complex intertextuality. In the twenty-first century, the story has entered a fourth dimension of data. As we walk, we emit streams of data, tracking where we’re walking and how we’re walking: how far, how fast, how many calories burned, and so forth. The air above the streets is thick with our narrative transmissions uploading to far-flung server farms where, parsed and analyzed, they reappear on our devices. We walk and we think; we read and we write. The rhythm of our walking influences the pace of our thinking. In a rush, we run/walk/think/read/write frantically and obsessively; at our leisure, casting aside logic, we let our feet instinctually caress the sidewalk’s urban braille. Inspired by the surrealists, the situationists had a technique for urban sleepwalking that they called dérive, which literally translates as “drifting.” Their idea was for the dériviste to completely give themselves up to the tugs and flows of the urban street, letting the crowds take them where they will, revealing regions of the city that, in their more “conscious” or “waking” moments, they would most likely not have been exposed to. Similarly, when beset by his demons, the painter Willem de Kooning would wander the dark streets of New York for most of the night, walking as far south as Battery Park at the southern tip of the island and then back. Often he went on these prowls alone, but friends occasionally accompanied him. The critic Edwin Denby said, “I can hear his light, tense voice saying as we walked at night, ‘I’m struggling with my picture, I’m beating my brains out, I’m stuck.’” Relieving ourselves of intention, we get unstuck; drifting through the streets with a purposeful aimlessness, we find ourselves reading the city for pleasure. When we drift through the city device-bound, we are enveloped in our own data storm, similar to the Peanuts cartoon character Pig- Pen, an embodiment of cloud-based computing. As a completely quantified being, each motion he makes—every step and every shake of the head—generates more visible dust. He doesn’t traffic in clods of turf or thick mud. Instead, his dust is atmospheric and crystalline, melding with the air. Like snow, it gently falls on whatever it touches, only to be whisked away just as quickly. He’s a machine; his cloud functions 24/7, continuously spewing billows of dust. Regardless of the weather, his condition remains unaffected; even rainstorms can’t rinse him clean. His is a networked cloud, affecting those who come into contact with him; he himself is a living social network, always eliciting a strong interactive response from those in close proximity to him. Like a Wi-Fi signal in search of a smartphone, dirt finds Pig-Pen. Stepping outside after a bath, in clean clothes, he is immediately coated in dirt, declaring to Charlie Brown: “You know what I am? I’m a dust magnet!” Wherever Pig-Pen walks, he is met with repulsion. His critics— the entire cast of Peanuts—often accuse him of wallowing in his dirt, of taking a hedonistic pleasure in his condition. They say he’s as self-absorbed and insensitive to others as he is a bastion of filth. But he sees it differently, claiming that he has affixed to him the “dust of countless ages.” Deftly assuaging his critics, he turns the tables on them, forcing them to see value where before they saw none: “Don’t think of it as dust,” he says. “Just think of it as the dirt and dust of far- off lands blowing over here and settling on Pig-Pen! It staggers the imagination! I may be carrying the soil that was trod upon by Solomon or Nebuchadnezzar or Genghis Khan!” As he moves through the world, he inscribes the contemporary into his cloud, adding the dirt of the day to his already thickly layered historical record. In this, he at once performs the roles of geologist, archeologist, and archivist. Like Homer, who transmitted his sagas orally, Pig-Pen is the bearer of a certain historical record, told in his own specific tongue. As an outcast, he assumes the role of the trickster, a figure who, defying normative community-based behavioral standards, is the keeper of a database of deep and secret knowledge. He is at once physical and ephemeral, omnipresent and local, site specific and distributed, time based and atemporal. His cloud is a haze, an ambience, a network that can’t be defined by specific boundaries. It is without beginning and without end: a pulse, a stasis, a skein, a caliphate. Going against the grain, his self-image is strong. Violet shows him a mirror and tries to humiliate him by asking, “Aren’t you ashamed?” Pig-Pen replies, “On the contrary. I didn’t think I looked this good.” A few months later, on a cool autumn evening after work, I’m sauntering down Madison Avenue. I walk lockstep a few paces behind a woman who is thumbing her Facebook page as she languidly ambles. She is oblivious to anything else going on around her, including my shadowing her and looking over her shoulder. Like many of us, she has honed and fine-tuned her peripheral vision to animal strength, stopping with the crowds at corners, waiting for red lights, never looking up. When the lights change, she crosses the street, neither crashing into anyone nor stumbling on a curb. We walk together for about five or six blocks, at which point my attention is drawn to a man stopped dead still in the middle of the sidewalk texting. As a sea of pedestrians flow around him, he doesn’t budge. He just stands there still as a stone. He’s a human piece of street furniture, a public impediment to others—many of whom are also glued to their devices. Everyone is in their own world, but it would be unfair to say that just because they aren’t interacting with people on the street they’re antisocial. In fact, they’re aggressively social, but their interrelations are geographically distributed. Like sleepwalkers, they’re both present and absent. I’m reminded of how the surrealists’ ideal state for making art was the twilight between wakefulness and sleep, when they would dredge up images from the murky subconscious and poetically juxtapose them on the page or canvas. A few days later, I’m walking up Sixth Avenue with a buddy who almost collides with a digital sleepwalker. “Fucking zombies,” he says, something I often hear used to describe them. He’s right: “zombie” is an accurate way to depict our digital somnambulists. Zombies seem self- motivated, even purposeful, but it’s an illusion. Completely lacking in awareness, zombies don’t make choices. They’re preprogrammed by drive, similar to the way consumers are. In fact, by nature, zombies are insatiable consumers. As reactivated corpses, zombies are living bodies rendered soulless, lobotomized by sorcery (which is itself a kind of programming), automated to consume living flesh. It’s been said that social media has turned us into ravenous consumerist zombies. Nothing has voracious brand loyalty the way social media does, which keeps us refreshing our feeds the way zombies crave flesh. On August 27, 2015, Facebook reported for the first time that one billion users logged on in a single day—and many of us compulsively log on several times a day. Each time we click Like on a status update we add to an already shockingly accurate profile of our consumerist selves—highly valuable information that’s eagerly harvested by the network. Edward Snowden said that if we want to protect ourselves against government agencies scraping our data, we should get off Dropbox, Facebook, and Google and that we should “search for encrypted communication services” because they “enforce your rights.” Few have taken his advice. Zombies can’t be deprogrammed. The social media apparatus beckons us and we become addicted, joining the billion-plus strong for whom a life without social media is an impossibility. Social contacts, dating prospects, job opportunities, communications with loved ones—just about every interaction we have—flows through social media. For most of us it isn’t a choice; it’s a necessity. Even Snowden couldn’t resist: on October 6, 2015, he joined Twitter. Much of the web itself has been colonized by zombies that automatically churn pages, entice us to click on them, sometimes phishing for passwords, other times accumulating page views to generate ad revenue. At the same time, spiders—another type of zombie—crawl the web and consume all they can, indiscriminately sucking up files. Casting the widest net possible, they trawl data, passwords, and media that are warehoused in distant servers with the hopes of salvaging something of value, ultimately to be resold by yet more zombies. Every move we make on the web is tracked, transforming our digital peregrinations into data sets. Truly, our online lives—intersections of flesh and machine—are daily feasts of extreme digital consumption. The zombies in George Romero’s 1978 film Dawn of the Dead, were also hyperconsumers. Descending on a suburban shopping mall, they’re doing all the things shoppers normally do—wandering aimlessly through the aisles, pushing their brimming carts to the piped-in strains of Muzak. A swarm of individuals who are unaware of each other, they act entirely out of self-interest. They are driven by the fierce desire to consume, in this case, the flesh of the living humans who have barricaded themselves inside the mall and who have also fallen prey to the dazzling array of products in this depopulated mall, all free for the taking. As much as the zombies have no real use for the consumer goods overflowing their shopping carts, neither do the humans. Trapped indoors, they can’t play golf with their new shiny clubs or go anywhere fabulous in their recently liberated couture. Yet both—the humans and the zombies—are consumed by the act of consumption. And the human consumers may themselves ultimately be consumed—literally eaten—by the hyperzombie consumers. Zombies replicate virally. Similar to the metrics of our social media accounts—your number of Twitter followers moves strongly in one direction—their numbers are always gaining in strength. Their power is in numbers: the more of them there are, the more powerful they are. Our power is also in numbers: the more followers we have, the more powerful we are. When we gain a follower, we don’t gain a person; we gain a metric. And yet, many of our followers might in fact truly be zombies or bots—programs on a network that often appear to act and interact like humans—who follow us so we’ll follow them back. A trick to swell our ranks is to buy followers, acquiring legions of zombies who will do our consuming on our behalf. Romero’s zombie shoppers may have filled their shopping carts with stuff but they can’t use it the same way you can’t use all the data you download. However, someone else can: our computers are invaded by agents that turn them into zombies as part of a botnet—a swarm of bots—performing nefarious deeds without us even knowing it. We are the walking dead, passive-aggressive, human-machine hybrids who are under the illusion that we’re in control. But it’s not that simple. We are collaborators with the zombies: sometimes wittingly, other times coercively, but always codependently. We are at once identified and self-identified with them, which might not be such a bad thing because the apparatus through which all of this flows— the network—is the ultimate zombie. The network appears to be more resilient than the waves of global epidemics and terrorism that continually engulf us. In spite of extremism, wars, mass migration, climate change, and market meltdowns in which fragile human bodies are decimated, our robust networks remain unbreakable in ways that bodies aren’t. A great inspiration for the dreamy surrealists was the nineteenth- century flaneur, an idle man-about-town who was the opposite of the zombie. Like a dériviste (the situationists also claimed the flaneur as a predecessor), he roamed the city alone, allowing himself to be pulled by the flows of the crowds on the grand boulevards. With no goal in mind, he was a spectator of the urban landscape, viewing the goings-on from the shadowy sidelines. Whereas the zombie was obsessed with consuming, the flaneur assiduously avoided it, feeling that to buy something would be too participatory. Instead, he was a world-class window-shopper, haunting enclosed arcades and narrow winding streets, browsing the displays. His was a stance of studied ambivalence. When asked about a certain topic of the day, he would feign indifference and recuse himself by simply saying, “I don’t know” or “I don’t care.” The flaneur exemplified a position that Roland Barthes called “the neutral,” wherein one intentionally places oneself in a state of uncertainty or indecision—living in a state between states—like sleepwalkers, ghosts, vampires, androids, and androgynous persons.* Neutrality was at the heart of the flaneur’s resistance; fiercely individualistic, he resisted any attempts to be programmed or enlisted to join movements or groups. Uninterested in power, he was bereft of the kind of hungry desire that drives consumers and zombies. The flaneur is hardwired into the ethos of the Internet: we “browse” the web with our “browsers,” “surfing” from site to site, voyeuristically “lurking” from the sidelines. The digital flaneur obsessively frequents comment streams but doesn’t dare leave a comment; he browses the great online shops and bazaars but doesn’t buy anything; he googles strangers but his online profile is studiously all but invisible. He is a peripatetic digital wanderer, pulled by the tugs and flows of his feeds, carelessly clicking from one spectacle to the next. Instagram is his Louvre, YouTube his Ziegfeld. The flaneur has a buzzing, hovering presence, at once visible and unnoticed, not unlike the dozens of Wi-Fi networks crowded into the air we breathe. He is an embodiment of Marcel Duchamp’s concept of the infrathin—a state between states. When asked to define the infrathin, Duchamp claimed it couldn’t be defined, only described: “the warmth of a seat (which has just been left)” or “Velvet trousers / their whistling sound (in walking) by / brushing of the 2 legs is an / infrathin separation signaled / by sound.” The infrathin is the lingering warmth of a piece of paper just after it emerges from the laser printer or the chiming start-up sound the computer makes, signifying its transition from death to life. When composer Brian Eno was commissioned to compose the Windows 95 start-up sound, he had to fulfill the requirements that it be “optimistic, futuristic, sentimental, emotional.” He did that and more, coming up with a three-and-a-quarter-second pocket symphony. Eno, an artist familiar with Duchamp, invented an infrathin genre, “ambient music”—a hovering static music that is barely noticeable—which he intended to act as little more than an atmospheric perfume or tint to a room. The whooshing sound my e-mail program makes when I hit Send or the click of the shutter my smartphone makes when I take a picture are similarly displaced infrathin moments. These noises are signifiers of an event that in some ways happened and in other ways didn’t happen. My mail was sent, silently and invisibly, and my photo was taken, but not in the way that I heard it. These series of contradictory events happening simultaneously—compatible and disjunctive, logical and absurd, present and absent, real and artificial—are evidence of ways in which the infrathin permeates our online lives. The flaneur died with the birth of the department store. A creature of the boutiques, arcades, and streets, he felt unwelcome in the controlled confines of the big-box shops. His stage taken from him, the flaneur ceased to be. As the web becomes more commercial, I find I do less wandering than I used to. The web is now so riddled with zombies and their foul culture—clickbait, spam, ads—that I tend to return again and again to the few sites I know and trust. And even when I do, say, click to a site from a Facebook link, I find myself closing that window and returning to Facebook to seek another for fear that I, too, might become contaminated. Years ago, I might’ve hung around, exploring that site, drilling down to see what else was there, but today, the lure of social media draws me in over and over again, filling me with nostalgic sadness to witness my digital flaneur hovering on the verge of extinction. Many lament the passing of the book’s physicality. They are nostalgic for its smell, the sound of flipping pages, or the habit of dog-earing a page. But reading the web has a different type of physicality than reading on the printed page. When I click on a link, I literally press down on language, something that never happens when I’m reading a book. I find that when I read a web page, I tend to nervously mouse over the words I’m reading, highlighting them, pawing and dragging them around as I read. Sometimes when I read a book, if I’m reading really carefully, I’ll run a finger over the words I’m reading; it’s a surface engagement, which never actually transforms the words I’m reading, unlike when I highlight those same words with a yellow highlighter pen, physically altering them. Yet now when I highlight words on my iPad, I do so with the tip of my index finger. Same when I sign a tablet for a credit card charge with my finger. Relieving the need for an intermediary utensil, my flesh directly creates or alters words. In what way is this not physical? Even the resizing of images, which I do with my forefinger and thumb, physicalizes the way I interact with visual media, bringing to mind a popular YouTube video of a young child crying with frustration as she tries to enlarge a photograph in a print magazine by frantically moving her fingers back and forth. We create the digital world in our own image. In this way, we can think of the web as a body double. With every click, we penetrate its flesh; with every bit of text we “cut,” we incise its corpus. Page views are, after all, sometimes referred to as “impressions” or “hits” marking this body. The data trails we leave on it are inscribed, marked, and tracked, engraved in browser histories, clouds, and databases, like tattoos on that body. Attempts to cleanse that body range from plastic surgery for surface blemishes to invasive surgery to root out virally spreading cancers by companies such as reputation.com, whose slogan is: “We believe individuals and businesses have the right to control how they look online.” In the European Union, one may exercise one’s right to be forgotten, which allows you to have documents, recordings, or images of yourself scrubbed from the web so search engines don’t index you, making you physically present and virtually absent, in essence, rendering you infrathin. This sense of being in-between—being at once digital and physical—has spawned a reassessment of the relationship of our bodies to meatspace, the earthbound equivalent of cyberspace. There was a time when the divide between being online and off was clear. It used to be that when I was online, I was sitting at my desk, tied to a computer. During that time, I was clearly online. When I was done, I’d shut down my computer and take a walk around the block, being clearly offline. Today, I don’t leave my house without a device; I’m still online when I take my walk around the block, smartphone in hand, at once straddling the physical and the virtual. In those days, the future appeared to be either/or. Either you were going to be spending time in sealed-off worlds like Second Life or Virtual Reality* or you’d be offline. Now wearable computing, mobile media, and augmented reality have reinscribed our bodies back into our physical settings, while we remain, at the same time, online. This intersection of the digital world and the physical has been driving the new aesthetic, a catchphrase cum art movement that was coined by the British designer James Bridle in 2011. No longer content to live exclusively on the screen, memes, images, and ideas born of digital culture are infiltrating and expressing themselves in meatspace. Think of digital pixelated camouflage as an example or a T-shirt with the dancing baby meme printed on it. This slight warping of reality, at once familiar and disconcerting, represents a shift in the ways we might process aesthetics much the same way Warhol’s soup cans did, prompting author Bruce Sterling to comment: “Look at those images objectively. Scarcely one of the real things in there would have made any sense to anyone in 1982, or even in 1992. People of those times would not have known what they were seeing with those New Aesthetic images.” With technologies like augmented reality, geography itself has become unhinged from any singular verifiable, stable state, instead subjected to remixes and whimsical interpretations, overwashed with data-hazed layers of subjectivity, proposing the landscape itself as a series of collage elements to be repurposed and reconfigured. Standing in front of my apartment building on West Twenty-Sixth Street in New York City and looking at it through an AR app, I view not only the history of the building, a biography of the architect who built it, and the city records attached to it, but also a wealth of unofficial crowdsourced data lobbed on top of it: personal stories of births, deaths, breakups, love affairs, and memories. I can view photographs of these ghostly protagonists as readily as I can call up old pictures of the building. On top of this—if I’m using the unpaid version of the app—I’m seeing a stream of geogenerated advertising associated with my neighborhood: “Hill Country at 30 West Twenty- Sixth Street serves the best Texas-style ribs in the city” and “Duane Reade at Sixth Avenue and Twenty-Seventh Street is having a sale on shaving supplies today.” In this way, the twenty-first century itself feels both visible and invisible; the surface of things alone might be the wrong place to look. Instead, the physical mixed with the unseen—the infrathin—as expressed by those tiny devices in our hands or the thick data haze that permeates the air we breathe, is what locates us in the present. And in this way, the collapse of online and physical space functions as a marker, a moment that informs us that culture—along with its means of production and reception—has radically shifted beneath our feet while we were looking elsewhere. The city streets, with their complex interplay of wakefulness and sleep, are rife with surrealism. Sometimes we barrel down the sidewalks apace, clinging to our devices; other times we meander slowly weaving in and out of the traffic flow as we stare down at our screens in a waking dream state. And yet, in the midst of the hustle and bustle, there are people actually sleeping in the teeming urban landscape around us. It’s late at night, I’m walking down Broadway, and there, in a huge plateglass window facing the street, is a night watchman sound asleep. I stand directly in front of him—there’s literally only a few millimeters of glass separating us—which is making my wife very uncomfortable. I ask her why and she responds, “You might wake him.” I reply, “But he’s sleeping, on display in public.” Encased in glass, and looking very peaceful, he feels unwakable. It strikes me that the proportions of the glass, similar to a computer screen, have rendered him two-dimensional. Backlit, he looks like he’s been flattened into a JPEG. The reflective surface of the glass and the flatness of the guard is creating a buzzy cognitive dissonance, making me feel as if I’m in the stylized world of Grand Theft Auto rather than on the gritty streets of New York. I snap a photo of him on my device. Gazing at the JPEG I just took, I see that he is now literally flattened into an image. I walk away from the scene with him in my pocket. My wife’s anxiety arises from the delicate play of public and private that happens on the streets of a crowded city. Walking down Fifth Avenue with a friend, we speak openly and loudly as if we were ambling down an isolated country lane. Yet many of us love to eavesdrop on these conversations, walking two steps in front or behind listening to these strangers’ narratives unwind block after block. We do the same with people shouting into hands-free headsets. Once, the only people who spoke to themselves were drunks; today, armies of people spout great soliloquies whilst traversing the sidewalks. Sleeping in public is an odd gesture. “Odd gestures of any kind are automatically taken as a threat,” writes Paul Auster of urban life. “Talking out loud to yourself, scratching your body, looking someone directly in the eye: these deviations can trigger off hostile and sometimes violent reactions from those around you. You must not swagger or swoon, you must not clutch the walls, you must not sing, for all forms of spontaneous or involuntary behavior are sure to elicit stares, caustic remarks, and even an occasional shove or kick in the shins.” Or else they’re met with indifference, marking a person as crazy and dangerous; any interaction with them is potentially unpredictable. Our sprawling homeless population exudes a mixture of passivity and aggression: they sleep, sprawled out on curbs, in our midst; yet they panhandle those same corners. With the combination of these gestures, they pose a double threat, causing us to walk by them as if they’re invisible. Addressing a packed house at Madison Square Garden, Pope Francis said, “In big cities, beneath the roar of traffic, beneath the rapid pace of change, so many faces pass by unnoticed because they have no ‘right’ to be there, no right to be part of the city . . . These people stand at the edges of our great avenues, in our streets in deafening anonymity.” The oxymoronic term “deafening anonymity” has echoes of Eno’s ambient music (unheard music) and Duchamp’s infrathin (unnoticed phenomena), which accurately describes the homeless as flickering between two states, at once painfully visible and conveniently invisible. I enter a subway car and see a man who is sound asleep. He’s not laying down, but is sprawled across a few seats. He is emitting no odor and is dressed in reasonably clean clothes. He’s neither sleep talking nor mumbling; he’s just laying perfectly still, with the exception of his head, which sways in tandem with the jerks of the subway car. This is not a dangerous man; it is a sleeping man. Although the car is crowded, nobody will get near him. Oddly enough, almost everyone is huddled in the opposite end of the car, glued to their devices, replete with earbuds, in a state Breton would certify as being properly asleep (surrealistically speaking). While there are many seats available next to where the guy who is actually sleeping, the walking dead appear to have no desire to be anywhere near the authentic sleeper. I look at both parties and feel that in their own ways they each dreamily navigate the city in “deafening anonymity.” Sometimes I go to a big Korean spa in Queens. It’s a wonderful lively place, filled with various pools and saunas. On weekends, it’s particularly crowded, packed with families: noisy children shriek with joy as they run from one water feature to another. Amid the noise and chaos is a public sleeping area that is separated from the cafeteria only by a low sheetrock barrier. It’s a large area, strewn with dozens of bodies of all sexes and ages, mostly clad in shorts, T- shirts, and bathing suits, all sound asleep. It’s always very crowded, with sleepers cheek to jowl, lying perfectly still. In the midst of life, it’s always surreal and lovely to see those lost in dream space among the waking. It’s past midnight, on our way home after seeing the sleeping guard in the window display, when I decide to invade someone’s personal space. A woman is standing outside a bar texting. The street is empty and I slowly approach, staring down at my phone. I zombie walk lethargically toward her. I can feel her spying me out of her peripheral vision but she doesn’t budge. I move closer. She stays where she is until I’m almost literally shoulder to shoulder with this total stranger. In times past, she might’ve been scared, or moved away, or called the cops. But now, with our devices in hand, she senses that I am no threat; zombies don’t fear other zombies. She knows I am one of her own, much more interested in consuming my device than I am in consuming her. CHAPTER 3 Our Browser History Is the New Memoir The surrealists had a technique of constructing literature that they called “automatic writing,” in which the poet or novelist sat down and, without conscious thought, put pen to paper and just started writing. The hand wrote, with the writer unaware of the meaning of what was being written. The hand continued to write on its own. Soon enough, if the writer were truly able to let go, the words would flow from deep within the subconscious to the page. Words always have meaning, the surrealists reasoned, so if you could give up intention, meaning would remain, but perhaps differently than you intended. Could we think of our web browsing as another type of automatic writing? As we drift from site to site, our peregrinations are literally inscribed in our browser history. This is purely automatic writing, writing that writes itself. Let’s say, I’m doing research for an article I’ve been writing for the past week or so. It’s been a struggle to find just the right bits and pieces that will make the article really fly. Suddenly, I remember a line from something I read on the web a few days ago that just might be the thing I’m looking for. I try to google it, but the idea is rather germane and the words used to describe it are ordinary. The search gives me pages of results that aren’t getting me anywhere. Suddenly, I have an idea: check my browser history. I crack it open, and after much scrolling, I locate exactly the page I was looking for. But as I’m scrolling through my history, I’m seeing my entire week flash before my eyes. It’s a little bit embarrassing but there’s my entire life—everything I was thinking about, curious about, angry about, desiring of—laid out before me. I had forgotten about most of this stuff—recipes for dinners that were never made, a pair of shoes that turned out to be too expensive, and a subsequent search to try to find them cheaper. I see the people who I stalked on Facebook, the videos I watched on Vimeo, and was embarrassed by how many times over the course of a week I self-googled. Since I spend so much of my time online, I was able to reconstruct pretty much my entire week in the most granular way. Can we think of our browser history as the new memoir, one that is being written automatically, effortlessly, unconsciously? If you want to know anything about me, what I was thinking, what I was interested in, exactly what I did or was going to do, check out my browser history: my passions, my hatreds, my crushes, my hopes—my intellectual and emotional life—all there before me, going back years and years, in all its embarrassment and all its riches. My search history is astonishingly detailed: last Friday, between 11:00 A.M. and noon, for instance, it shows that I looked at forty-two different pages. And if I strung them together, I could literally reconstruct exactly what I was doing, what I was thinking about, and the associative patterns that my thoughts took during that hour. And that’s just the time I was at my laptop. Chrome shows me my mobile browsing history from my phone and iPad as well, so not a click is missing. Gmail keeps an exact record of every correspondence I’ve had and social media tracks everything I’ve said, liked, or commented on. If I add the dozens of SMS messages I sent during that hour, then taken as a whole, I could reconstruct a fairly accurate self-portrait. And even if there were gaps, just glancing at a web page inscribed in my history can spark a chain of memories, enabling me to recollect thought patterns and reconstruct memories. Buddhist meditators use a technique that they call mental noting. As each emotion arises, they give it a name: fear, excitement, sadness. They also assign names to sensations: coolness, warmth, pressure. They feel that naming things anchors the emotions, keeping the meditator in the present. It also helps distance themselves from the pull of those emotions so that they don’t take on too much power, overwhelming the placidness of meditation. Noting is a way of making visible what is normally invisible, making something ephemeral concrete. Our browser history is doing exactly that and going further by not only naming, but also time-stamping and archiving these fleeting traces of data. Our browser history could also be seen as a scrapbook, a textual and visual travelogue. Fifty years ago, William S. Burroughs began using scrapbooks as mnemonic devices for his writing. When he read something in the newspaper that reminded him of something he’d written, he’d clip it and paste it into a scrapbook alongside the words from his book. Sometimes, when he’d be walking down the street and see a scene that reminded him of something he wrote, he’d take a picture of it, scrapbooking the photo alongside his text. He said, “I do a lot of exercises in what I call time travel, in taking coordinates, such as what I photographed on the train, what I was thinking about at the time, what I was reading and what I wrote; all of this to see how completely I can project myself back to that one point in time.” Like surrealist techniques, the juxtaposition of related but disparate items were enough to kick off chains of richly associative thoughts and memories in Burroughs’s mind. Echoes of these ideas—digital and analog—can be found in two famous books written between the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that are, in form and content, uncannily reminiscent of obsessive blogs or on active social media streams. One is the Diary of Samuel Pepys which was composed while Pepys was living in London, where he spent nine years—from 1660 to 1669—writing down every detail of his life and times. The diary totaled more than a million words and it’s the best account of what it was like to live day to day in the seventeenth century; reading it can transport you back three centuries. While it gives firsthand accounts of historical events such as the Great Plague and the Great Fire of London, it’s also rife with juicy illicit personal details—many of which were enciphered using a shorthand mashup of several foreign languages—such as gossiping about friends and chasing women. The other book that gives us similarly granular details of the life and times in which he lived is James Boswell’s biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D., a massive tome that is an accumulation of bits and pieces of the quotidian ephemera: letters, observations, patches of dialogue, and descriptions of daily life. Begun in 1763, when Johnson was fifty- four years old, it’s not really a complete life of Johnson, but rather an intimate portrait of him over his final twenty-one years. During that period, Johnson became great friends with a woman named Hester Thrale, who was half his age and had an intelligence to match his own. Though their relationship stayed platonic, Boswell became jealous of their friendship. Seven years after Johnson died, Boswell published his massive biography—my edition is more than 1,500 pages long—and when Thrale got her hands on the book, she was shocked by just how wrong Boswell got it. In her copy of the book, she started scribbling corrections and comments in the margins, such as [ absurd! ] or [ I don’t recollect that ] and [ Johnson would not have liked to hear this of himself ]. By the time it was over, there were thousands of comments and annotations by Thrale in her copies of the book, which she turned into a small handmade edition, by obsessively scribbling marginal notes in one copy of the book after another, never changing her annotations from one copy to the next. Upon her death, her many copies were disbursed. One of them made its way to Boston and into the hands of poet Amy Lowell who, along with her pals, would spend nights howling with laughter at Thrale’s bitchy comments. Thrale’s trolling of Boswell is reminiscent, both in tone and combativeness, of the flame wars that erupt in web comment streams, and her self-publishing of her annotated editions was analog print on demand. Can you imagine, were it possible, seeing Johnson’s or Pepys’s browser history? The weaving of small details into an account of a life was based on selective memory and subjective bias—as was pointed out by Mrs. Thrale—yet it’s these exact qualities that give these works their eccentric literary charm. I excitedly think of the potential of a modern-day Boswell or Pepys scraping browser histories into a literary biography or memoir. Similarly, might we imagine Facebook as a grand experiment in collective cultural autobiography? For future sociologists, historians, and artists, social networking provides in detail a portrait of a civilization at a moment in time on a scale previously unimaginable in all its glory, and, truth be told, in all its ugliness. In the early days of the Internet before social media, one of my students e-mailed himself things he wanted to remember. It could’ve been anything as mundane as a pair of sneakers he liked to a profound philosophical insight. Over the years, he never looked at these e-mails but he kept sending them to himself nonetheless. For his final project in my class, he went back to the first year he had done this and scraped all those e-mails, laid them out in a page- design program, and had a print-on-demand book made of them. He called it Notes to Myself after the best-selling self-help book from the 1970s by Hugh Prather. While the book wasn’t interesting to anyone but himself, he cherished it as a diary, a physical embodiment of a time gone by, created with little effort or intention. His plan is to print out every year of those e-mails and collect them into a master set, one volume per year, a massive work of automatic autobiography. This furious accumulation of detail and data, from a creative point of view, is reason to celebrate. The vast amount of the web’s language is perfect raw material for literature. Disjunctive, compressed, decontextualized, cut and pastable, and, most important, archivable, it’s easily reassembled into works of art. It’s a beautiful early summer evening and a group of us are sipping wine on a terrace with a dramatic view overlooking the Adriatic Sea on the Dalmatian coast. It’s dark and I can see the outline of the town below us hugging the rocky coastline, articulated by strings of streetlights. In the distance I can make out the dark shapes of mountains that melt into the sea as thousands of stars dot the ink- black sky. The various members of our group are chatting, drinking, and texting when suddenly, a giant peachy-yellow moon crests over the mountains in the distance. It’s stunning and the group goes silent as the moon quickly starts to rise—except for one guy, who is glued to his phone, deep in a text conversation with his girlfriend. Our eyes keep moving from the moon and then back to this guy. We can’t believe he’s absorbed in his phone instead of being absorbed in the spectacular scene unfolding before our eyes. We’re taking the ancient poet Basho’s stance: “A haiku is like a finger pointing to the moon / If the finger is bejeweled, we no longer see the moon.” And he’s taking Marinetti’s stance: “Let’s murder the moonshine.” Finally, someone calls him out on it, to which he responds, “I can see the moon anytime, but this is the only time I can be having this conversation.” His remark gives me pause. He’s right. Why is looking at the moon somehow perceived to be more “present” than looking at your phone? A specific text conversation happens only once, whereas natural phenomena, while they don’t always happen in such an extraordinary way as that moon, are recurrent; wait around long enough and you’ll see another spectacular moonrise. It struck me that as much as we were in the moment, so was he. Our moment wasn’t better because it was natural; it was simply different. It brings to mind an article I read about the practice of mindfulness, which stated, “Mindfulness in its original Buddhist tradition is not about being able to stare comfortably at your computer for hours on end, or get ‘in the zone’ . . . it’s about gaining insight into the human condition.” But don’t programmers get in the “flow state” all the time, spending hours in the hyperpresent? One stray thought can lead to a wrong keystroke, botching a program. I know typesetters, graphic designers, painters, musicians, and illustrators who are similarly mindful. In fact, it’s hard to think of anyone deeply involved in work in front of a computer who isn’t staring at a screen and completely in the moment. In regard to our texting friend, how is using a piece of technology to have a deep conversation with someone you love not insightful to the human condition? Being fully present in the moment is what happens every time you load a web page. Web pages don’t exist: they are spontaneously assembled at a split second’s notice upon a click. They appear for a moment, then dissipate once that window is closed until called on again. A web page is comprised of a series of disparate codes from various places—sometimes on the same server, other times pulled from distant geographic locations—which pull images, RSS feeds, CSS, style sheets, and other bits of code to form a temporary constellation, which appears in your browser as a unified page. On dynamic sites—such as social media or news sites—those constellations are refreshed often, becoming fully new sometimes within seconds. The idea of a “dialectical constellation” comes from Walter Benjamin, who theorized that in order to study history we’ve got to be able to freeze a complex and dynamic stream of systems into a still moment. When this happens, he calls it a “constellation”: “It’s not that what is past casts its light on what is present, or what is present its light on what is past; rather what has been comes together in a flash with the now to form a constellation”—which is a pretty good description of what happens when you click on a link, causing a web page to be spontaneously assembled. Similarly the Dada poet Raoul Hausmann wrote in his 1920 “Manifesto of PREsentism”: “To compress all the possibilities, all the givens of every second into a tangible energy. Wisdom. Eternity is nothing. Let’s seize each second today!” Benjamin also wrote that “memory is not an instrument for exploring the past but its theater.” If memory is but a stage set for events that once happened but can never be accurately and realistically recalled, then those props populating the stage must be stored somewhere after the play has ended. That space, in the twenty-first century, is the web. Ceding vast tracts of our memory to the web in the form of photographs, videos, and status updates that never vanish, we’ve created memory banks in finer detail than our brains are capable of conjuring. With the birth of hyperrealistic memory (a version of total recall through documentation) comes the death of poetic license and selective memory, upon which some of the greatest works of Western civilization—Proust and Nabokov come to mind—are built. Instead, in a time of information surplus, we find ourselves in a condition of “directed forgetting,” the selective forgetting of outdated or irrelevant information in order to clear space for encoding new information on our brain’s hard drive. Like a surveillance cam, information is being scrubbed as quickly as it is being written, keeping us in an eternal state of Hausmannian presentism. Many decry the loss of “real time” to capturing moments on- screen, claiming that the recording of memories as they happen threatens to replace the actual memories you have of that moment. I’ve read many articles in which parents bemoan the fact their kids were seeing family vacations through GoPro cameras, rather than actually living them. After a day on the ski slopes, they edit their raw footage into action-packed greatest moments and post it to social media, where it’s shared and commented on by their friends, hyperextending their time on the mountain. For a generation raised on reality TV to be able to replay those moments over and over through a mediated interface is a way of reliving an eternal present, loved for a moment then replaced by the next day’s upload. In this way, we’re simultaneously archiving and forgetting: archiving because we continuously upload media, and forgetting because we rarely go back to visit what we have uploaded. Today’s upload is the best upload and keeps us very much present and mindful in the here and now. The fear of outsourcing our memory to the web—known as “digital amnesia”—has ancient echoes. Plato was apprehensive about the transition from spoken language to the written word. He was fearful that those who wrote would stop exercising their memory and become forgetful; they’d rely on externalized graphical notation instead of their innate capacity to remember things. He derided writing as a pharmakon or substitute, a cheap imitation of speaking. As a result of writing, he feared knowledge would become information. Since there was no individual there to speak it—and speak for it—writing would literally dehumanize wisdom. Speech, Plato felt, was high resolution and required full presence, whereas writing was low resolution and depended on absence. Memory was internal, writing external; speech carried the essence of knowledge, writing its appearance; spoken words were living, written marks were lifeless. We see similar fears in the digital age. Studies show that most people happily use the web as an online extension of their brains, and of those surveyed, half admit their smartphones are stand-ins for their memory. Freud theorized rewritable memory when in 1925 he used a child’s toy he called the “mystic writing pad” as a metaphor for the way human consciousness is structured. The pad consists of three layers: on the top there is a sheet of plastic, beneath there is a sheet of paper, and finally at the bottom there is a layer of wax. When you write on the plastic with a stylus, an impression is made both on the paper and on the waxy tablet. When you lift the paper up, the writing vanishes from it, but an impression is permanently embedded in the wax. Freud used this schema as a metaphor for how memory works: the stylus is the stimuli from the outside world, the two layers of plastic and paper are layers of consciousness, and the waxy bottom is the unconscious, where impressions are stored. Taken as an allegory for the digital age, the stylus is a metaphor for the material we’re downloading (data), the paper and plastic are our data being currently used (random access memory or RAM), and the wax layer is the deep storage (read-only memory or ROM) of our hard drives or cloud computing, invisible but able to be recalled on command. The paper and plastic memories are dynamic and rewritable, while the wax is accumulative. There are two seemingly contradictory temporal metrics happening on the web: the archival and the hyperpresent. How many times have we cynically noted that someone has shared something we’d already seen posted a month, a week, a day, or even an hour ago? Social media’s architecture insists that everything always stays new. Facebook’s web interface turns every link, literally, into a newspaper headline. A feature photograph is captioned by a headline in large serif type, reminiscent of Times Roman, underneath which is a line of descriptive text in a smaller sans serif font. Below that, in all caps, but with a lighter font, is the name of the website. The entire link is bounded by a thin, one-pixel rule, making it feel just like an item in a newspaper. The result of this is that every link posted to Facebook, no matter how big or small, trivial or important, gives the sense that it’s breaking news: Bored Panda has the identical visual weight and import as the Washington Post online. Social media’s genius is its leveling quality: every voice has the same volume and every link is an urgent call to action. It keeps us glued: blink for a moment and you might miss something important. The faster things get, the slower they become. In the midst of this dynamism, we are simultaneously archiving elements of each page in our browser’s cache. Similarly, when I’m reading on a device, every move I make—from my “page turns” to the speed at which I’m reading—is tracked and sent to a database, converting the fleeting experience of reading into something quantified. Automated spiders are also reading the web, silently and continuously. For them—the most voracious readers in history—reading is literally archiving as they indiscriminately index every word without ever “reading” any of it. The ecology of the web teeters on the cusp of the hyperpresent and the eternal: Just think of the legions of sites built for now-expired academic conferences or weddings that long ago ended in divorce that eternally linger, visited only by the occasional spider, who, sucking the dead data from these corpses, imprisons it in distant digital ossuaries. While we have the illusion that things are speeding up, they’ve actually reached a point of stasis, of stillness. The technology theorist Paul Virilio claims that “there is a definite relationship between inertia and absolute speed which is based on the stasis which results from absolute speed. Absolute stasis leads— potentially—to absolute stasis.” When the speed of information moves at the speed of light, as it has with our fiber optic networks, accelerationism has bumped up against its speed limit, thereby ceasing to be accelerationist. Instead, it is static, signifying the end of the technological narrative of speed and the inevitable beginning of another: entropy. CHAPTER 4 Archiving Is the New Folk Art Of all the things known about Andy Warhol, the fact that he curated a show called Raid the Icebox 1 at the Rhode Island School of Design Museum in Providence in 1969 is one of the more obscure. In fact, combing my shelf of books by and about Warhol (twenty-eight in total), there’s not a single mention of it. It’s strange because, living his life as a celebrity under the glare of the media, not a moment was otherwise missed. Back in the 1960s, Warhol traveled in wealthy circles and his great patrons John and Dominique de Menil had strong connections to the RISD Museum’s young director, Daniel Robbins. While trying to raise some funds for the museum, Robbins gave the de Menils a tour of the museum’s vast storage spaces, where they were wowed by the treasures that were languishing far from the public’s view. Many of the objects were in poor condition and so they hatched a fundraising scheme, which involved inviting a hip artist into the storerooms to curate a show. The artist they chose was Andy Warhol. They had no idea what they were getting into. In short, it was a total disaster. Warhol treated the museum as if he were on a shopping spree at a flea market, grabbing everything he could—shoes, umbrellas, blankets, baskets, chairs, paintings, pottery—and then casually displaying them in the museum. The paintings were stacked on top of each other the way they are in a thrift shop; the antique shoes were crammed into cabinets, vaguely resembling Imelda Marcos’s closet; the nineteenth-century parasols were hung from the ceiling, looking like a cross between slumbering bats and a surrealist assemblage; gorgeous colonial chairs were piled atop each other like in a cafeteria about to be cleaned; colorful Navajo blankets were stacked on top of a cheap table as if they were in a department store, with the cardboard boxes they came in shoved beneath the table. And that’s just the beginning. The museum’s curatorial staff was offended by what they perceived to be Warhol’s irreverence in handling their treasures. They saw his choices as indiscriminately lazy and his presentation as preposterous. What’s more, Warhol demanded that only fake paintings be shown. “If that’s real,” he said, pointing to a Cézanne still life, “we won’t take it.” They thought Warhol was truly the ignoramus his public persona pretended to be. Hindsight is twenty- twenty. Over the next forty-five years, the art world would mold itself to Warhol’s vision, celebrating commodities, the market, and consumer excess. His own studio work also explored excess: Why make only one Brillo box when the supermarket has a stack? Why paint only one portrait of Ethel Scull when you can charge her for thirty-six? To a poor kid from the Pittsburgh slums, more was always better. And after Warhol’s death, more was what they found in his Upper East Side townhouse, which was crammed to the gills with unopened boxes of coats, watches, diamonds, rugs—you name it— piled up in rooms so stuffed you could barely enter them. In 1988, a year after he died, all of Warhol’s possessions were laid out for all to see on huge tables at Sotheby’s in New York: the whole thing—ten thousand items, from cookie jars to precious gems—eerily resembled Raid the Icebox 1. But why should we care now? There’s something about Warhol’s obsessive cataloging and collecting, his archiving and displaying, that resonates in the digital age. Many of us raid the digital icebox every day, downloading more cultural artifacts than we know what to do with. I think it’s fair to say that most of us have more MP3s sitting on our hard drives than we’ll ever be able to listen to, and yet we keep acquiring more, not so different from the way Warhol hoarded cookie jars or delighted in displaying the dozens of pairs of shoes he found at the RISD Museum. In some ways, Warhol seems to be saying that quantity is more important than quality; it doesn’t matter what you have as long as you have a lot of it. You could say that in the digital age, with its free flow and circulation of cultural artifacts, that the act of acquisition—raiding the digital icebox—has turned many of us into amateur curators and archivists. We dig into the deep reserves of the web and arrange them, sometimes for a public (file sharing, MP3 blogs) and sometimes for oneself (the joys of collecting), and like Warhol, often for the sake of gathering itself. In this way, older arts of compiling such as commonplace books and scrapbooking have reemerged, inverting the predominant form of top-down cultural consumption of the twentieth century, when collections would consist as often of things bought—an LP or book—as things found. On the web, circulation has surpassed ownership: someone owns a material artifact, but who owns a JPEG? Commonplace books and scrapbooks combined democratic-based practices such as crafts, folk arts, and hobbies with the avant-garde tradition of the objet trouvé—found objects admired for their aesthetic qualities—which resonates with our current obsessions of archiving, arranging, hoarding, and sorting of digital readymades. When asked, “How do you choose a readymade?” Duchamp replied, “It chooses you, so to speak.” One can imagine Duchamp drifting into the plumbing supply and letting the urinal choose him, one object among many lodged in a protosurrealist wunderkammer, unbelievably rich in its limited offerings. I think we can relate. How many times have we wandered into a record store, boutique, or bookstore and let objects choose us? In this way, Duchamp collapsed the distinction between artist and shopper and added a dash of surrealism. Yet if we really gave ourselves over to Duchamp’s procedure and let objects choose us as we browsed the web, surely we’d be overwhelmed by the sheer number of artifacts. To manage the vastness, we employ guided chance via search engines. Let’s say I’m looking for a specific image. To wait until it found me—in Duchampian terms—would be ludicrous. Instead, I plunk my term into Google Images search and then let one of them choose me. In this way, the web is a push and pull of opposites: intuition and intention, conscious and unconscious, drift and determination. The play of conscious and unconscious is extended into the structure of the web itself. We could say that the mechanics that runs the web—from the code to the server farms—are the web’s subconscious, while the software—the graphical user interface and all the activities that happen there, on the surface—is the web’s consciousness. The unconscious, which is pure apparatus, is all hung on a grid, starting with binary code, moving to the pixel, and resulting in GUIs (graphical user interfaces). In this way, the web is an extension of modernism, reiterating a stasis that Rosalind Krauss claimed to be the hallmark of modernity: “The grid announces, among other things, modern art’s will to silence, its hostility to literature, to narrative, to discourse.” As an apparatus, the web is grid-like: static and even-keeled, a state more than a thing. On top lies a thin layer, the web’s “content,” which Krauss refers to as “literature, narrative, and discourse.” All of the image archiving interfaces—Pinterest, Flickr, Instagram, Google Images—are gridded, from the rectangular format of the images to the lattices on which they are hung. While the images themselves may proffer organic subject matter, the interface and apparatus is entirely industrial. When we use an apparatus extensively, it becomes invisible, as we become completely subsumed by content. In 2000, the media theorist Matthew Fuller wrote an essay addressing the dangers of this exact blind spot; the title of his essay was “It Looks Like You’re Writing a Letter: Microsoft Word.” A decade and a half later, we still take apparatus for granted, the way we might take breathing or our body’s circulatory system for granted; clearly, it’s what makes everything function, but when I look in the mirror, all I can think about is how I need a haircut. Pinterest is a human-driven image-harvesting engine, one that is fast becoming the largest single-source image repository on the web. When you pin an image from the web for one of your boards, Pinterest copies it to its own servers, providing you with a thumbnail and a link back to its original source. Therefore, should an image disappear from, say, a shuttered blog, it will remain on your Pinterest board. In this way, Pinterest is acting as an image redundancy and archive service, while at the same time building a vast proprietary image library. Because each image archived is pinned by human librarians, the signal-to-noise ratio is high as compared to Google Images, which are culled algorithmically. The darker side is that every user is ultimately working for Pinterest; with each pin, the company’s image database grows richer—as does the corporation’s bottom line. Pinterest is Duchampian in that users don’t generate any original content; instead, all images are drawn from elsewhere on the web. As opposed to Flickr or Instagram, every photo on Pinterest is a ready-made or a collage of preexisting images. To achieve this, the site uses a data compression algorithm called deduplication, which is a way of reducing the size of images by outsourcing redundant chunks of data to a single file that can be inserted into an image on demand. So, let’s say that I’ve pinned an image of a dog with brown eyes. Housed in the Pinterest database is an untold number of photos of dogs with brown eyes. The algorithm scans all of those eyes and determines that in many cases portions of the pixel configurations are identical. So when I load my dog, the algorithm shoots a reference with that exact pixel set and inserts it where my dog’s eye is. My dog, then, is not a photograph of a dog in the traditional sense but instead is patched together from a database of preexisting elements on the fly. Each image is at once both unique and cloned, reverberating with modernism’s constructivist methods of collage and assemblage, as well as postmodernism’s mimetic strategies of appropriation and sampling. But Pinterest’s emphasis on found and assembled materials also leads right back to the premodern notions of collecting and scrapbooking, which is no coincidence since the company claims that the platform is “built by hobbyists, for hobbyists” and that one of the partners’ “boyhood bug collection is the touchstone inspiration and the company’s founding myth.” Walter Benjamin, an obsessive collector himself, wrote about the close connection between collecting and making when he said, “Among children, collecting is only one process of renewal; other processes are the painting of objects, the cutting out of figures, the application of decals—the whole range of childlike modes of acquisition, from touching things to giving them names.” Pinterest’s CEO has described the site as a “catalog of ideas,” which echoes Benjamin’s idea that “if there is a counterpart to the confusion of a library, it is the order of its catalog.” Pinterest’s apparatus converts the confusion of an image library into an order of a searchable catalog. While the users of Pinterest curate photo albums, the algorithms are the librarians, bots that sort the profusion of content. The alt-librarian Rick Prelinger has proclaimed archiving as a new folk art, something that is widely practiced and has unconsciously become integrated into a great many people’s lives, potentially transforming a necessity into a work of art. Now, at first thought it seems wrong: how can the storing and categorizing of data be folk art? Isn’t folk art the opposite, something predicated on the subjective handcrafting of an object into a unique and personal statement, oftentimes one that expresses a larger community ethos? One need think of, say, the magnificent quilts of Gee’s Bend produced over many generations by a group of African American women who live in an isolated Alabama town. Each quilt is unique, while bearing the mark of that specific community. Or the spectacular cosmic visions of someone like Rev. Howard Finster, whose obsessive, emotional, hand-rendered religious paintings and sculptures could only be sprung from the unique genius of Finster himself. Like quilting, archiving employs the obsessive stitching together of many small pieces into a larger vision, a personal attempt at ordering a chaotic world. It’s not such a far leap from the quilt maker to the stamp or book collector. In the digital age, our relentless “pinning” of images on Pinterest, curating of Instagram feeds, or compiling of Spotify playlists are contemporary expressions of folk archiving, ones that hearken back to predigital technologies. Pinterest’s main metaphor is the cork-lined bulletin board, itself a site of folk archiving, which John Berger wrote about in his 1972 book Ways of Seeing: Adults and children sometimes have boards in their bedrooms or living-rooms on which they pin pieces of paper: letters, snapshots, reproductions of paintings, newspaper cuttings, original drawings, postcards. On each board all the images belong to the same language and are all more or less equal within it, because they have been chosen in a highly personal way to match and express the experience of the room’s inhabitant. Logically, these boards should replace museums. In this passage, Berger positions the folk art of scrapbooking as high art, but the two have long been intertwined. Many artists in their studios have inspiration boards, not too different from what Berger is describing, pinned with postcards, inspirational notes, photographs, and so forth. And in the twentieth century, many libraries had “clipping libraries,” where cabinets were bursting full of photographs clipped from magazines, glued to cardboard backings, and arranged by subject. Berger’s deduction regarding the obsolescence of museums rings true for many; Pinterest’s images are more integrated into their daily lives than the occasional visit to the museum is. For many, the postcard or JPEG, in essence, has become the painting. The founder of Whole Earth Catalog, Stewart Brand, has stated that “like everything else, [curating] has been democratized by the Net, in one sense, everybody is curating: whether you are writing a blog, it is curating . . . So we are becoming editors, and curators, and those two are blending online.” Even something as simple as bookmarking kicks off a chain of curation. When I instapaper a long- form article so I can read it later, it is added to my archive of articles. Oftentimes, due to the fact that things disappear from the web, if it’s an article I think is particularly worthwhile, I’ll convert it to a PDF and save a copy of it in my articles archive on my computer, creating my own personal library. As many users of MP3 blogs, file locker services, and streaming services know all too well, things vanish all the time. Sometimes users kill their blogs; other times, as in the case of Netflix, studio contracts expire, resulting in the disappearance of specific films, or regional geographical differences make their service unavailable in various countries. I went to a conference in China a few years ago where several of the conferees “brought” their papers on Google Docs, only to find out that once they arrived in mainland China, Google was blocked. Same with their Gmail, Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube. And as much as Wi-Fi is ballyhooed, it’s still locked down in many places, making it less than reliable. Creating a robust local archive of digital artifacts is perhaps the most effective means by which to protect yourself against cloud-based instability. Our archiving impulse arises as a way to ward off the chaos of overabundance. And yet even in the predigital age, the collector could never actually consume the sheer volume of cultural artifacts that could be collected. Anatole France (1844–1924), for instance, when asked of his vast library, “You have read all these books, Monsieur France?” answered, “Not one-tenth of them. I don’t suppose you use your Sèvres china every day?” The condition of too much far precedes the nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries. René Descartes (1596–1650) claimed that “even if all knowledge could be found in books, where it is mixed in with so many useless things and confusingly heaped in such large volumes, it would take longer to read those books than we have to live in this life.” The Harvard historian Ann Blair relates how Kant (1724–1804) and Wordsworth (1770–1850) were among the earliest authors who described an experience of temporary mental blockage due to “sheer cognitive exhaustion . . . whether triggered by sensory or mental overload.” Blair charts the rise of various indexing systems—as well as the invention of commonplace and reference books—as a way to order the impending chaos of overproduction and underconsumption. And like today, the ever-accumulating knowledge and the various attempts to manage it was felt globally across the centuries, from medieval/early modern Europe to the Islamic world and China. The managing and sorting of information became an industry hinged on the illusion of control, which grew alongside increasingly codified systems of knowledge and rhetoric. Eventually, it evolved into a booming and lucrative industry, with the rise of everything from Johnson’s Dictionary—for which he was paid roughly the equivalent of $350,000 in today’s money—to the current crop of paywalled archives such as LexisNexis, ProQuest, and JSTOR, for which academic institutions spend between $10 billion and $20 billion annually. Information—who produces it, who consumes it, who distributes it, and, in short, who controls it—has been a contested space for centuries. While this is nothing new, when placed in the replicating digital ecosystem of the Internet—with its array of pirate and legitimate venues—these tendencies go into overdrive, creating new and unintended consequences in a variety of related areas such as copyright, intellectual property, historical contextualization, free culture, archiving, taxonomies, distribution, artistic practices, and curating, to name but a few. Prior to the digital age, a common metric for expressing the infinite was the Argentinian writer Jorge Luis Borges’s short story “The Library of Babel” (1941), which imagines a vast library that contains every book that could be written about every subject known to mankind. But one problem with Borges’s library was information management—finding anything was nearly impossible. In his story, such drudgery was ceded to teams of weary human librarians who perished in their lifelong efforts to locate specific books in the labyrinthine library. And yet Borges was an optimist: with the right combination of fortitude and luck, there was a chance that a librarian could overcome the greatest odds; even though it’s vast, his library is not infinite. And there are no duplicate copies of any books; every book is unique. But the problem is that many books are nearly identical, differing only in a single letter or a comma. Somewhere in that library, still yet to be found, would be one book that could contain all the world’s knowledge between its covers printed in minuscule type and on an infinite number of infinitely thin leaves. That book of books—the Library of Babel—turned out to be the Internet. A twenty-first-century version of Borges might resemble an author named Philip M. Parker, who, with the help of computers, has churned out more than a million books on a wide range of arcane subjects. When someone wants to buy a book of his, an army of spiders is sent out to crawl the web for content. Upon being hauled in, algorithms determine and sequence the most relevant information. They are then assembled into books (slightly shifting the semantic order to avoid direct plagiarism), chunked into predetermined print-on-demand formats, and automatically posted to Amazon, where titles are fabricated only if someone wants to buy the book. The process is so automated that titles are listed that haven’t yet been written; if someone desires to have a book written on any subject, it is produced for them on demand. Parker’s is but one of many such projects, where perfectly semantic accounts of sporting events and financial transactions are generated from generic data sets and published in newspapers all over the world; no one has any idea that there isn’t a human writing these things. Both Parker and Borges play down content and quality, choosing instead to focus on quantity and the challenge of wrangling meaning—and in the case of Parker, money—out of such vastness. Today we’re confronted with the abstraction of big data—large data sets, expressed in equally large and equally abstract numbers —and it’s assumed somehow that we can comprehend these. For instance, the WikiLeaks site contained 1.2 million documents a year after it was launched; and in 2010, it released almost 400,000 documents related to the Iraq War alone. The United States diplomatic cable leaks totaled 251,287 documents consisting of 261,276,536 words. A common complaint was that WikiLeaks released too damn much, prompting the journal Foreign Policy to call the release of such a vast amount of data “information vandalism”: There’s a principle that says it’s OK to publish one-off scoops, but not 250,000—or for that matter 2.7 million—of them all at once? The former feels like journalism; the latter seems grotesque and irresponsible, more like “information vandalism” . . . And even if responsible papers like the New York Times have a chance to review and contextualize them, there’s no way they can dot every i and cross every t in the time allotted. There’s just too much. And with every new leak, comes a new metric of immensity: it is said that Edward Snowden initially leaked between 1.5 and 1.7 million documents. To give an idea of how much this is, in 1969, the conceptual artist On Kawara (1933–2014) embarked on a project entitled One Million Years, which was a twenty-volume set of books that printed the name of each year in closely typeset columns (1856 AD 1857 AD 1858 AD, etc.). Each page contains five hundred years, and each book contains 2,068 pages. As an absurdist gesture, live readings of the work are occasionally given; the complete reading of the years could never be finished in one’s lifetime. If recorded, 2,700 CDs would be needed to complete the readings; if read aloud, it would take a hundred years to enumerate aloud the names of one million years. Too much was the same accusation that drove the young hacktivist Aaron Swartz to take his life after being hounded by the United States Department of Justice for attempting to liberate approximately 4.8 million articles (or seventy gigabytes) from JSTOR, the paywalled academic database. It’s hard to imagine exactly what constitutes, say, 10,000 documents let alone 250,000 or 5 million. And yet it’s this metric that is propelling public discourse, not to mention legal policy. The immensity of the digital is hard to imagine. I shudder to think what my apartment would look like if every MP3 and PDF on my drives were to manifest itself as an album or a book, or if every video on my hard drive were somehow converted to film stock, wound on reels. I wouldn’t be able to move. Each day, as we shuffle our data from one place to another, we have the illusion of mastery, when in fact we are drowning in our own riches. Our data—the management, storage, organizing, and moving of it—owns us. Ask anyone who’s had to maintain a blog, Facebook page, or Twitter account: it’s a second job. In effect, many of us have unwittingly become both the authors of Borges’s “Library of Babel” and its lowly librarians. I began to get curious about what immensity might look like and went in search of Swartz’s cache, which—predictably locked down by the Department of Justice—was nowhere to be found. However, a tribute action dedicated to Swartz the day after his arrest in 2011 appeared on the Pirate Bay in the form of a thirty-three-gigabyte torrent that consisted of 18,592 PDFs from the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, a prestigious scientific journal with a history extending back to the 1600s that was illegally downloaded from JSTOR and posted publicly by a user named Greg Maxwell. The torrent was accompanied by a free culture statement, which, in part, read: “This archive . . . should be available to everyone at no cost, but most have previously only been made available at high prices through paywall gatekeepers like JSTOR. Limited access to the documents here is typically sold for $19 USD per article, though some of the older ones are as low as $8. Purchasing access to this collection one article at a time would cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.”* A day later, upon unzipping one of the many files, I was faced with an overwhelming number of PDFs, ranging from 1 to 254 pages long. I couldn’t absorb more than the smallest fraction of what I had just downloaded—and what I had just downloaded was but a fraction of the 4.8 million documents that Swartz had liberated. The sheer size of this smallest corner of the Internet verged on a cosmic scale. This scale itself is an abstraction: certainly we can’t conceive of what Swartz’s 4.8 million “articles” might look like, never mind what we would do with them were we to actually have them in our possession. It seems that all we know for sure is that Swartz downloaded a lot. Maxwell’s gesture is at once a ghost of, and at the same time the only concrete realization of Swartz’s vision, one that is both symbolic and instructive. No one will ever read Maxwell’s trove (same with Swartz’s), but the fact of this material—and, in Maxwell’s case, its ever-present availability—competes with what practical applications we might render from it. The media critic Darren Werschler feels that content might be the wrong place to look for meaning: It feels like the end of the modernist notion of “information.” Modernity brought with it the idea that there was this thing that could be extracted that represented the most valuable part of a text. Swartz’s gesture suggests that there’s no “information” in places like JSTOR and Elsevier. Any paper is as good as any other for a gesture like his, because individually these papers literally have NO audience—an average academic paper is read by maybe two or three people. So the gesture only matters when it’s done in bulk and it doesn’t matter of what the bulk consists. The offense is a corporate one; it has relatively little to do with individual authors because it assumes from the outset that the individual author isn’t all that important. Aaron Swartz’s gesture was a conceptual one, focused on the power of making available sealed-off information. He wasn’t concerned with what he was liberating; he was interested in using the model of moving masses of information as a political tool, as if to say that the gesture of furiously pushing, moving, gathering, sharing, parsing, storing, and liberating information is as important as what’s actually being moved. In 2010, Pamela Echeverria, owner of the LABOR gallery in Mexico City, held a conference called Who Owns the Image? that focused on the way images and their reception have been changed by digital culture. Echeverria, like so many of us, was living a double life: on one hand, she dealt in unique fine art objects at the gallery; on the other hand, she was downloading scads of infinitely reproducible artifacts from file sharing. The conference sparked numerous heated conversations, many of which Echeverria and I continued to discuss long after the conference ended. In early 2013, shortly after Aaron Swartz passed away, Pamela asked me to curate a show dedicated to his memory at her gallery. When I began working on the show, I pondered the sort of immensity that Swartz and Assange (and later Snowden) were dealing in. What would it look like if their leaks were somehow materialized? And how would it make us think differently about them if we could physically comprehend their magnitude? With a more conventional exhibition in mind, I began by seeking artworks that explicitly sought to concretize digital data into physical objects. For instance, I discovered a huge book that consisted of every photograph of Natalie Portman on the Internet. I also found a series of twelve books that recorded all changes made to the Wikipedia article on the Iraq War; the volumes covered a five-year period from December 2004 to November 2009, with a total of twelve thousand changes. The set of books was nearly seven-thousand-pages long. Along similar lines, I came across a piece by an Iraqi American artist that was a collection of every article published on the Internet about the Iraq War, bound into a set of seventy-two books, each a thousand pages long. Displayed on long tables, they made a stunning materialization of the quantity of digital culture. But somehow these gestures, although big, were not big enough. They were too precious, too boutique, and too small to get at the magnitude of huge data sets that I was seeking to replicate. I wondered how I could up the ante. The Iraq War books showed that printing out even a small corner of the Internet was an insane proposition. My mind made a poetic leap: what if I were somehow able to crowdsource printing out the entire Internet? I leapt on social media and put out a call: LABOR, UbuWeb, and Kenneth Goldsmith invite you to participate in the first-ever attempt to print out the entire Internet. The idea is simple: Print out as much of the web as you want —be it one sheet or a truckload—send it to Mexico City, and we’ll display it in the gallery for the duration of the exhibition, which runs from July 26 to August 31, 2013. The process is entirely open: If it exists online and is printed out, it will be accepted. Every contributor will be listed as a participating artist in the show. What you decide to print out is up to you: As long as it exists somewhere online, it’s in. We’re not looking for creative interpretations of the project. We don’t want objects. We just want shitloads of paper. We’re literally looking for folks to print out the entire Internet. We have over 500 square meters of space to fill, with ceilings that are over six meters high. There are many ways to go about this: You can act alone (print out your own blog, Gmail inbox, or spam folder) or you could organize a group of friends to print out a particular corner of the Internet, say, all of Wikipedia, the entire New York Times archive, every dossier leaked by WikiLeaks for starters. The more the better. Print out the Internet. Post it to Mexico City. At the conclusion of the show, the entire archive will be recycled. The response was overwhelming. More than twenty thousand submissions poured in from every corner of the globe, manifesting themselves in a ten-ton heap of paper that was nearly five meters high. The pile looked a lot like the Internet itself, crammed with spam, credit card reports, memes, in-boxes, news sites, and porn— lots and lots of porn. Overnight, countless blogs and international media outlets ricocheted the idea across the globe, sparking intensely negative reactions, accusing me of everything from igniting an arboreal holocaust to cynical careerism. An online petition sprung up pleading: “Kenneth Goldsmith, please don’t print the Internet,” which petered out at less than five hundred signatures. The project grew so furiously that in July 2013, it was made an official meme on the website Know Your Meme. By the time it was over, more than a thousand pages of commentary had been generated—ironically, making a thousand more pages of the web that needed to be printed and thrown onto the pile. As most people never made it to Mexico City to see the actual show, the idea itself and the conversation it generated became a stand-in. Fueled by rumor and hearsay, the pile of papers grew to monumental proportions in the public’s mind. It’s fair to say that the conversation around the show was more real than the show itself. As speculation about the project grew, I couldn’t help but wonder what made people actually take something so ridiculously impossible so seriously? If you stopped even for a moment to think about it, printing the entire Internet is simply impossible. How can one even define the Internet, never mind freeze it for a moment to be able to print it? In the time it took me to write this sentence, an untold number of new web pages were generated, never mind the gajillions of photos, videos, and music that were just uploaded—each expandable to miles of source code, which in alphanumeric terms would mean oodles and oodles more pages. Trying to print out the entire Internet sounds like punishment meted out on a Promethean scale. The alarms tipped to near hysteria, resembling a twenty-first- century version of Dutch tulip mania more than the supposedly logical, levelheaded, contemporary world we imagine we live in. Printing out the Internet was a physical manifestation of every skeleton in our digital closet, tumbled out, and splayed across the floor, pushing us out of house and home, forcing us to confront the fact that we are hoarders of the worst sort, even if that hoarding is now invisible. Printing the Internet was a grade-B zombie film, a cheap version of War of the Worlds, the return of the repressed, a physical expression of the irrational fear that all this stuff will one day come back to haunt us. I’d like to believe that Printing Out the Internet was an unarticulated fear of abundance, of too much, of trying to comprehend a scale so large that no human brain could process it. Instead, we needed to invent, imagine, and enact the smallest slice of this problem in order to even contemplate purging ourselves of it. The project was a slanted and swerved tribute to Aaron Swartz, filtered through the poetic lens of Jorge Luis Borges. It was a fleeting “dialectical constellation” of the Internet, materialized and frozen for a moment in a gallery in Mexico City, only to be blown apart, pulped, recycled, and reconstituted into some other form. The outcry from the public was misplaced, having demanded real solutions to what was an imaginary problem—imaginary because it never really happened. What happened instead was a global conversation about a proposition—a tear in the curtain—one of those strange moments when strands of magical realism, pataphysics (the science of imaginary solutions to imaginary problems), and meme culture collided, fleetingly materialized, and just as quickly vanished from the face of the earth. In his introduction to his short story collection Ficciones (1941), Borges wrote: “The composition of vast books is a laborious and impoverishing extravagance. To go on for five hundred pages developing an idea whose perfect oral exposition is possible in a few minutes! A better course of procedure is to pretend that these books already exist, and then to offer a résumé, a commentary . . . I have preferred to write notes upon imaginary books.” It’s no surprise that both “The Library of Babel” and “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote”—in which an author spontaneously re-creates Don Quixote word for word, having had no prior knowledge of the book—appear in this collection. Textuality is objectified, not to be tampered with, frozen into baubles to be handled either by librarians or duplicate authors. The last thing on Borges’s mind is the text itself and what it means; what it means is implicit in the managing of it. In “The Library of Babel,” we never know what books the librarians are searching for and why, rather they’re concerned with how to locate, extract, and manage preexisting knowledge. Similarly, it’s taken for granted that Quixote is a classic text and therefore unassailable; instead, the emphasis is on the hermeneutics of how such a perfect replica came into being in the first place. As early as 1941, Borges is proposing that content is no longer king; instead context and reception are the new sites of meaning, an idea that was explored in the theoretically authorless practices of 1960s conceptual art. There’s a Borgesian slant on artist Lawrence Weiner’s famous 1969 declaration: “THE ARTIST MAY CONSTRUCT THE WORK / THE WORK MAY BE FABRICATED / THE WORK NEED NOT BE BUILT.” There’s a Borgesian twist as well in Sol LeWitt’s 1966 notion that “in conceptual art the idea or concept is the most important aspect of the work. When an artist uses a conceptual form of art, it means that all of the planning and decisions are made beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair.” As if to say that if all fictions are, in fact, fiction, then perhaps it’s just as good to propose them as to realize them. Borges questions labor and value in a realm where perspiration is plentiful and remuneration is scarce. Why bother? Borges echoes the Parisian radical May ’68 sloganeers, when they scrawled across city walls: “NEVER WORK” and “PEOPLE WHO WORK GET BORED WHEN THEY DON’T WORK. PEOPLE WHO DON’T WORK NEVER GET BORED.” Perhaps, then, in a Borgesian sense, it’s best not to write but to propose: propositions are gateways to utopias. All of this is a far cry from the activism of Aaron Swartz, Chelsea Manning, Julian Assange, and Edward Snowden, where theoretical propositions are not an option. These four individuals enacted Michel Foucault’s notion of parrhesia—the impulse to speak the truth at whatever cost—and they paid dearly for it: Manning in prison, Snowden in exile, Assange in limbo, and Swartz with his life. And it’s here where the distinctions between activism and art, politics and poetry, fact and fiction become clear. I am reminded of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s admonition: “Do not forget that a poem, although it is composed in the language of information, it is not used in the language-game of giving information.” Such is the freedom and beauty of poetry. Politics, however, is another matter. CHAPTER 5 Dream Machines and Eternidays A figure is staring intently at a device cradled in his hands. His shoulders are rounded, his back is hunched, and his head is bowed at the neck. Both elbows are flat against his body, bent at forty-five- degree angles. His fingers are moving about the surface of the device. While the world goes on with its business around him, he is completely oblivious; he can’t stop staring at the device. This is a magical device, for it has the ability to transport him to exotic and faraway places: exciting sea adventures, lumbering hippopotamuses wading in rivers, colorful rice fields halfway around the world. The device completely engulfs every inch of his being, when suddenly, in an instant, he raises his head, pauses for a moment, and places the device—a small book—on top of a jumble of other books in a cramped bookstall on the Seine. The camera zooms out, showing us rows of men in the same exact posture, all of them, heads bowed, deeply absorbed in small books they’re reading, oblivious to the world around them. These men, in formation, posture, countenance, and absorption bear a striking resemblance to the lines of people I see hunched over their devices on the platform of the West Fourth Street station waiting for their rush hour trains home. This film, Bookstalls, is by Joseph Cornell, the American surrealist, and was cobbled together at his kitchen table on Utopia Parkway in Queens, New York, in the late 1930s. Like most of Cornell’s films, he didn’t shoot a thing; this silent film was assembled from found footage taken from his vast collection of early cinema reels that he kept in his basement. What Cornell shows us in this film is that dreaming in public is nothing new. Be it books or smartphones, these wondrous devices have the capability of lifting us out of our everyday circumstances and transporting us elsewhere without our ever having to move an inch. Although Cornell rarely traveled—in his lifetime, he never journeyed farther than New England—he was able to span the globe and time travel across centuries through his artworks: films, boxes, assemblages, and collages. Peer into a tiny Cornell box and you’ll be magically transported to some other world created entirely from scavenged flotsam and jetsam—old prints, maps, Ping-Pong balls, shattered wineglasses, sand—that Cornell salvaged from his ramblings in junk shops and bookstores, which he then assembled into his famous dream machines. There’s much about Joseph Cornell’s life and work that anticipates our digital age. The origins of our computer interfaces and operating systems, with their delicate balance of logic and absurdity, mirror the surrealist aesthetics of Cornell’s boxes. The Internet’s grassroots ethos of sharing, open source, and free culture were in full swing on Utopia Parkway. His varied artistic output could be called multimedia some seventy-five years before it became the digital norm. An early adapter of indie culture, his living room became a pop-up cinema for like-minded film buffs in the 1930s who had no access to already-forgotten silent classics from the turn of the century. Even after he became world famous, Cornell was a one- man gift economy, giving many of his boxes away to neighborhood children as toys. He was self-educated before it became common. Although he became one of the most famous artists of the twentieth century, he didn’t attend art school or have any other formal training. In fact, he never even finished high school, preferring instead to teach himself philosophy, poetry, history, and aesthetics by devouring books from libraries, the way we harvest web-based educational resources from the comfort of our couches. Our relentless management of information—downloading, cataloging, tagging, duplicating, and archiving—was expressed in this early modernist’s working and collecting habits. By the time he died, his little house had become his own library—his private Wikipedia— prompting one observer to quip that he was “a kind of curator of culture, and his house on Utopia Parkway a bureau of which he was trustee, director and staff.” And, like many Internet fanboys, he was a geeky loner, more comfortable with distant correspondence than he was with face-to-face encounters; although his meatspace social network was wide, he died a virgin. Born in 1903 into an upper-middle-class family, his father, a traveling salesman, died young, sending Cornell, his handicapped brother, and mother into a downward spiral of poverty. They ended up in a modest working-class house on Utopia Parkway where Cornell spent the rest of his life. Devoted to his mother and acting as a caretaker for his brother, Cornell eked out a living for the family by working a series of low-level jobs during the day and working on his art at night. Due to his familial and financial burdens, he didn’t travel much farther than Manhattan—a twenty-minute train ride from his home—so he invented a series of self-sustaining measures that made it possible for him to create and live in a world of his own. Cornell was a massive collector, verging on hoarder, who stockpiled all types of ephemera and meticulously organized them by arcane but precise systems so that anything could be retrieved at a moment’s notice. By the time he died in 1972, his tiny house was jammed with cultural artifacts: three thousand books and magazines, a comparable number of record albums and vintage films, enough diaries and letters to now fill more than thirty reels of microfilm, and tens of thousands of examples of ephemera—from postage stamps to clay pipes, from theatrical handbills to birds’ nests. When he wasn’t working his job, he was out gathering materials for his boxes, trolling the vast used bookstores of Manhattan’s Fourth Avenue, hunting for illustrations that might be incorporated into his work. He became an ardent collector of media—films, in particular—making trips to New Jersey warehouses where Dumpsters’ full of reels were being unceremoniously tossed, regarded as artistically worthless, salvageable only for the silver nitrate they contained. In this way, Cornell was able to assemble one of the largest collections of early cinema in America. The steady stream of cinephiles who passed through his house trading films with him in the 1930s hadn’t a clue that Cornell was an artist. To them, he was an eccentric homegrown archivist. He was most famous for his box constructions. Made of wood, they’re often no wider than a laptop, and no deeper than a few inches. Often they are divided with wooden slats into multiple compartments. Each compartment contains an element, object, or image: in one section is an image of a bird clipped from a Victorian lithograph, in another is a collection of small seashells, in a third a few strands of ribbon. Depending on the theme of the box, the images tangentially relate to one another. In one box, most of the elements are naturally themed, in another they are celestial, in yet another they are classical. But not always. There are always odd things thrown in—compasses, clay pipes, marbles—that gently disrupt the overarching themes, nudging the box into the realm of dreams. The same way our devices are launching pads for web voyages, Cornell’s boxes are launching pads for interior voyages. Each box has an interface, its own operating and navigational systems through which we may experience it. It’s no coincidence that Cornell extensively used maps and globes in his work. From the repeated rows of iconic imagery to the way the space is divided into small windows, they are structurally reminiscent of the way our desktops are ordered. In a way, they seem like primitive computers. The names of web browsers—Navigator, Safari, and Explorer—could equally be applied to Cornell’s boxes. My desktop resembles a Joseph Cornell box. It’s at once a coherent space and a fractured one. My operating system unifies everything, but each window has its own agenda, shattering any real sense of accord. Like Cornell’s boxes, I never have just one window open, I always have many. And like his compartments, each window represents its own world. Sometimes those windows contain related content—right now my Facebook page and Twitter app are showing much of the same stuff—and other times, they’re really disjunctive: in one window is a dull spreadsheet, while another is streaming a slick music video. My screen is cluttered with graphic images, from the icon- festooned dock at the bottom to the pull-down menus at the top, where various icons show me the time, weather, my battery life, Wi- Fi strength, and so forth. The windows on my screen are piled on top of each other so thickly that I can only see fragments of each. Yet, there’s nothing confusing about this. Somehow, I understand where everything is and what each window does, even in this chaotic, cluttered, and shattered environment. And then there are worlds within worlds. In one of my windows, I’m streaming CNBC’s Squawk Box, whose video stream itself is divided into no fewer than fourteen windows all going at once, each showing something different. The main window has an image of the three hosts sitting around a table in a studio that itself has dozens of screens, computer monitors, and whose physical stage set is crowded with reflective surfaces. The hosts’ window is ringed by more boxes showing various stock charts and numbers; there’s a clock, a logo, and a title box. Along the bottom are two crawls, one with news, the other with market numbers, one on top of the other. On the right side of the window are stacked boxes with market numbers and charts. The entire landscape is moving and fluid: new words and numbers continue to appear and just as quickly disappear. A network logo and HD+ symbol reside in the lower-right corner. There’s a strong visual connection between both Cornell’s boxes and what my computer screen looks like at this very moment. My screen and the many windows contained therein feeling like an M. C. Escher drawing— worlds within worlds within worlds. Cornell predicted this. Boxes and screens are everywhere, from guys that work on Wall Street literally enveloped in flat-screen monitors to sports bars where every surface is showing a different game. In 1969 Andy Warhol said, “Everybody should have two television sets. So you can watch two at a time. Every time you see the President, he has three.” Sometimes I feel like all this distraction is life training for a distracted world—which is not always a bad thing. Running contrary to popular opinion that we’re losing our ability to concentrate, the Princeton historian Michael Wood calls distraction another kind of concentration: “The distracted person is not just absent or daydreaming, he/she is attracted, however fitfully, by a rival interest.” Wood says that distraction contains certain elements of concentration, but not enough to make it respectable. When we concentrate, we’re no longer curious—we’re concentrated, after all— foreclosing on surprises that distraction can bring. True, distraction might mean missing the main event. But what if nobody knows anymore what or where the main event is? Seeing ourselves and our lives reflected in our interfaces is a key part of the reason we stay so attached to them. Cornell thought it was important to include his viewers in his boxes, which is why they often contain mirrors. Glimpse into his boxes and in one or two of his “windows” you’ll find an image of yourself. The myth of Narcissus, who mistook his own reflection in the water for another person, underlies the success of social media. The psychologist Jacques Lacan had a name for this, the “mirror stage,” which says that when an infant sees him- or herself in a mirror for the first time, there is an immediate identification with that image. Up until that point, the baby has no knowledge of itself as an individual, unified being; instead, wholly dependent on others, it has only a fractured sense of self. From that time on, according to Lacan, the image of oneself as a whole person is intoxicating; we become hooked on external representations of ourselves, which goes a long way toward explaining why we love to find ourselves tagged in Facebook photos or have our tweets retweeted. If the Internet is a giant copying machine, then every time we see ourselves reflected in it, we are more drawn to it. It’s no surprise that we can’t stop self-googling or try as we might, we can’t leave Facebook. There’s too much of us reflected in it to walk away from. Interface designers know this well. Each time I open my Twitter feed, I see an image of myself—a flattering one, after all, I chose it— in the navigation bar. And on Facebook, my little avatar shows up next to every comment box at the end of every single thread. Scrolling down my Facebook feed on my computer, I see me— rendered as an icon—repeatedly and endlessly. It’s no wonder I feel I have a vested interest in every conversation happening there. Every time I open a social media app, the first thing it shows me is how I am reflected in it: how many times I’m mentioned in comments, how many likes I got, how many retweets and favorites I have amassed. This accumulation is social media’s capital, a symbolic currency for which “I” is the metric of valuation. McLuhan theorized that the insertion of one’s self into media was a basic precept of electronic media. Commenting on the myth of Narcissus, he claimed that “this extension of [Narcissus] by mirror numbed his perceptions until he became the servomechanism of his own extended or repeated image. The nymph Echo tried to win his love with fragments of his own speech, but in vain. He was numb. He had adapted to his extension of himself and had become a closed system. Now the point of this myth is the fact that men at once become fascinated by any extension of themselves in any material other than themselves.” If there’s a better description of the mechanics of social media, I don’t know it. Cornell spent an enormous amount of time drifting around the streets of Manhattan, where he would see his reflection in the glass of shop windows. Like social media, when we see ourselves reflected in a window display, we become entwined—literally overlaid —with what is being sold to us. Shop window displays invoke Renaissance scholar Leon Battista Alberti’s dictate that the proportions of the spectator and the display figure should be nearly the same, creating a symbiosis between the consumer and the desired object. In 1435, Alberti wrote a treatise about perspective and painting called De pictura. In it, he positioned the human figure as the basis for the division of the canvas into proportional parts. He was among the first to imagine the canvas as being a transparent window on to the world—like a plate of glass—upon which an image could be literally traced, resulting in accurate representations of reality. In doing so, he theorized the idea of perspective: if the canvas was indeed a transparent glass or window, we could look into it toward a vanishing point far in the distance. For Alberti, the canvas/window was a twofold surface that was both opaque (canvas) and transparent (illusionistic). Alberti’s ideas percolated throughout Europe over the centuries. In the 1680s, for instance, when Versailles was built, the vertical casement window—which still reflected Alberti’s human proportion as a standard—was extensively employed, resulting in a national idiom called the French window. This type of window remained the standard in classical French architecture for the next 250 years until the early 1920s when Le Corbusier introduced the horizontal window, a concept that was widely attacked as being unpatriotic. Le Corbusier, of course, was part of modernism’s thrust toward “flatness,” which reached its zenith in the 1950s when Clement Greenberg insisted that the surface of a painting was not a space of depiction for anything other than the act of painting itself. His hard- core anti-illusionism was exemplified by the abstract expressionists, for whom flatness was the gospel. As consumer technology evolved, it also adopted an ethos of flatness. Similar to modernism, it strived to strip away vestiges of cumbersome apparatuses. When televisions first appeared, they were encased in wood, posing as pieces of furniture, an attempt to seamlessly integrate the cold, mechanical technology into cozy domestic environments. By the 1970s, led by the smart design of Sony’s Trinitron, TV sets were freed from their furniture function, and like modernist painting, were able to become what they were, leading the way for today’s floating flat screens and plasmas. Similarly, each subsequent release of smartphones and tablets is thinner. Yet contradictorily, there is a drive to render believably illusionistic depths of field on these flat surfaces: video games and virtual reality interfaces seek to literally move you through “worlds” in hyperdimensional detail. It’s been said that as interface design has progressed, it’s grown more childlike with each passing iteration. The first computers were unquestionably made for adults. Their command lines required you to know how to read and how to type. But with the introduction of graphical user interfaces, operating systems migrated to large and overly simple iconic representations of complex phenomena—so simple that children could operate them. When interfaces were strictly linguistic, their languages tended to be logical, with a one-to- one correspondence between command and functionality: the “ls” command in Unix or “dir” in DOS listed your directories—and that’s all it did. But once GUIs appeared, the visually expressed commands became interpretative and vague. Every icon set is drawn by a graphic artist and is therefore interpretative, with each operating system attempting to visually distinguish itself from the others: think of Windows’ recycling bin as opposed to Mac’s trash can. But neither is accurate: computer documents are neither permanently deleted nor recycled. In truth, they are partially overwritten. The idea that the content of any medium is always another medium is expressed in the metaphor of the desktop. From the very beginning of GUIs—screen interfaces displaying icons and folders, etc. which mask the lines of code that actually run your computer— it’s as if the entire contents of a mid-twentieth-century office had been dumped on your computer. There are stacks of “paper” you can click on, “notepads” you can write on, “folders” where you can store your “documents,” “calculators” that have “buttons” you can “push.” To this day, I still edit my documents in the program “Office” while browsing web “pages.” (I often ask myself what exactly constitutes a web page. I still haven’t found the answer.) The office DNA is so embedded in our computing operating systems that even our mobile devices, bereft of desktops, still bear its predigital iconography. On my iPhone, my Notes app depicts a square legal pad, my camera icon looks like a 1950s Nikon, my Mail app is a standard number 10 white envelope, and my Phone app shows an outline of a mid- twentieth-century telephone receiver. Early graphical icons were flat, nondimensional representations. A folder—based on a classic manila folder—was a simply drawn outline of a tabbed folder. With successive iterations folders became dimensional, modeled with drop shadows. Later on, when you’d click on that 3-D folder, it would animate, literally opening itself up to show its paper contents before spinning off into a new window. (And now, on Apple products at least, everything’s flattened back out again in the latest OS.) While these animations and heavy graphics slowed systems down, they also opened up the role of the interface and graphic designer to inject playful surrealist elements into the once- dry textual environment. It’s hard to imagine an interface designer not wanting to reference Dalí’s melting watches when creating desktop icons (even the clock icon on my iPhone is depicted by a clock with hands). The title of his famous painting The Persistence of Memory has echoes of RAM (temporary data, such as files that can be easily deleted, altered, or overwritten) and ROM (permanent data, such as your operating system, that can’t be easily deleted, altered, or overwritten), the foundation of our computers. About his painting Dalí wrote: “I am the first to be surprised and often terrified by the images I see appear upon my canvas. I register without choice and with all possible exactitude the dictates of my subconscious, my dreams.” Substitute the words “upon my canvas” for “in my browser,” and it becomes clear how surrealism and its ethos are hardwired into the very core of our computing experience. Floating in the middle of my screen is a series of vertical blocky gray images, one atop another, on a jet-black background: a birdhouse with two holes in it, a bell that tilts to the right, an envelope that has the stem of a speech bubble protruding from its bottom-left corner, a series of three vertical dots next to a series of three vertical lines, a head without a neck, and a magnifying glass tilted to the left. All are the same size and all are rendered in the identical style. Like a rebus, I could assemble them into some sort of a narrative or simply enjoy their playful visuality, their randomness, their absurdity. They hang in the space of my screen the way a moon and stars poetically dangle in a Joan Miró painting or how vaguely abstract figures hauntingly populate a desolate Yves Tanguy landscape. But there’s very little that’s artistic or poetic about it; it’s a description of the navigation bar on my Twitter app. The icons in the dock that runs along the bottom of my screen are equally surreal. If I turn on the magnification function and enlarge them, I’m surprised at what I find. Several times a day I use my Preview app to view PDFs and images.* As an icon no larger than a cufflink, nestled in my dock with all my other icons, I think of it as “the blue one with a few lines through it.” I click on it, it does its job, and I never think about it again. But if I scale it up, a bizarre and rather incomprehensible series of images reveals itself. The icon consists of two photographs printed on “paper” with a white border, each skewed, laid atop one another. The photo on the bottom appears to be a picture of an old yellow stone wall and the photo on top, the most prominent image, is of a child standing on a beach, framed by a crisp blue sky. As the waves crash behind him, he’s got his hands clasped in what could be interpreted as a quasi-religious salutation, the kind of thing you always see the Dalai Lama doing. He’s got a sort of beatific half smile and his hair, in cowlicks, is soaked as if he just got out of the water. He’s clothed in a gray garment that is open at the chest, which could either be a raincoat (why would anyone wear a raincoat on the beach on a sunny day?) or a drenched gray karate gi (a gi is a strange choice for a beachwear). On top of the photos sits a magnifying loupe, the type used to examine photographs or media spreads while editing them. It strikes me as odd that the imagery in this icon refers to dead media: printed photographs and a loupe. After all, Preview examines only digital imagery and if you wanted to zoom in on what you’re looking at, you’d click a button, not gaze through a lens. A similar nostalgia permeates contemporary art as well. “Today, no exhibition is complete without some form of bulky, obsolete technology,” observes the art historian Claire Bishop. “The gently clunking carousel of a slide projector or the whirring of an 8-mm or 16-mm film reel . . . Today, film’s soft warmth feels intimate compared with the cold, hard digital image, with its excess of visual information (each still contains far more detail than the human eye could ever need).” While these Preview app images tell a certain story, they also refuse to tell a story, a textbook example of the nineteenth-century poet Comte de Lautréamont’s definition of surrealistic absurdity: “a sewing machine and an umbrella on a dissection table.” Like a Cornell box, they’re suggestive: of place, ethos, nature, environment, corporate values, positivism, world peace, and religion, while deftly avoiding taking an explicit position on any one of them. The icon is evocative, not narrative; and its style of evocation is grounded in the disjunctive surrealist tradition. The icon gives two conflicting messages: functionality (it reads documents really well) and non sequitur (I can’t figure out why these images represent a functional program). They’re not really in conflict with one another—they seem to work quite well together, if bizarrely—but it points to the fact that underlying the strict surface “logic” of our operating systems is a subconscious irrationality or sentimentality. Your computer’s ROM is the basement, attic, or toolshed of your computer, where stuff goes into deep storage. Cornell’s house was one big hard drive, particularly his basement, where he stored his vast collection of ephemera, much of which went into making his boxes. Down in the basement was also where he kept dossiers stuffed with scads of flotsam and jetsam on various starlets like Greta Garbo and Hedy Lamarr, with whom he was obsessed. When he attended film premieres or spent evenings at the ballet, he’d return home to his basement media collection to pore over his archived images of the stars he’d seen, ultimately incorporating their images into his boxes. Joseph Cornell was the ultimate fanboy. In the mid-1950s, for instance, Cornell became obsessed with Allegra Kent, a gorgeous young ballerina he had read about in Newsweek. Finally, he got the courage up to meet her by writing and asking her to appear in one of his films. She agreed to see him at her home in Manhattan, but the meeting didn’t go well. “He was terribly thin, a strange, gaunt, intense-looking creature,” Kent recalled. “I noticed his hands which were discolored from perhaps shellac or varnish. I immediately sensed that he really liked me, which was a little scary. Fans can be crazy. You don’t know what to expect from a fan.” On the spot, Kent told him that she wasn’t interested in appearing in his film and sent him on his way. Cornell’s crushes remind me of Internet fanboy culture, in particular, of Harry Knowles, the founder of the influential website Ain’t It Cool News, a vast repository of geek culture, comics, as well as information on sci-fi, fantasy, horror and action movies and TV shows. Like Cornell, Knowles built his site from his bedroom, where in 1994 he started posting to newsgroups, swapping rumors about upcoming films. He ended up writing film reviews on the newsgroups, which formed the basis for his website, which he launched in 1996. Quickly, the site drew hundreds of collaborators, many of whom leaked scandalous insider information about Hollywood—rumors, secret film scripts, advance screening reviews —much to the chagrin of the Hollywood studios, who up until that time were able to keep a tight rein on the publicity surrounding films before they were released. A 1997 New York Times profile on Knowles sounds like it could almost be describing Cornell: “Harry Jay Knowles is sprawled on the edge of his bed, clicking at the keyboard of his Packard Bell computer. It’s 10 A.M., and he is just starting his day in a tiny airless room crammed with videos, unread film scripts, movie posters (“Bride of Frankenstein,” “King Kong,” etc.) and 8-by-10 glossies of Marilyn Monroe, Britt Ekland, Ray Milland and the original Superman, Kirk Alyn. A grinning Vincent Price shrunken head lies in a box on the floor.” Knowles’s parents ran a movie memorabilia shop in Austin, Texas, where he grew up, that was crammed with pulp fiction, fanzines, and comics. They would set up shop on weekends at comics conventions and film festivals. “I was their experiment,” Knowles said in an interview. “They unleashed everything on me. I saw porn, all the Universal monster movies, all the Charlie Chan films, all the Sherlock Holmes things, all the Fred and Ginger movies. Film for me became how I related to everything else.” Like Cornell toiling in his cramped basement, Knowles created his empire from the confines of his bedroom, at the helm of a vast correspondence network that was done mostly from afar. A 2012 pilot for a YouTube show, Ain’t It Cool with Harry Knowles, is shot in his father’s Austin, Texas, basement (these guys love basements) and features Knowles—a heavyset man in a loud Hawaiian shirt, goatee, and chunky black-framed glasses—seated behind a desk talking to a camera, surrounded by piles of ephemera. Aping the style of Pee-wee’s Playhouse, Knowles shows old movie clips, opens a mailbox where he finds a catalog for a Captain America auction filled with props for sale, converses about comics with an animated cardboard boiler, and browses through a leaked film script. Information flies at him from all directions, all without him ever having to leave his chair. It’s a meatspace enactment of the vaporous networks that made Knowles famous, while forwarding Cornell’s methodology into the heart of the digital age—accumulating and organizing vast amounts of information, not into the art economy of boxes, but into websites, hits, and likes. As “free culture” geeks, both Cornell and Knowles share an elastic sense of copyright. In Knowles’s case, he leaked once-private information, posting documents in full. Cornell, too, subscribed to the idea of “borrower’s rights,” or, as his friend the poet Mina Loy put it, “A contemporary brain wielding a prior brain is a more potent implement than a paintbrush.” Stuck in Queens, Cornell never got to go to Paris or Florence to see the masterpieces he loved so much. Instead, he surrounded himself with reproductions of them, which came to stand in for the originals, similar to how our crummy AVI rips become more beloved than the “real” 35-millimeter version of a film that we’ll probably never see in a theater. In the early twentieth century, the networks that fed Cornell’s proclivities were the United States Postal Service; his exposure to much of the world’s great art came to him through printed reproductions in books and magazines. When he wished to incorporate an image into one of his boxes, he would photostat it, preserving the original in his archive. To him, the copy was a natural thing, more real than the original. While remix culture is commonplace today, it was much rarer when Cornell began his artistic life. He had one rule about his art—that no element in it could be original. Everything he used had to be found or reproduced. Cornell might’ve been the only filmmaker in the history of film who never learned to operate a camera. Instead, his early films, like Bookstalls, were all recomposed from found footage.† His 1936 film Rose Hobart is an ancestor of the Internet supercut—those fast- paced montages that compile, say, every swear word uttered in Deadwood or every scene in Talladega Nights in which the phrase “shake and bake” is roared with an accompanying fist bump. To make Rose Hobart, Cornell took a trashy grade-B jungle flick and, with scissors and Scotch tape, cut it up and put it back together out of order. The clichéd story line was happily disposed of and in its place appeared a series of disconnected fantasy sequences. When Cornell screened it, he projected it through a pane of deep-blue glass, imparting a dreamlike quality to it. The film was accompanied by a campy soundtrack from warbly 78 rpm discs that Cornell would hand crank. Rose Hobart was an influential film that spawned genres of “cut up” films, the best known of which is Christian Marclay’s The Clock (2010), a twenty-four-hour film that is literally a clock, displaying in real time the passing minutes of a day. Comprised of thousands of recycled film clips, The Clock is an epic work of montage. To create it, Marclay and his assistants watched thousands of DVDs and extracted scenes that had clocks somewhere in them. They collected them until every minute of the day was accounted for, then strung them together chronologically. Narrative, genre, or style were of no concern; the only thing that mattered was the presence of a clock in the shot. These scenes were edited down to exactly one-minute lengths and synced to real time so that if you, for example, entered the theater at 4:34 P.M. and looked up at the screen, the clock in the background of the film at that moment would read 4:34. Walk into the cinema at noon, a clock would read 12:00; the following minute the clip changed and another clock would show 12:01. The entire project was mellifluously sequenced by Marclay, so that one scene seamlessly melded into another, binding the entire enterprise into a smooth, sensual, and riveting experience. In one way, it’s a giant work of montage; in another, it’s actually a clock that tells the correct time. Befittingly, the film has been widely celebrated and crowds around the globe continue to this day to queue up to view the piece in person. Critical praise has been superlatively lavish: the art critic Roberta Smith called The Clock the “ultimate work of appropriation art.” What’s more, The Clock manages to bridge the art world with popular culture, which might account, in part, for its popularity. While Marclay contemplated crowdsourcing the project on the web, he felt that the supercut’s jagged and rough editing style would be at odds with the seamless quality he was after. So far, so good: a massively popular work constructed in the style of broad-based web trends, which is also acclaimed, valorized, funded, exhibited, and collected by the most powerful art world institutions. And yet, the elephant in the room is copyright: few have mentioned that Marclay hasn’t cleared any permissions with Hollywood for his work. Marclay explained his idea of copyright in an interview with the New Yorker: “If you make something good and interesting and not ridiculing someone or being offensive, the creators of the original material will like it.” It’s something he’s stood by for the past three decades, weaving a career out of sampling, appropriation, remixing, and plunderphonics; clearly, for Marclay, it appears to be working. Yet there seems to be a schism between popular culture and the museum. While Marclay’s actions are hailed, media policing agencies like the MPAA (Motion Picture Association of America) and RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America) have been waging an ongoing campaign against file sharers who create remixes out of copyrighted material not unlike what Marclay does. The Clock is a product of the digital age—it’s hard to imagine it being constructed out of celluloid—but, for a work borne of preexisting material and exuding free culture frisson, The Clock is tightly controlled: a full- length version can’t be found on YouTube or on the Pirate Bay. Instead, like a conventional market-based work of art, there is only an expensive, limited edition available to a select few institutions that can afford its half-million-dollar price tag. More so, at a time when much cultural power is based on multiplicity, nongeographical specificity, and wide dissemination, The Clock can only be viewed during special times under pristine conditions—often for a steep museum admission price—which sends mixed signals to the Internet-savvy public. Although the work is predicated on a complex computer program that syncs the film with the actual time in any given location, one assumes that a web version that does the same thing wouldn’t be too hard to create, a move that would satisfy both worlds. Time is an obsession that both Marclay and Cornell share. There’s something both temporal and atemporal about The Clock: it tells the exact time of day, but as an artwork it has no expiration date. Since it’s comprised of used and mostly classic materials, the work has a timeless feel, riding an edge between the momentary and the eternal. Furthermore, its site specificity ensures that it’s always current: when it shows at noon, there are usually big crowds in the theater, but at 4:00 A.M.—if the museum is open—just a few diehard fans are scattered about. Those quiet moments in the middle of the night belonged to Cornell, who was an insomniac. To him, every day was—as he called it—an eterniday. He came up with this idea by working all day at a crummy job, and then coming home to take care of his mother and brother. Then, when the house quieted down, he would stay up all night doing his work in a sleep-deprived dream state—a state between states—half-asleep, half-awake. Like his antecedents the sleeping surrealist poets, he came to prefer being in that twilight zone and later, when he was able to quit his job, would nap sporadically throughout the day so that he could work all night. Cornell was 24/7 before we were 24/7. When I address a global audience late at night on social media, I am acutely aware that the people I am addressing may be on the other side of the world, wide awake in the middle of their day. I sometimes tailor the content of my posts to appeal directly to that audience across the planet, forsaking my local community because I assume them to be sleeping. The digital age has ushered in atemporality; the hum of the computer and the grinding of the network exists outside of subjective, personal, local, traditional, and even communitarian, traditions of time, a condition explored in Jonathan Crary’s book 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep. Crary gives a Cornellian example of where labor, technology, sleeplessness, and the cosmos meet. He tells of an effort in the 1990s by a space consortium to build and launch satellites to reflect sunlight back on the earth with the intention of creating, literally, an eterniday. (The company’s slogan was “Daylight all night long.”) Outfitted with paper-thin reflective material two hundred meters in diameter, it would have the capacity to illuminate a ten-mile-square area of the earth in the middle of the night. Originally intended so that miners working in Siberia would have more “daylight” hours under which to toil, it was quickly embraced as a way of extending office hours in cities. There were protests, however, from groups who argued that the night sky was “a commons to which all humanity is entitled to have access, and the ability to experience the darkness of night and observe the stars is a basic human right that no corporation can nullify.” The project was killed, but that didn’t stop us, our machines, and our networks from working eternidays. In the winter of 1955 through 1956, Cornell held an exhibition of boxes in a New York City gallery entitled Winter Night Skies, which incorporated star charts of constellations. The series was stark: white boxes with deep-blue images of night skies, framed in architecture he called Hôtel de l’Etoile. Joseph Cornell loved the winter stars at night. Gazing out his kitchen window at 4:00 A.M. at the bright stars embedded in the pitch-black sky over a silent Queens, half-asleep, half-awake, he was an armchair voyager traveling the cosmos basking in—as he called it—“light from other days.” CHAPTER 6 I Shoot Therefore I Am Like Joseph Cornell’s basement, my many hard drives are packed with downloaded books, movies, images, and music. While I spend a lot of time downloading them, copying them, renaming them, and organizing them into their respective folders, once they’re neatly filed away, I tend to forget about them. Rummaging through them, I’m often surprised at what I find, as was the case when I was recently in the mood to listen to the music of the American midcentury composer Morton Feldman. I dug in to my MP3 drive, found my Feldman folder, and opened it up. Among the various folders in the directory was one labeled the Complete Works of Morton Feldman. I was surprised to see it there; I didn’t remember downloading it. Curious, I looked at its date—2009—and realized that I must’ve grabbed it during the heyday of MP3 sharity blogs. I opened it to find seventy-nine albums as zipped files. I unzipped three of them, listened to part of one, closed the folder, and haven’t opened it since. In the digital ecosystem, the apparatuses surrounding the cultural artifacts are often more engaging than the artifacts themselves. In an unanticipated twist to John Perry Barlow’s 1994 prediction that in the digital age we’d be able to enjoy wine without the bottles, we’ve now come to prefer the bottles to the wine. Back in 1983, the media critic and philosopher Vilém Flusser (1920–1991) described this exact phenomenon in a little book called Towards a Philosophy of Photography. Flusser claimed that the content of any given photograph is actually the camera that produced it. He continued with a series of nested apparatuses: the content of the camera is the programming that makes it function; the content of the programming is the photographic industry that produces it; and the content of the photographic industry is the military-industrial complex in which it is situated, and so forth. He viewed photography from a completely technical standpoint. In Flusser’s view, the traditional content of the cultural artifact is completely subsumed by the apparatuses—technical, political, social, and industrial—surrounding, and thereby defining, it. Although he was writing about analog, print-based photography, Flusser’s ideas go a long way to explain our changing relationship to the cultural artifact in the digital age, reminding us of Moholy-Nagy’s prediction that “those who are ignorant in matters of photography will be the illiterates of tomorrow.” The mistake most make in reading Flusser is to assume he’s talking about analog photography. Yes, he is, but that’s the least relevant part. Imagine, instead, that everything he’s saying about photography he’s saying about the digital. This requires an act of imaginative translation on our part, but once you make that leap, you realize that this 1983 text astonishingly directly addresses our situation some three and a half decades later. For instance, Flusser claimed that the camera was the ancestor of apparatuses that are in the process of “robotizing all aspects of our lives, from one’s most public acts to one’s innermost thoughts, feelings, and desires.” And when we look at social media—from blogs, to Twitter, to Facebook, and to Instagram—we can see he was correct. Like the camera, the Twitter apparatus coerces us, seducing us to tweet, and we dutifully obey. Once we’re hooked in to the game, we become compulsive: the more we tweet, the more we enrich the program, thereby increasing its standing within the larger social media apparatus and ultimately boosting Twitter’s share price. In Flusserian terms, it doesn’t really matter what we tweet (content); it just matters that we keep tweeting (apparatus). For Flusser, the content of any medium is always the series of apparatuses that produced it. In fact, content plays little role in Flusser’s writing. A photograph is not a carrier of memories—your baby pictures are interchangeable with a million other baby pictures—but a predetermined artifact spit out by the camera apparatus. The camera is a voracious, greedy device, programmed to stalk images the way an animal stalks prey: the camera smells blood and (literally) snaps. On Instagram, the more you shoot, the more you become addicted to the photographic apparatus, which Flusser likens to opium addiction or being on a “photograph-trip.” In the end, you wind up working for the camera and the industry that produced it. The more people who use an apparatus, the more feedback the company receives about its camera, the smarter it becomes, and the more users it draws to its base, thereby increasing the manufacturer’s bottom line. For this reason, Instagram keeps adding new filter sets and features in order to retain and broaden its users. To Instagram, what people are photographing is beside the point; the real point is that they keep posting. Photography is easy. Anyone can push a button and produce a good photograph without having a clue as to the inner workings of a camera. A recent Apple ad underscores this: “Every day, millions of amazing photos and videos are shot with iPhone. That’s because the iPhone makes it easy—for everyone—to shoot amazing photos and video.” If taking good photos were difficult—once upon a time it took a great deal of mastery to take a good photograph (f-stops, light meters, shutter speeds)—Instagram would never be as popular as it is today. The programmers of cameras also strive to keep their interfaces as simple as possible, to discourage experimentation outside of its parameters. The simple interface keeps the photographer pushing the button so they can produce, in Flusser’s words, “more and more redundant images.” The free cost of digital photography keeps the photographer playing the photographic game. (How many people snapping photos with a smartphone only take one shot of any given scene?) Those photos are uploaded to the cloud, where ever-more-redundant photos are stored. Your photo of the Eiffel Tower on Flickr is identically redundant to the millions already stored on Flickr, yet you keep on snapping them (just as I keep downloading MP3s). I shoot therefore I am. The camera doesn’t work for us. We work for the camera. Our compulsive behavior leaves no scene undocumented. When we take a holiday to a foreign country, the photos don’t show the sights we saw, they show us the places where the camera has been and what it’s done there. We think we’re documenting our own memories, but what we’re actually producing is memories for the apparatus. The digital photograph’s metadata— geotagging, likes, shares, user connectivity, and so forth—proves much more valuable to Instagram than any subject matter it captures. The image is irrelevant in comparison to the apparatuses surrounding it. Once we buy into a specific apparatus, it’s awfully hard to leave it. Your cultural artifact is locked within that system, constrained by its programming. Notice how an Instagram photo can’t be resized, e- mailed, or downloaded to your hard drive. It can’t exist within any ecosystem other than Instagram’s. Notice how easily Instagram can be integrated into the interface of its parent company, Facebook, but how difficult it is to share on Twitter, a competitor’s platform. While we play the Instagram game by liking and reposting photos, the apparatus knows otherwise: a like is a way for the shareholder to verify that there are consumers populating the program; the greater and more verifiable the user base, the more valuable the apparatus. Unless the market determines otherwise, the physical value of most printed photographs are negligible: they’re just pieces of paper with information on them—cheap, ubiquitous, unstable, and infinitely reproducible. As opposed to paintings, where the value of the objects resides in their singularity, the value of photographs lies in the information on their surface. Their surface is ephemeral and, in the digital age, rewritable. The photograph is a pivotal artifact, bridging the industrial and postindustrial, embodying the transition from the physical to the purely informational. How that information is distributed determines much of its meaning. When an image was printed on paper, its ubiquity in physical space was its distributive metric. But even then, the content in a poster or handbill was somewhere other than its image. Flusser writes, “The poster is without value; nobody owns it, it flaps torn in the wind yet the power of the advertising agency remains undiminished . . .” Depending on context and distribution, an image printed on paper could take on different meanings. Unlike, say, an image displayed on a TV screen, a photograph published in a newspaper could be clipped, stuffed into an envelope, and sent to a friend. Passed hand to hand, the movable photographic artifact anticipated our image-sharing networks. The camera resembles a game of chess. It contains what appears to be an infinite number of possibilities, but in the end those possibilities are prescribed by its programming. Just as every possible move and permutation of a chess game has long been exhausted, every program of the camera too has long been exhausted. In the case of Instagram, with a user base approaching half a million users, its programs are instantly exhausted, resulting in updates that include new features in order to retain users. Although finite, the apparatus must always give the illusion of infinity in order to make each user feel they can never exhaust the program. Or as Flusser says, “Photographs permanently displacing one another according to a program are redundant precisely because they are always ‘new’ . . .” Your cell phone still makes calls, but you’d be foolish to think that it is about being a telephone in the same way you’d be foolish to think Instagram is about expressive photography. But criticize Instagram, says Flusser, and that critique becomes absorbed in its apparatus: “A number of human beings are struggling against this automatic programming . . . attempting to create a space for human intention in a world dominated by apparatuses. However, the apparatuses themselves automatically assimilate these attempts at liberation and enrich their programs with them.” The only hope? Those who attempt to break the system by doing something with the camera that was never intended by industry: taking intentionally boring photos (Instagram is full of boring photos, but how many of them are made to be intentionally boring?) or blurring images beyond recognition. Twitter is trickier to break. Attempts at self-reflexive critique within the Twitter apparatus are instantly absorbed by the apparatus and celebrated by the corporation to highlight the diversity and playfulness of its expanded user base (once again making the company a more valuable entity). Flusser’s forays into media have framed, theorized, and unpacked the new complexities of our digital world. By empirically questioning received knowledge and recasting it within crisp lines of history and logic, he’s made the digital legible in a time when its theorization is occluded and murky to say the least. When Willem de Kooning said, “The past does not influence me. I influence it,” I am reminded of Flusser and how prescient his twentieth-century investigations proved to be for our digitally-soaked twenty-first. A precursor to Flusser’s ideas about apparatus was the Soviet avant-garde filmmaker Dziga Vertov’s 1924 concept of the Kino-Eye. Vertov’s argument revolves around the idea that the camera’s eye has a neutrality that the unaided human eye lacks. It’s the difference between you walking down a city street and you looking at an image of that same city street. The image can be contemplated in ways that your eye on the street can’t. On the street, the hyperactive and restless human eye is connected to an equally active brain, one that is instructed to see and process images in very specific ways, whereas the camera lens—a superhuman eye—is connected to a machine, one that records with cool precision what it is programmed to capture. Like Flusser’s apparatus, Kino-Eye democratizes every image it sees—one image is as good as another—cataloging a visually chaotic world by transforming it into information and creating a stockpile of images for later use, exactly what Google Street View does today. On a darker note, Kino-Eye predicted the rise of the surveillance camera, which restlessly and indiscriminately devours all that passes before its lens. London’s ring of steel is Kino-Eye at its most dystopian. In 1971, the conceptual artist Douglas Huebler set out to make a pre-Internet work of art based on Kino-Eye. His proposition, a cross between sociology and visual art, read: “Throughout the remainder of the artist’s lifetime he will photographically document, to the extent of his capacity, the existence of everyone alive in order to produce the most authentic and inclusive representation of the human species that may be assembled in that manner.” Understanding the futility of the project—naturally, it remained incomplete at the time of his death—Huebler attempted it anyway, roaming the streets of cities around the world with a film-loaded camera, photographing random passersby. He shot the multitudes from the roofs of buildings and rephotographed pictures of crowds from the day’s newspaper. On the web, absurdly totalizing projects like Huebler’s are common: one could imagine crowdsourcing digital photos of “everyone alive” on a Tumblr, yet oddly enough, it hasn’t yet happened. The photographer Penelope Umbrico creates huge photo sets from preexisting images she finds on the web. In 2006, she began an ongoing series of collecting images of sunsets posted to Flickr, where she crops out everything but the image of the sun itself, prints them out as 4x6 prints, and arranges them in galleries in massive grids. The variety and subtlety of images are stunning. What could be more banal and clichéd than an image of a sunset? Yet Umbrico’s suns are all completely different: some are purplish, some are blue, and others are green. Some suns are tiny dots and others fill the picture frame entirely. Some have halos around them, while others are poetically obscured by wispy clouds. In many, the lens pointed at a bright object creates dramatic solar flares, making them look more like meteorites than suns. A search on Flickr for “sunset” reveals that there are more than twelve million of them housed there, a fact that isn’t lost on Umbrico. Echoing Flusser, she states: Perhaps part of the beauty of taking a picture of a sunset is that while you are doing it it’s likely that a million other people are doing it as well—at exactly the same time . . . While the intent of photographing a sunset may be to capture something ephemeral or to assert an individual subjective point of view— the result is quite the opposite—through the technology of our common cameras we experience the power of millions of synoptic views, all shared the same way, at the same moment. To claim individual authorship while photographing a sunset is to disengage from this collective practice and therefore negate a large part of why capturing a sunset is so irresistible in the first place. The artist Eric Oglander has an ongoing Tumblr called Craigslistmirrors, which features only images of mirrors that are for sale. On first glance, it’s a bit perplexing why he’d want to post a bunch of banal, crappy snapshots of mostly ugly mirrors, but it quickly becomes clear that folks selling their mirrors haven’t always stopped to consider what those mirrors are reflecting. Some reflect vast landscapes and clear blue skies; others reflect curious pets and, in many, the photographers themselves unwittingly appear, oftentimes in various states of undress. “Either the photographer is going to be reflected in the mirror or the inside of their home will be,” says Oglander. “It’s like an invasion of privacy almost, and I think that’s why people bring the mirrors outside.” Oglander’s work references the seminal 1960s mirror constructions by artist Robert Smithson, which he called displacements. Robert Smithson didn’t make paintings of the sky; instead, by simply placing a mirror in a grassy field faceup, Smithson literally displaced an image of the sky, dropping a square of blue into a sea of green. Blazing azure one day, smoggy grayish-yellow the next, Smithson’s gestures were at once formal color studies, quiet mediations on nature, and political statements on ecology. The mirror is a displacement machine that appropriates all that passes before it. A preprogrammed automaton, the mirror employs no judgment or morals; it indiscriminately displays all in the most democratic manner possible. The mirror works around the clock, reflecting a dark room all night long when its inhabitants are sleeping, or an empty apartment all day long when its inhabitants are at work. Like its cousin the surveillance camera, the mirror displays scads of dark data, but unlike the CCTV, the mirror has no memory: every image passing across its surface is ephemeral. Great crimes are committed before mirrors; no one is ever the wiser. The mirror, then, is closer to a movie screen than CCTV, a surface upon which images are projected—and then reflected in reverse. Like the CCTV camera, the mirror never goes dark. Smash the mirror; disperse the image. Toss the pieces in the trash; they continue to dumbly reflect. Since 1996, a group of actors/activists called the Surveillance Camera Players have been staging subversive plays adapted from books such as George Orwell’s 1984 and Wilhelm Reich’s The Mass Psychology of Fascism in front of CCTV cameras. While it’s not known if anyone is watching them, their performances—often interrupted by the police—are exhaustively documented by their own cameras in addition to being documented by the surveillance cameras. The Players’ message is a political one: “We protest against the use of surveillance cameras in public places because the cameras violate our constitutionally protected right to privacy. We manifest our opposition by performing specially adapted plays directly in front of these cameras . . . Down with Big Brother!” The cars festooned with cameras that capture Google Street View drive around the world sucking up images. Meant to provide panoramic views of neighborhoods and buildings to accompany their maps, the cameras often capture unexpected and bizarre occurrences, such as women giving birth on the sides of roads, drug deals in progress, or tigers caught prowling suburban parking lots. One artist, Mishka Henner, scoured online forums where people share the whereabouts of sex workers. He then put those map coordinates into Street View, and indeed, on some of those corners, found images of scantily clad women standing by the sides of the road in isolated areas. He collected these images as a series of photographs that he calls No Man’s Land. While one might presume these women are sex workers, there’s no definite evidence to support that claim. Instead, it’s a mix of conjecture culled from the forums with the visual evidence compiled from Street View that gives the story credibility, one that could easily be misconstrued by legal authorities to arrest these women on charges of prostitution. Henner’s project underlines the Promethean social and political circumstances that arise when nearly every inch of the planet has been surveyed and posted online and acts as a warning for its potential abuses. Other artists stage performances for the Street View car as it drives through their neighborhoods. Ben Kinsley and Robin Hewlett have staged seventeenth-century sword fights, hired marching bands, and dressed people up in giant chicken costumes, all for the sake of creating strange images that will be incorporated into Google’s official map culture. One online video shows a Street View car approaching on a narrow, rain-slicked Pittsburgh street. The car is forced to drive through a parade with brass bands and baton- spinning majorettes. As the car approaches the parade, it is showered with confetti. Leaving the parade, the car encounters a group of absurdly dressed joggers who animatedly approach it from the opposite direction. Undeterred, the car drives through the spectacle, continuing its recording, seemingly oblivious to the exotic circumstances. Until the car passes this street again, those staged happenings will be preserved on the Google Street View record. The first popular photoshopped image was of a dark-haired topless woman in white bikini bottoms sitting on a sandy beach in a tropical paradise with her back to the camera. Her name was Jennifer and on that day in 1987 she was photographed gazing out on a picture- perfect landscape, replete with pale turquoise water and a lush tropical island floating to her left on the horizon line. Puffs of clouds hang in a blazing azure sky. This photo came to be known as “Jennifer in Paradise,” and was taken by a software developer named John Knoll of his fiancée while they were on vacation in Bora Bora. Shortly afterward, Knoll went on to create Photoshop and this image was distributed with early versions of the program. For many people using Photoshop, Jennifer in Paradise was the first digital image they ever manipulated. Jennifer’s inclusion in Photoshop was casual, even serendipitous. When the demo package was coming together and sample images were needed to digitize, Knoll just grabbed the nearest photo at hand —a 4x6 photograph on paper that happened to be his fiancée in Bora Bora—and tossed it on a scanner. Spontaneously and unwittingly, an icon was born. An online video from 2010 shows Knoll reenacting the Photoshop demonstrations he used to give in order to show the power of his photo-editing suite. Knoll fires up an ancient Mac and pulls up the image of Jennifer. He runs some primitive functions on Jennifer: first he clones her; then he copies, resizes, and pastes a duplicate image of the island and drops it on the horizon. It’s kind of creepy: you’re watching a reenactment of the future of the image unfurl before your eyes at the site of its inception. And he’s not cloning just anything: he’s cloning his topless wife, who would be cloned endlessly by the first generation of geeks to get their hands on Photoshop. Constant Dullaart is an Internet artist who has mounted exhibitions based on the photograph. “Given its cultural significance just from an anthropological point of view I thought it would be interesting to examine what values the image contains,” he says. “The fact that it’s a white lady, topless, anonymous, facing away from the camera. [Knoll] offers her, objectifying her, in his creation for the reproduction of reality.” Dullaart suggests that the negative of that photo should be given to the Smithsonian, to celebrate the time when “the world was young, as it still naïvely believed in the authenticity of the photograph.” As late as 1973 Susan Sontag could still state: “A fake painting (one whose attribution is false) falsifies the history of art. A fake photograph (one which has been retouched or tampered with, or whose caption is false) falsifies reality.” A decade later, Samuel Beckett said the same thing for literature, regarding Duchamp’s readymades: “A writer could not do that.” Thirty or forty years ago, fakeness was still the exception, not the rule that it is in today’s digital world. The binary of true/false art/reality bespeaks a less complicated time, before appropriation in the visual arts, digital sampling in music, Internet avatars, and reality TV was the norm. A photographic print was just that: an emulsified surface that clung to a piece of paper. Once out in the world, these physical artifacts tended to be stable objects like newspapers, photographic prints, and bound books. The only way to reconfigure them was with a razor blade and a pot of glue. But even then, they remained paper-bound stable artifacts. These copies often bore signs of their original context: a Xerox of a newspaper photograph, for instance, still carried benday dots and signature typefaces like Imperial in the New York Times. Photographs appearing on the pages of a newspaper had proper authorial accreditations and captions that made their sources readily identifiable and verifiable. Today, photographs emanating from newspaper websites are regularly reblogged without attribution or context; oftentimes the caption doesn’t travel with the photograph, nor does authorial accreditation. These are free-floating artifacts, detached from the anchored signifiers and contexts that first birthed their meaning. A thousand new contexts and meanings emerge from the viral nature of photographic distribution in the digital age. In “Jennifer in Paradise,” Dullaart sees embodied a more innocent and hopeful time: a time before the Internet was steeped in surveillance, when few worried about the politics behind software design, the digital divide, the colonizing of the digital commons, and the invasion of privacy; a time before social media and all the venom that came with it. It’s a complicated image. While there’s something touching and pure about it in an idealistic web 1.0 way, it’s also filled with blind spots in terms of race, class, gender, and colonization. In his artwork, Dullaart often warps Jennifer beyond recognition, radically applying Photoshop’s own tools to her until the iconic image becomes an abstraction. His 2014 online video “Jennifer in Photoshop” is a loop of step-by-step Photoshop filters applied to the image until she is nothing more than a blur, then in reverse until she reappears in full resolution, set to the strains of Bobby Sherman’s 1971 easy-listening song “Jennifer.” In his artworks, Dullaart uses the image of Jennifer in Paradise without Knoll’s permission, something that angered the developer when he found out about it. Knoll claimed, “I don’t even understand what he’s doing.” But it seems like Knoll is the one who is lost, seemingly unable to grasp the full complexity of the forces his software package has unleashed, which is exactly the subject of Dullaart’s work. When Jennifer was asked about Dullaart’s art, she was sympathetic, offering a more realistic assessment: “The beauty of the Internet is that people can take things, and do what they want with them, to project what they want or feel.” A decade before Jennifer, a group of artists known as the Pictures Generation critiqued the ways mass media images were reproduced and circulated. One of their primary tactics was to rephotograph preexisting photographs and claim them as their own. Inspired by the pop artists, who painted images of mass-produced consumer goods, the Pictures group wielded a camera instead of a paintbrush, entirely removing the hand of the artist. They called into question the nature of originality: can we say there is an original when it comes to an infinitely reproducible medium like photography? Their work was as much critique as it was practice. Long before the Internet, they questioned traditional ideas of authorship, setting the stage for today’s image macros and memes. So you had Jeff Koons rephotographing billboards of brands like Hennessy and Nike and re-presenting them unaltered on the walls of galleries. Sherrie Levine rephotographed reproductions of Walker Evans’s iconic black-and-white photos of Depression-era sharecroppers, then claimed she was the author of those images. Richard Prince did the same with Marlboro ads of leathery-skinned men on horseback in glorious natural settings of the American West. Simply by removing all ad copy and logos, and titling his series Cowboys, they were a sly reference to the dawn of the Reagan era, when the photos were made. All of these works asked the same question: if artists photograph an image—any image—aren’t they the authors of that image? Certainly they pushed the button that created it. If blame is to be ascribed, perhaps the apparatus is guiltier than the artist. Building on these earlier strategies, Richard Prince recently turned his eye to the Internet when he began appropriating other people’s Instagram photos in a series entitled New Portraits. He downloaded them without permission, printed them out on large canvases, and hung them on gallery walls, adding only a few comments in the comment stream, which he printed along with the images. Each carried a price tag of $90,000. Upon hearing this, the Instagram community went nuts, accusing Prince of exploiting regular people’s photographs for his own financial benefit. One Instagrammer whose work was reproduced by Prince said, “What Prince is doing is colonizing and profiting off a territory of the Internet that was created by a community of young girls,” referring to the Instagram account of SuicideGirls, the alt-erotica stream with more than three million followers, from which Prince liberally poached. Yet what Prince did was perfectly legal. Instagram’s privacy policy states: “Once you have shared User Content or made it public, that User Content may be re-shared by others.” Those offended might have been wise to read Flusser. They were fooled into thinking that their Instagram feeds are private photo albums of their most beloved and cherished images, rather than a façade that feeds a series of voracious apparatuses. What was as remarkable as the amount of money he made from appropriating other people’s photos was the fact that with this one small gesture, our naiveté about the apparatus was so sharply critiqued and exposed.* In 2008, Prince made the series of paintings Canal Zone, which incorporated black-and-white photographs of Rastafarians that were taken by a little-known photographer named Patrick Cariou nearly a decade earlier. Prince took Cariou’s photos and, like the Instagram pieces, blew them up large and printed them on canvas. But instead of just straight appropriations, he added and subtracted elements, at times cutting and pasting images on top of each other, other times isolating Cariou’s images so that they floated in empty fields. Prince also painted heavily on top of some of the photos. In one of the most reproduced images from the series, Prince took a photo of a shirtless Rasta standing in a forest with dreadlocks draping down to the ground, and pasted George Harrison’s Rickenbacker guitar in his hands. He also blotted out the Rasta’s eyes and mouth with blue circles. The paintings generated more than $10 million worth of sales. Cariou, who made about $8,000, from his book, sued. The case went back and forth in court for several years, with the art world hoping for vindication of its long-standing tactics of appropriation, and the photography world hoping to regain control of their medium in a time of ubiquitous digital imagery. In 2013, the court decided in favor of Prince, saying he had transformed Cariou’s photos and it was therefore considered fair use. The irony is that this battle was being played out during the digital age on two analog mediums: paintings stretched on canvas and photographs printed in books. At the heart of the case was neither painting nor money; it was photography, which Flusser presciently called “the mother of all reproducible apparatuses.” A few months ago, a friend pulled a book off of her bookshelf that was a new appropriation work by Prince, one as radical and daring as anything he’d done. The premise of the book was achingly simple: it was a reproduction of the first edition of The Catcher in the Rye, identical in every way to the iconic first edition, except that everywhere Salinger’s name appeared, it was swapped for Prince’s. The production value of the book was astonishingly high, a perfect facsimile of the original, right down to the thick, creamy paper stock; even the typeface on the book’s pages was identical. The text on the dust jacket—replete with the familiar line drawing of the angry red horse—begins: “Anyone who has read Richard Prince’s New Yorker stories, particularly A Perfect Day for Bananafish, Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut, The Laughing Man, and For Esmé—with Love and Squalor, will not be surprised by the fact that his first novel is full of children.” It’s a dead ringer through and through with the exception of the following disclaimer on the colophon page: “This is an artwork by Richard Prince. Any similarity to a book is coincidental and not intended by the artist.” The colophon concludes with: ©Richard Prince. For Prince, the book was modestly priced: a few hundred bucks for a limited unsigned edition, with a copy signed by Prince selling for several thousand, matching the identical price of what the signed first edition by Salinger goes for on that day. Remarkably, Prince took a bunch of copies of his pirated edition, spread them out on a blanket on the sidewalk in front of Central Park, and sold them for forty dollars each. It’s unknown how many—if any—he sold or how a presumably befuddled public might have responded to this performance. Prince is openly pirating what is rather valuable literary property —American literature—practically begging the estate of Salinger to sue him. One imagines that if Salinger’s estate went after him, he’d have the money to settle with them. And, yet—probably because this is a low-profile, low-income-generating project—nothing ever happened. But this gesture, played out on a relatively small scale, on paper, is not really as much about Salinger as it is about the status of the cultural artifact in the digital age, its infinite reproducibility, and our changing notion of authorship and authenticity in the twenty-first century. Images on the web take on a Wittgenstein-like character, flickering back and forth between the semantic and the visual, being both at once. We search for images based on key words that summon images, yet it’s in this interval—between typing and clicking—that the correspondence between the two begins to slip. I enter the word “red” into Google Images and the first result is of a red square from Wikipedia. I assume that the image is from the Wikipedia entry to the color “red” but when I go to the page, I find that it is, in fact, the entry for “Red flag (politics),” which reminds me of Wittgenstein’s claim that “the two propositions, ‘Red is a primary color’ and ‘Red is a color in many flags,’ wear the same linguistic dress.” The tension between language and image on the web is the subject of a recent project by the London-based artists King Zog (Felix Heyes and Benjamin West) called Google, Volume 1, which takes the entire Oxford English Dictionary and replaces every word with the first image displayed when searched on Google Images. The result is a 1,328-page tome that begins, obviously enough, with an image of an aardvark and ends with a mysterious scientific-looking diagram, which the book’s index tells me is zymase, an enzyme that catalyzes sugars into ethanol and carbon dioxide. When I search the book for the image “red” trying to find the r’s I flip through the pages and stumble across an image of a red flag—a Nazi flag, to be specific—and think that I have found the entry for “red.” It is only when I look to one side of it and see an image of a “sweater,” which is followed by a broom “sweeping” that I realize I’m looking at the entry for “swastika.” I flip backward, then, trying to find the r’s and when I do, I land on the page with a poster for the movie The Recruit, followed by a medical illustration of a “rectum.” Nearby, I see an image of an open book with the words “verso” and “recto” on it and I know I must be getting close. Sure enough, I turn the page and there is the image for “red,” which is not a solid square of red referencing a red flag, as Google Images today tells me it is, but instead is a movie poster for a film called Red. Evidently back in 2013, the day the authors sought the first entry for “red” in Google Images, the movie poster was the top hit. Today, things have changed. Tomorrow—or even later this afternoon—the top hit on Google Images for “red” might very well change again. Printed in an edition of only three hundred copies, each subsequent edition will scoop the top images search terms from that printing date, resulting in an entirely different book each time it’s published. Baltimore-based artist Dina Kelberman produced a similar project called I’m Google, which is a collection of images she finds on the web and meticulously organizes according to their formal and lyrical properties. Displayed in a seemingly endless scroll, the project visually resembles both Google Images and Pinterest, which, according to her artist statement, “results visually in a colorful grid that slowly changes as the viewer scrolls through it. Images of houses being demolished transition into images of buildings on fire, to forest fires, to billowing smoke, to geysers, to bursting fire hydrants, to fire hoses, to spools of thread. The site is constantly updated week after week, batch by batch, sometimes in bursts, sometimes very slowly.” At first glance, Kelberman’s project feels like she created the most perfect algorithm, one that is able to match perfectly the semantic and visual qualities of images in the most poetic fashion. Yet the truth is that she’s meticulously picking and arranging these images by hand, one after the next. In this way, she’s closer to Christian Marclay’s The Clock than she is Google’s search function that allows you to find images that are visually similar images. Google is a smart formal algorithm but it misses the nuances of what only a human can bring to a project: humor, subtlety, irony, perversity, playfulness, and poetry. It’s not enough to simply “raid the icebox,” and display the treasures because they are there. Instead, it’s Kelberman’s artistic sensibility—her “order of the catalogue,” as Walter Benjamin would put it—that makes a striking counterpoint to the “confusion of a library.” Over the course of the year when I was named MoMA’s first poet laureate in 2013, I was fortunate enough to spend a lot of time in the museum among great works of art. Prior to my appointment, as a visitor, I would stand in front of certain paintings, lost for what seemed to be an eternity, completely oblivious of my surroundings. For me, the content of MoMA was its glorious collection; the apparatus surrounding the collection was something I barely noticed. But once I was there every week, I began to see how MoMA itself— its history and its narrative of modern art, the fact that it was MoMA —was influencing what I was looking at and the ways in which I was seeing it. I found myself filtering my experiences through the lens of “institutional critique,” an art practice that like Flusser’s apparatus takes as its subject matter the way institutions frame and control discourses surrounding the works of art they exhibit rather than focusing on the content of the works themselves. A more traditional approach would be to isolate a work of art and to appreciate its aesthetic values, while ignoring the context in which it is being displayed and the factors that brought it there. Like Flusser, institutional critique claims that the structures surrounding the works are actually what gives the work much of its meaning, oftentimes controlling the reception of a work in ways we as viewers are unaware of. While institutional critique began in the museum, the practice evolved over time to include everything from the production and distribution of art to an examination of the corporate offices or collectors’ homes where the art was hung. By the 1980s, it roped in art criticism, academic lectures, and art’s reception in the popular press. Around the same time, art schools began offering classes in poststudio practice, where the study of institutional critique became an act of making art in and of itself. So you get works like Hans Haacke’s 1970 MoMA Poll, which was literally a poll that asked viewers: “Would the fact that Governor Rockefeller has not denounced President Nixon’s Indochina Policy be a reason for your not voting for him in November?” Haacke then provided two Plexiglas boxes into which the YES or NO ballots were cast. While, aesthetically, the piece fit into the information-based art of the period, Haacke meant to shed light on the fact that Nelson Rockefeller was a member of MoMA’s board, thereby making visible the normally hidden play of money, power, and politics behind the institution. Another tactic is to take objects from a museum’s collection and rearrange them in ways that highlight the biases of the collection. For instance, in 1993 the artist Fred Wilson critiqued the Maryland Historical Society’s collection in relationship to Maryland’s history of slavery. For this show, he regrouped specific objects from the museum in order to speak of, in Wilson’s words, “a history which the museum and the community wouldn’t talk about: the history of the exclusion and abuse that African-American people experienced in that area.” Other works have focused on the physical institution itself. Andrea Fraser, a performance artist, often acts as a docent, leading groups at museums on false tours, not of the works on the walls, but of the security systems, water fountains, and cafeterias. In 2003, Fraser performed what was perhaps the ultimate work of institutional critique in which a collector paid twenty thousand dollars to sleep with her, “not for sex,” according to Fraser, but “to make an artwork.” What I witnessed at MoMA was institutional critique, being performed not by artists, but by the museum’s visitors. While I was there, I noticed something odd happening in front of Les Demoiselles d’Avignon and other paintings in the museum, something that signified radical shifts in the nature and structure of the museum itself brought on by technology. Instead of reverently standing there in front of Picasso’s masterpiece, scads of visitors were turning their backs on the painting, snapping selfies, and uploading them to social media. I noticed that more visitors were paying attention to their devices than to the artwork on the walls. In every gallery, benches intended for the quiet contemplation of modernist masterpieces were co-opted by smartphone users hunched over their devices. While technology originally claimed to enhance the viewer’s museum experience with one-way audio guides—those high-toned narrators walking you through the collection instructing you how to view the art —today technology works to destabilize the work on the walls. Instead of the official voice of the museum on people’s headphones, now it’s Beyoncé, NPR, Spotify, or any number of different podcasts. This shift, driven by technology, is happening everywhere in culture now, from the massive open online courses (MOOCs) in higher education to crowdsourced knowledge bases like Wikipedia. In the museum, the artwork—along with the museum’s once unassailable top-down museum narrative—for most visitors has become secondary to the experience of actually being there. The art on the walls is the pretense that draws people to the museum, but once they get there, they’re elsewhere: on their smartphones, facebooking, instagramming, vineing, tweeting, periscoping, texting, facetiming—everything, really, except for paying full attention to the art on the walls. The artwork now often acts as a backdrop, evidence that proves to the world you were, in fact, there. Museums in general are alive and well—the Metropolitan Museum of Art reported a record 6.3 million visitors in 2014—but the function of the space has been transformed into a social rather than artistic one: a town square, a place to gather, a place to party, a place to dance, a place to hear music, a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to network, a place to be seen on First Wednesdays and Free Fridays. CHAPTER 7 Lossy and Jaggy Back in college in the late 1970s, I was never the kind of person who brought high-end audiophile equipment into the dorm. In those days, kids would show up to school with speakers the size of refrigerators, chunky solid-state receivers, and turntables that resembled chrome- plated turbine engines. They would set this stuff up to be blown away —literally—hoping to re-create the iconic 1978 Memorex ad in which a shaggy-haired dude in dark shades holds on to his chair for dear life as a hurricane of sound coming out of the speakers threatens to blow him straight back. Inevitably, these people had mediocre taste in music; they were more concerned with how their music sounded than with the music itself. Being a bit of a punk rocker, I tended to go in the opposite direction, listening to crummy lo-fi umpteenth- generation cassette tapes and scratched vinyl, which I played on a cheap all-in-one console that had a turntable, cassette player, radio, and two bottom-end speakers the size of Pop-Tarts boxes. It suited me just fine. I was raised on the trebly sound of AM radio squawking out of transistor radios: for me, if the music couldn’t sound great coming out of tiny speakers, then it wasn’t worth listening to. Later, when CDs came out, I plugged a Discman into that system and the CDs sounded no different than my LPs and cassettes, which sounded no different than the radio. All I heard was the music. Little did I know that in the digital age, my listening habits would win out. In an era when music went portable, music went lo-fi. In order for it to soar across our networks and quickly settle on our devices, music had to lose a good chunk of its sound due to digital compression. While most of us can’t really tell the difference between an MP3 and a CD—particularly when played over a portable device through tinny white earbuds—not everyone is thrilled about this. For years, Neil Young has grumbled about our digitally degraded audio experience, complaining that even our CDs are compromised. According to Young, they contain only 15 percent of the recording information found on the original analog master tracks. MP3s take that down to 5 percent. He even went so far as to make it the theme of a recent roaring half-hour jam called “Driftin’ Back,” which, like many Neil Young songs, is a paean to how much better things were in the past. “We live in the digital age,” Young moans, “and unfortunately it’s degrading our music, not improving.” What happened to the other 95 percent? It was knocked out by the compression it took to make MP3s tiny enough to fly across the networks. Uncompressed digital formats were full resolution: you got 100 percent of the sound but they were unwieldy and huge. In the 1990s scientists witnessing the explosive growth of the web began working on a solution that would create listenable audio files that would be small enough to be streamed or downloaded quickly. They used a technique they called lossy compression, in which redundant or unnecessary information was eliminated (hence the technological etymology: “loss”). When you rip a CD to MP3s, the encoder that converts your disc is a lossy one, removing all the sounds that are either humanly inaudible or are so close together the human ear can’t discern one from another. The compression is a sleight of hand, resulting in a venetian blind version of the song: the missing pieces are then bridged by your ear and brain’s natural ability to fill in the missing gaps, resulting in the illusion of full and continuous sound. In lossless compression formats like FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)—good for downloading but not for streaming—the original, uncompressed data is re-created from the compressed version. When MP3s were in development, the lossy technique was being tested on big, bombastic tracks like late 1950s Nelson Riddle– arranged Sinatra tunes. And they were sounding pretty good: there was so much going on in them that the missing information was unnoticeable. But one day, a scientist working on the compression algorithm was walking down a corridor in the lab and the radio was playing “Tom’s Diner,” Suzanne Vega’s sparse 1981 a cappella song. He stopped and wondered how compression technology would sound on something this stripped down. He saw it as a litmus test for the technology: if an unadorned and unaccompanied human voice like Vega’s was not noticeably altered when compressed, then anything else it was applied to would also pass. After some tinkering, it worked and as a result, the song earned Suzanne Vega the awkward title Mother of the MP3, presumably an appellation she never asked for. Recently a doctoral music student named Ryan Maguire did a project called “The Ghost in the MP3” in which he took all of the audio that was removed from the MP3 compression on “Tom’s Diner” and re-presented it as his own composition. Apropos of its title, it’s an eerie thing. It’s as if Vega’s song was chopped into small pieces and then flung into outer space. You can still vaguely discern the structure of Vega’s song but it’s been disassembled and scattered, awash in faint echoes and lots of reverb. Shards of Vega’s voice, interspersed with random digital glitches, come through loud and clear, then suddenly vanish without explanation. The overall feeling of Maguire’s piece is indeed ghostly, like listening to the inverse of Vega’s song or perhaps an avant-garde ambient remix of it. Still, Neil Young is right: we’re missing most of the richness from our listening experiences. But the surprise is that many people don’t seem to mind. The marks technology leaves on our cultural artifacts —as ugly as they may be to some ears—become Proustian madeleines that plunge us down involuntary memory tunnels. From Phil Spector’s 1960s Wall of Sound, to the chunky Fairlight synthesizers in eighties pop music, to the recent blur of Auto-Tune, entire generations get hooked on these musical tropes. Jonathan Berger, a music professor at Stanford, has noted that his students actually prefer the sound of MP3s to higher quality formats because they signified the sound—they call it the MP3s’ “sizzle”—of their generation. This particular sound of MP3 compression is as much the hallmark of their youthful audio experience as the cracks and pops of vinyl were mine. When CDs came out, the sounds of LPs— skips and pops—were often dropped in as both nostalgic and ironic gestures, warming up the icy digital format. Sometimes, CDs began with the sound of a needle dropping onto a vinyl record, a reminder that new technologies are haunted by the ones that precede them. The MP3 is the latest in a long line of compressed artifacts and technologies. For most people, the pleasures of portability— remember Apple’s enticing tagline for the first-generation of iPods, “1,000 songs in your pocket”—have outweighed the full-spectrum listening experience we’ve lost. Meanwhile, Neil Young tried to remedy his 5 percent problem by developing his own audio format and player called Pono, which restored the full spectrum of missing audio in a semiportable way. It was met with mixed reviews at best: one focus group in a blindfold test couldn’t tell the difference between the Pono and the iPhone, and when used with headphones, the sound of the MP3-based iPhone actually won out. Streaming music services aren’t much better. In order to deliver their music swiftly, they have to compress it. Neil Young recently pulled his music from services like Spotify, claiming that “streaming has ended for me . . . It’s about sound quality. I don’t need my music to be devalued by the worst quality in the history of broadcasting or any other form of distribution . . . When the quality is back, I’ll give it another look. Never say never.” * In the late nineteenth century, visual art set out to shatter romantic preindustrial notions of coherence. In an age when industrial products were being spit out piecemeal on an assembly line, how could one ever again depict the world as unified? So, in his still lifes, Cézanne painted all sides of an apple at once, putting an end to the idea that the world can be seen from our—and only our—point of view. Instead, all objects and ideas are open to multiple interpretations, a Pandora’s box of possibilities. The ante was upped by the cubists who, taking Cézanne one step further, went from one individual seeing an object from many angles, to the many eyes of a crowd seeing many objects from many angles. Their shattered picture planes represented a fourth-dimensional way of seeing, with all perspectives represented simultaneously. Theirs was a networked vision, harnessing the power of the crowd as opposed to the isolation of the individual. In this way, cubism anticipated common computing ideas from crowdsourcing to “hive minds” and “swarm intelligences.” They also were inspired by cinema, in both its experiments with rapid-fire montage and its mechanical mass distribution of imagery. In his book The Language of New Media, the historian Lev Manovich has eloquently written about how cinema is hardwired into the DNA of computing. Alan Turing’s Universal Turing Machine, for instance, was operated by reading and writing numbers on an endless tape, similar to the way a projector reads data from celluloid film. It’s no coincidence that one of the earliest computers, built in 1936 by the German engineer Konrad Zuse, was run off of discarded 35 mm movie film. Similar to the cubists, the Italian futurists began incorporating primitive forms of animation in their paintings. Giacomo Balla’s painting Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash (1912) shows a dachshund’s feet blurred in a whir of motion. In fact, everything in the picture that is moving is depicted as such: the leash is like a series of ghostly threads waving multiple times through the air; the person’s feet walking the dog consists of dozens of flying shoes; even the dachshund’s tail is spinning out of control. Futurism celebrated motion-based technology, depicting frame by frame the speed of the motor car, the rhythmic pounding of the assembly line, and the rat-a- tat of the machine gun. It’s not a far cry from Balla’s early twentieth-century oil on canvas depiction of motion to today’s animated GIFs. The GIF, like the lossy MP3, is a low-resolution format, known in computing terms as jaggy, named for the jagged-edged pixels you see when you zoom in on a lo-res image. Like flipbooks, animated GIFs are made by sequencing a series of still images, hearkening back to the earliest days of cinematic animation technologies like magic lanterns or zoetropes. The best animated GIFs are like pocket cinema, with narratives and punch lines, all unfurling in a matter of seconds, then infinitely looping. And because they have no sound, they have to express strong ideas entirely through visual images, the way silent films did in the early part of the twentieth century. Their brevity, too, has echoes of Edison and the Lumière Brothers, whose reels were often no longer than thirty seconds. The animated GIF is haunted by earlier technologies like painting, cartoons, and cinema. Yet creating animated GIFs is a modern-day craft. Even today, there is no real shortcut to making a dazzling animated GIF, which still must be constructed more or less in a hands-on way. They’re meticulously woven, frame by frame, much as they were two decades ago, which might help to explain why they’re still cherished: the collaboration between human and machine has kept animated GIFs alive as a sort of technological folk art. There’s a theory that the moment something verges on obsolescence, it’s also on the cusp of revival, ready to reincarnate itself into new forms and uses. For example, when the horse was rendered obsolete as a mode of transportation, it found a new role in recreation. Or, in a cellular age, when everyone carries a clock in their pocket, the wristwatch evolved from timekeeper to luxury status object.* And while magazines were once a source of information, today many have come to resemble highly produced coffee-table books, more to be browsed than read. In a similar way, just as the GIF was on the verge of being rendered obsolete by streaming video, it was taken up as an artisanal craft by a small community of GIF builders, who quietly refined them from a jaggy way of communicating information into an art form. Their jumpy lo-res frames had been transformed into lushly looping image streams, depicting a tremendous amount of rich information in an insanely compressed form. Whereas in the beginning they were used to convey actual messages, that task had been usurped by streaming video and Flash, so they were free to become playful and artistic, functioning very much the way that image macros do—visual devices for quick and punchy commentary. It was at this point that they caught the attention of Tumblr founder David Karp, who was so dazzled by the new generation of animated GIFs, that he opened up his platform to them, spurring an explosion of them. Today, Tumblr claims to have twenty-three million animated GIFs uploaded to it each day, and Facebook, which recently started supporting the format, says that five million animations daily are sent through its messaging app. Like emojis, they can convey a great deal of information in a compressed format, the proverbial picture worth a thousand words. An animated GIF is what McLuhan termed cool media. All forms of low-resolution imagery are cool; all forms of high-resolution imagery are hot. Hollywood is hot; animated GIFs are cool. A hot medium does a lot of the work for you. In the cinema, you’re presented with gigantic images in the highest resolution available. McLuhan claimed that as a result cinemagoers are passive spectators; with hi-res there’s not much left to the sensual imagination. All the blanks are filled in for you; you just have to sit back and enjoy. Narrative complexities are carried particularly well in hot media. A sweeping story coupled with beautiful cinematography displayed on a gigantic screen is what we think of as an optimal film- going experience. Low-resolution, or cool media, requires you to do some work, as in the case of MP3s, where your ear has to fill in the blanks in order to give you the illusion that you’re hearing it in higher resolution. Visual forms of cool media include comic strips, in which your mind is forced to make the connections between sequential frames, or television in which your eye must patch the mosaic of benday dots in order to give the illusion of a coherent and rich visual experience. We could say that the entire Internet—a huge compression machine —is a cool medium, one that demands an endless amount of participation. In this way, cool media has a web-based DIY ethos, one that invites you to customize, tinker with, and remix its artifacts. We could say that hot media is “strong” and that cool media is “weak.” But in this case, strong doesn’t mean good and weak doesn’t mean bad; it’s actually just the opposite. For the past decade, art historians Hito Steyerl and Boris Groys have written in favor of “weak images,” claiming that in the digital age, a weak or cool artifact is more democratic than a strong or hot one. The Internet and the artifacts that circulate through it—MP3s, GIFs, JPEGs, AVIs—are all, relatively speaking, low-resolution or weak artifacts. What makes the weak artifact powerful is not its resolution or quality but its abundance and availability—the fact that everyone can possess it, whenever one pleases, often for little or no cost. Think of clicking on a freely available but weak lo-res YouTube video from the comfort of your home versus going out to a cinema to pay for a strong visual experience. Obviously they’re completely different experiences, but Steyerl and Groys argue that the weak experience is stronger because of its low-impact economics and the sheer fact of its availability. Due to its high compression rates, even HD streaming video is weak as compared to broadcast HD or DVD video. Of course this is nothing new: bootleg VHSs and street-stall DVDs have long been a part of the democratic nature of weak images, trading hands for a few dollars and shown under less-than- optimal conditions. Taking cues from both street culture and the counterculture, Steyerl frames the so-called weak image as a type of resistance against consumerism: “In the class society of images, cinema takes on the role of a flagship store. In flagship stores high- end products are marketed in an upscale environment. More affordable derivatives of the same images circulate as DVDs, on broadcast television, or online as poor images.” Politically, she says, the strong image is on the side of “official” culture: capital and corporations. The “poor” image is on the side of “unofficial” culture: file sharing and individuals. Her classification of image quality takes a political turn: “The poor image is a rag or a rip; an AVI or a JPEG, a lumpen proletariat in the class society of appearances, ranked and valued according to its resolution. The poor image has been uploaded, downloaded, shared, reformatted, and reedited.” There’s a humanistic strain to Steyerl’s logic. File-sharing networks create communities, bridging people from all over the world through the exchange of cultural artifacts. And every time a film is ripped, reformatted, remixed, shared, subtitled, and resubtitled, that artifact bears a human trace, marked by human intention. In this way, these altered weak images are palimpsests, containing records of human experience in ways that official out-of-the-box culture, sealed and protected, can only bear one mark—that of the corporation. Because weak artifacts are in circulation, they’re useful and dynamic, as opposed to the moldering reels of 35 mm films that languish in the dark archives of institutions, trotted out on occasion as part of a film festival that few will see. The bootleg is distributed with use-value in mind. In the late 1960s, the Cuban director and screenwriter Julio García Espinosa wrote a manifesto called “For an Imperfect Cinema,” in which he went so far as to claim that “perfect cinema—technically and artistically masterful—is almost always reactionary cinema.” Perfect cinema was made by Hollywood; imperfect cinema could be made by anybody. “Film today,” he complained, “no matter where, is made by a small minority for the masses.” That would change with the advent of Super 8 cameras and escalate in the 1970s and ’80s with the widespread availability of video recorders. But Espinosa was prophetic: in the YouTube age everybody—in the famous words of German conceptual artist Joseph Beuys—is an artist. Weak images, then, are popular images in that they can be made and viewed by the many. Because compression makes it possible for weak images to travel long distances efficiently, they lose information and gain speed. Steyerl claims that “this is precisely why they end up being perfectly integrated into an information capitalism thriving on compressed attention spans, on impression rather than immersion, on intensity rather than contemplation, on previews rather than screenings.” So the problem becomes one of quantity. Who has the time to consume all of these artifacts? It’s all well and good that “everybody is an artist,” but what use is it if no one will ever see your works? Boris Groys puts a twenty-first-century spin on Espinosa: “Whereas before, a chosen few produced images and texts for millions of readers and spectators, millions of producers now produce texts and images for a spectator who has little to no time to read or see them. Earlier . . . one was expected to compete for public attention. One was expected to invent an image or text that would be so strong, so surprising, and so shocking that it could capture the attention of the masses, even if only for a short span of time.” The GIF was succeeded by the JPEG, a compressed format that is able to render images with much greater finesse than its predecessor. The jaggy compression works similarly to the way lossy MP3s do, relying on human psychovisual systems to fill in missing information. When these images are printed, most of the information that makes them look good on the screen is lost, resulting in blocky pixelation, which is why our photographs don’t look as good on paper as they do on our devices. But for some artists, the distortion of low resolution (a cool or weak image) is a gateway to twenty-first- century abstraction. Since 2007, the German photographer Thomas Ruff has taken jaggy low-resolution JPEGs from the web and blown them up to monumental proportions, exhibiting them as framed megaphotographs. His process is one of devaluation: he takes JPEGs from the web and renders them even lower resolution than he found them, compressing them further so that they are, in his words: “worst possible quality JPEGS. Then I get my image.” The dramatic change in scale—from a thumbnail to more than seven feet tall—is shocking, as is his subject matter, which runs the gamut from porn to images of disaster from news sites, such as the burning Twin Towers or Baghdad during the shock and awe siege. Like Steyerl’s weak AVIs or Professor Berger’s students who love the sizzle of MP3s, Ruff’s photographs are a play of human intervention and technology’s fingerprint. When blown up so large, you can really see the compression algorithm at work, as any semblance of visual cohesion is overwhelmed by the complex shades of pixelation at play. One thing these photos reveal is that the underlying structure of our digital images is the grid, a rather basic system of binaries, which when run through an algorithm trick the eye into patching together a seamless image. Because of the play between an iconic image like 9/11 and the blocky pixelation, Ruff’s photographs flicker back and forth between realism and abstraction, being both and yet neither. For his Nudes (1999), giant blowups of porn JPEGs dissolve objects of desire into pixelated nightmares. Ruff seems to be saying that on the web, porn—up close and enlarged—is nothing more than a pile of pixels, an illusion. What fuels your fantasies is technology, not flesh. When you see works from Nudes from across the room you see a coherent image of eroticism, but the closer you get, the more they fall apart. By the time you’re standing in front of them you feel like Austin Powers when he realizes that the beautiful women surrounding him are not women at all, but are actually fembots. Ruff’s work reifies compression technology as the basis for an artistic investigation, one that is at the heart of our daily experience. He asks, “How much visual information is needed for image recognition? A pretty small quantity of data will go a long way for the brain and the computer, both of which take shortcuts for the sake of speedy comprehension . . . Our brain is very brilliant; at interpreting even the lowest resolution, it creates images.” CHAPTER 8 The Writer as Meme Machine “It was while looking at Google’s scan of the Dewey Decimal Classification system that I saw my first one—the hand of the scanner operator completely obscuring the book’s table of contents,” writes the artist Benjamin Shaykin. What he saw disturbed him: it was a brown hand resting on a page of a beautiful old book, its index finger wrapped in a hot-pink condom-like covering. In the page’s lower corner, a watermark bore the words “Digitized by Google.” Shaykin was an MFA student in graphic design at the Rhode Island School of Design when he was given an assignment to choose a book from Brown University’s library that would serve as the basis for a series of projects. Even though he had the physical books readily available, he found it easier, as many people do, to access them through Google Books. Once he came across the first hand, he was hooked, and started digging deeper into Brown’s Special Collections library, which was digitized by Google. He came upon many more anomalies. “In addition to hands and fingers, I found pages scanned through tissue paper, pages scanned while midturn, and foldout maps and diagrams scanned while folded,” he explained. “The examples were everywhere. I quickly became obsessed, and filled my hard drive with gigabytes of downloaded PDFs.” He collected his strangest findings in a book called Google Hands, which ended up as one in a series of a dozen small hand- sewn books, each focused on a different type of glitch. Through social media, he came into contact with like-minded collectors, and they began swapping artifacts. There are several collections of Google hands around the web, each one as creepy as the one Shaykin saw. A small but thriving subculture is documenting Google Books’ scanning process in the form of Tumblrs, printed books, photographs, online videos, and gallery-based installations. Something new is happening here that brings together widespread nostalgia for paperbound books with our concerns about mass digitization. Scavengers obsessively comb through page after page of Google Books, hoping to stumble on some glitch that hasn’t yet been unearthed. This phenomenon is most thoroughly documented on a Tumblr called “The Art of Google Books,” which collects two types of images: analog stains that are emblems of a paper book’s history and digital glitches that result from the scanning. On the site, the analog images show scads of marginalia written in antique script, library DATE DUE stamps from the midcentury, tobacco stains, wormholes, dust motes, and ghosts of flowers pressed between pages. On the digital side are pages photographed while being turned, resulting in radical warping and distortion; the solarizing of woodcuts owing to low-resolution imaging; sonnets transformed by software bugs into pixelated psychedelic patterns; and the ubiquitous images of workers’ hands. The obsession with digital errors in Google Books arises from the sense that these mistakes are permanent, on the record. In 2013, Judge Denny Chin ruled that Google’s scanning, en masse, of millions of books to make them searchable is legal. In the future, more and more people will consult Google’s scans. Because of the speed and volume with which Google is executing the project, the company can’t possibly identify and correct all of the disturbances in what is supposed to be a seamless interface. There’s little doubt that generations to come will be stuck with both these antique stains and workers’ hands. Paul Soulellis is the proprietor of the Library of the Printed Web, which is housed in a pristine industrial space in Long Island City. Soulellis, a graphic designer turned book artist, has built a library that consists entirely of stuff pulled off the web and bound into paper books. One book is nothing more than dozens of images of highways rendered flat by flaws in Google Earth’s mapping algorithm. There are grubby, stapled zines consisting of printed Twitter feeds, books of CAPTCHAs (an acronym for “Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart”) presented as visual poetry, collections of photos of dogs with glowing eyes culled from Flickr, and lots of books where “photographers” have selected uncanny moments from Google Street View. While most of them are cheap, print-on-demand editions, a few are highly produced art books. One of the most beautiful books in the library is a collection of hundreds of crummy JPEGs of variations on the Mona Lisa (think the Mona Lisa morphed with E.T., made by a fourteen- year-old), printed on thick, handmade paper, and accordion folded into an expensive slipcase; the combination of the crappy and the crafted is weirdly effective. Then there are absurdly large projects, such as a ninety-six-volume set called Other People’s Photographs, which scoops up material from random Flickr pages. Amusing and titillating as these images are, it’s easy to forget that they’re the work of an army of invisible laborers—the Google hands. This is the subject of an art work by the Brooklyn-based artist Andrew Norman Wilson called ScanOps. The project began in 2007, when Wilson was contracted by a video-production company to work on the Google campus. He noted sharp divisions between the workers; one group, known as ScanOps, were sequestered in their own building. These were data-entry workers, the people to whom those mysterious hands belonged. Wilson became intrigued by them, and began filming them walking to and from their ten-hour shifts in silence. He was able to capture a few minutes of footage before Google security busted him. In a letter to his boss explaining his motives, Wilson remarked that most of the ScanOps workers were people of color. He wrote, “I’m interested in issues of class, race and labor, and so out of general curiosity, I wanted to ask these workers about their jobs.” In short order, he was fired. His video later became an art installation called Workers Leaving the Googleplex, a play on the title of the first film ever shown in public, the Lumière brothers’ Workers Leaving the Lumière Factory (1895), as well as a remake by the German filmmaker Harun Farocki simply called Workers Leaving the Factory (1995). Wilson’s Google experiences have also resulted in a series of beautiful gallery installations, with large, saturated color photos of those same workers’ hands. Wilson reminds us that we, too, are contributing our own labor to the company’s bottom line. He writes, “Everyone who uses the free Google perks—Gmail, cloud-storage, Google Books, Blogger, YouTube—becomes a knowledge worker for the company. We’re performing freestyle data entry. Where knowledge is perceived as a public good, Google gathers its income from the exchange of information and knowledge, creating additional value in this process. Google, as we know it and use it, is a factory.” Soulellis calls the Library of the Printed Web “an accumulation of accumulations,” much of it printed on demand. In fact, he says that “I could sell the Library of the Printed Web and then order it again and have it delivered to me in a matter of days.” Since the advent of electronic readers, there’s been a lot of hand-wringing about the demise of the printed page. And for a while, it looked like things were headed in one direction as bookstores folded and e-book sales soared. In an unanticipated twist, in 2015 e-book sales began slowing and print sales began climbing again. It turns out that people read both formats—the Kindle on the train and the paper version at home. In addition, cheap print-on-demand services like Lulu, which offer free PDFs along with physical copies for sale of any given title, have made it possible for people to publish and to buy the kinds of books Soulellis traffics in and proves once again that we’re neither one way nor the other. Straddling the physical and the digital, we’re inhabiting many spaces at the same time in ways that were unthinkable just a decade ago. What if the poetic has left the poem in the same way Elvis has left the building? Long after the limo pulled away, the audience was still in the arena screaming for more, but poetry escaped out the back door and onto the Internet, where it is taking on new forms that look nothing like poetry. Poetry as we know it—sonnets or free verse on a printed page—feels akin to throwing pottery or weaving quilts, activities that continue in spite of their cultural marginality. But the Internet, with its swift proliferation of memes, is producing more extreme forms of modernism than modernism ever dreamed of. These are the ideas of the Canadian media scholar Darren Wershler, who has been making some unexpected connections between meme culture and contemporary poetry. “These artifacts,” Wershler claims, “aren’t conceived of as poems; they aren’t produced by people who identify as poets; they circulate promiscuously, sometimes under anonymous conditions; and they aren’t encountered by interpretive communities that identify them as literary.” Examples include a Nigerian e-mail scammer who writes out the entire Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets in longhand, a data engineer who renders the entire text of Moby Dick into emoticons, and a library scientist who converts Ulysses into QR codes. Wershler calls these activities “conceptualism in the wild,” referring to the aspect of 1960s conceptual art that concerned reframing, and thereby redefining, the idea of artistic genius (think of Duchamp’s urinal). Conceptual projects of the period were generated by a kind of pre-Internet OCD, such as Sol LeWitt’s exhaustive photographic documentation of every object, nook, and cranny in his Manhattan loft, or Tehching Hsieh’s yearlong practice of taking a photo of himself every hour, on the hour. Today’s conceptualists in the wild make those guys look tame. It’s not uncommon to see blogs that recount someone’s every sneeze since 2007, or of a man who shoots exactly one second of video every day and strings the clips together in time-lapse mashups. There is a guy who secretly taped all his conversations for three years and a woman who documents every morsel of food she puts into her mouth. While some of these people aren’t consciously framing their activities as works of art, Wershler argues that what they’re doing is so close to the practices of sixties conceptualism that the connection between the two can’t be ignored. And he’s right. Younger writers find it stimulating: they are reclaiming this “found” poetry and uploading it to the self-publishing platform Lulu. They create print-on-demand books that most likely will never be printed but will live as PDFs on Lulu—their de facto publisher and distributor. These are big, ridiculous books, like a 528- page book that reprints every single tweet that contains the word “McNugget”; or a book that appropriates more than 400 pages’ worth of Discogs listings of small-bit session players from long-forgotten 1970s LPs; or a project that converts Gertrude Stein’s difficult modernist text Tender Buttons into illegible computer code; or a fifty- eight-page list poem of poets’ names followed by their presumed economic status: “John Ashbery is a rich poet.” “Amiri Baraka is comfortable.” Quality is beside the point. This type of content is about the quantity of language that surrounds us, and about how difficult it is to render meaning from such excesses. In the past decade, writers have been culling the Internet for material and making books that are more focused on collecting than on reading. It’s not clear who, if anyone, actually reads these, although they are often cited by other writers working in the same mode. There are few critical systems in place to identify which books are better than others. For now, these authors function on a flat, horizontal field creating a communitarian body of work in which one idea or one author is interchangeable with another. This ethos is evident on the smart art blog the Jogging, where artworks in the form of JPEGs are posted semi-anonymously and, like all blogs, last only until they are pushed off the page by newer works. It is an ephemeral amnesiac data flow, one that swaps the art world’s market-driven frenzy for networked global visibility. On the Jogging, it isn’t really the individual posts that count: the blog’s métier lies in its ceaseless and restless stream of information. The best images on the Jogging are the ones that walk a fine line between sharp humor and weird ambiguity, such as a hacked black- and-white iconic photo of Fidel Castro chomping on his famous cigar. The only alteration the artist made to the found image is a photoshopped blue dot at the end of his cigar. The title is the reveal: Che Guevara Smoking an E-Cig. Not obviously funny enough to be a meme, it’s a sly twenty-first-century mutation of a twentieth-century icon, one that welds critiques of power, commodity, history, advertising, and technology into an Internet readymade. Another image is entitled wlan router under water, which shows exactly that: two wireless routers photoshopped onto the floor of a swimming pool while the legs of swimmers dangle nearby. It looks like something out of Jaws, ciphered through the digital age. The surreal warping of entertainment and technology—hallmarks of the Jogging—conflate leisure with danger: Wouldn’t plugged-in routers electrocute everyone in the water, killing them faster than sharks would? Or is this a new technology that allows Wi-Fi underwater so that the swimmers could tweet while diving? For now, it’s a sci-fi idea, but in the forthcoming “Internet of things”—where intelligent everyday objects such as appliances communicate with one another over the web—we’ll surely be able to tweet underwater while swimming via a network that’s hardwired into the architecture of a pool. These works are meant to be quickly favorited, reblogged, and forgotten. They embrace the blips and flickers of the screen, celebrating the life span of a meme as a metric for artistic legacy. Yet the irony is that because the blog ended in 2014, they are now preserved for eternity—or at least until somebody pulls the plug on Tumblr. By then the images hosted there will have been indexed, spidered, and mirrored so many times that their eradication will be virtually impossible, ensuring them a place in a virtual pantheon. In the twentieth century, many artists who claimed to want to burn down museums ended up enshrined in them. The same remains true for the twenty-first: young artists wishing to skirt conventional valorization by the art establishment have, by posting their works on the web, inadvertently become preserved for posterity by the search engine. Fifty years ago, when Andy Warhol said things like “I want to be a machine” and “It’s easier not to care,” he was romanticizing the formal and emotional cleanliness of machine-based production. Humans, after all, court messiness. Warhol’s salvo is extended by today’s Internet poets, who resemble zombies more than inspired bards, gathering and shoveling hoards of inert linguistic matter into programs, flipping switches, letting it rip, and producing poetry on the scale of WikiLeaks cables. Imagine the writer as a meme machine, writing works with the intention for them to ripple rapidly across networks only to evaporate as quickly as they appear. Imagine poetry that is vast, instantaneous, horizontal, globally distributed, paper thin, and, ultimately, disposable. R. Sikoryak is a graphic novelist who has been drawing unoriginal comics for more than a quarter of a century. Inspired by a mix of Raw magazine (to which he contributed) and John Cage (he once drew a strip version of Cage’s aleatory work Indeterminacy), Sikoryak meticulously redraws well-known historical comics and mashes them up with classic works of literature. His book Masterpiece Comics includes strange works like Dante’s Inferno drawn as a series of Bazooka Joe bubblegum comics, and Camus’s The Stranger as the story line for a Superman strip. His most recent project takes a more conceptual twist. This time, instead of classic literature, he’s matched appropriated comics with the complete text of the iTunes Terms and Conditions for a total of seventy pages, published in three comic books. “Instead of taking an important book that no one has read,” Sikoryak says, “I’ve taken an agreement that none of us have read and have made an unreadable book out of it.” All of the classic comics protagonists—Charlie Brown, Dilbert, Spider-Man, Richie Rich—have been redrawn to resemble Steve Jobs, replete with scraggly beard and round glasses. Each page presents a different cartoon style; every source is cited in a bibliography in the back of the book. There are lovely details: Snoopy’s doghouse is branded with an Apple logo; Hellboy, posing as Jobs, is battling a monster listening to an iPod with white earbud cords dangling from his head. Why would someone want to do this? Sikoryak, when I asked him, had an avant-garde response: “What would be the most absurd text to put into a comic, the least likely thing to do?” He also selected the legal code because—somewhat surprisingly, given the nature of his work—he’s never had any legal problems. This got him wondering whether those miles of tiny legal print ever really amount to anything. Sikoryak’s book also speaks to how, after decades of scanning, file sharing, and cutting and pasting, notions of copyright and authorship in the comics world have relaxed. Bill Kartalopoulos, a comics historian and series editor of the Best American Comics series, told me that pirating, copying, bootlegging, and plagiarism have been around since the beginning of modern comics history. “The foundational nineteenth-century graphic novels of Swiss cartoonist Rodolphe Töpffer were pirated in France, England, and elsewhere,” Kartalopoulos says. “At that time, if the French wanted to produce a pirated edition of Töpffer’s Swiss book, someone would literally have to redraw and re-engrave his images onto wood blocks. Later, in the nineteen-thirties and forties, small bootleg comic books called ‘Tijuana Bibles’—also referred to at the time as ‘Fuck Books’— were sold under the table, featuring famous cartoon characters like Popeye and Little Orphan Annie in explicit sexual situations that didn’t normally present themselves on the daily newspaper page.” By the sixties and seventies, with the counterculture in full swing, everyone from the situationists—who whited out speech balloons and filled them with political text—to the Air Pirates, a collective of Bay Area hippies, were copying and repurposing famous comic strips. The Air Pirates adopted the styles of an array of historical cartoonists as their own (including Krazy Kat artist George Herriman and turn-of-the-century cartoonist Frederick Burr Opper). In Air Pirates Funnies, they took on the Disney entertainment empire and redrew Mickey, Minnie, and company Tijuana Bible–style: smuggling drugs and having orgies. Wanting to stick it to the man, they made sure Disney was aware of their activities. Disney, predictably, sued. They later settled with Air Pirate Dan O’Neill and made him promise never to draw Mickey Mouse again. Thirty-year-old Blaise Larmee may best exemplify that stick-it-to- the-man attitude. Mostly, he uses web platforms to mess with the comics establishment. Modeling his practice on the situationists, he adores misattribution, altering other people’s comics by inserting his own texts into speech balloons, which end up getting reblogged as authentic artifacts. He once pretended he was named editor for Best American Comics and posted his announcement on a bogus Chris Ware Tumblr he created. He added a note that promised: “If you reblog this Tumblr image, your work will be included in the book.” Asked why he does these things, he answers, “Because I can.” His most perplexing work may be Labor Day Comic, a series of screenshots of mundane tasks that he performed on his computer over the course of one Labor Day. He strung these images, one after another, onto a blog, and called it a comic strip. Frame by frame, we watch him download a Vangelis album from MediaFire—taking screen caps every step of the way—then uploading these images to Flickr, and finally posting the whole process to Blogger. The title suggests a political edge: is this what labor looks like now? The Greek artist Ilan Manouach takes a more directly political stance in his work. He’s most famous for his book Katz, which is a reinterpretation of Art Spiegelman’s Maus except that all the characters—Nazis, Jews, Poles—are drawn with cats’ heads. (In the original, Jews are drawn as mice, while non-Jewish Germans and Poles are drawn as cats and pigs, respectively.) Besides this, not a single word or image was added or removed. The book caught the legal ire of Spiegelman’s French publisher, Flammarion, and the entire run of one thousand copies was pulped. He did something similar with Les Schtroumpfs noirs (The Black Smurfs), a comic originally published in 1963. In the story, a Smurf village is infected by a black fly that bites all the villagers, turning them from their natural blue color to black, and making them go mad. A cure is finally found and every Smurf is restored to blue. When the book was later turned into an animation, the Smurfs were changed from black to purple to avoid the racial subtexts. Manouach made a facsimile of the original, but transposed each of the book’s four colors onto the cyan plate, resulting in a book that is entirely blue. For his most recent project, Tintin Akei Kongo, Manouach took the most popular Tintin adventure in Francophone Africa, Tintin au Congo (1931), and had it translated for the first time into Lingala, the official Congolese dialect, without the permission of the publisher. The pirated book will never officially be distributed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo—only one hundred copies have been brought to Kinshasa so far—but for Manouach: “It’s the idea, the provocation, the critique, that is important.” Manouach sees himself as an agitator, a sort of Hans Haacke of the comics world. Trained as a conventional comic book artist, he grew restless by what he perceived to be the limits of the comics world. “There’s not much critical discourse in comics and not much questioning of convention,” he says. “Instead, there’s a lot of nostalgia, which has kept comics politically and aesthetically conservative.” “Certainly there are many issues connected to fair use that are still in flux, and these artists are all troubling those waters in interesting ways,” says Kartalopoulos. “Comics have historically been considered part of commercial popular culture, and existed to the side of modernist developments for much of the twentieth century. What’s most exciting to me is that now there is a growing critical mass of well-rounded comics artists who are comfortably bringing their avant-garde legacy to the form.” There is also, these days, a renewed sense of the political power of cartooning, in the wake of the attack on Charlie Hebdo and the debates that have followed. These artists’ strategies—Sikoryak’s remixings, Manouach’s recontextualizations, Larmee’s provocations—bring a contemporary set of conceptual tools to the making of comics, tools that could prove helpful in navigating the swift-moving waters of the Internet age. The Internet is indeed changing our ways of reading and writing. Few want to read War and Peace sitting in front of a computer screen; it’s the wrong place for in-depth, lengthy reading, which is better done offline, either on paper or on our devices. When we are in front of a computer hitched to a fast web connection, the last thing we want to do is stop, slow down, and do only one thing. Idling on a highway is antithetical to the medium. Instead, our time in front of a machine is active time: we’re clicking and seeking, harvesting and communicating. Our ways of reading and writing, then, while on the web, reflect this active state. Offering coping strategies, any number of articles tell us to keep our e-mails short, that lengthy e-mails will most likely go unread. They offer suggestions like “commit to making every message five sentences long—or less” and “treat all email responses like SMS text messages, using a set number of letters per response.” The migration to short forms of writing and reading that we’re witnessing—shorter e-mails, tweets, SMS messages—are the latest in a long line of compressed language: hieroglyphs, ideograms, haiku, Morse code, telegrams, newspaper headlines, the old Times Square news zipper, advertising slogans, concrete poems, and desktop icons. Writing on electronic platforms is transforming aspects of our daily communication into constraint-based writing, a method of writing according to preordained rules initially explored in the 1960s and ’70s by a group of French writers who called themselves the Oulipo (Ouvroir de littérature potentielle / Workshop of Potential Literature). They devised formulas for writing that were more akin to mathematics than they were to literature. A famous Oulipian constraint is called n+7, which involves replacing each noun in a text with the seventh one following it in a dictionary, so that the Declaration of Independence run through an n+7 operation, as the poet Rosmarie Waldrop did in her poem “Shorter American Memory of the Declaration of Independence” begins: “We holler these trysts to be self-exiled that all manatees are credited equi-distant, that they are endured by their Creditor with cervical unanswerable rims.” The writer, bound by the constraints, accepts the results, regardless of how unappealing they may be to one’s own literary sensibilities. Perhaps the most well known work of Oulipo writing is Georges Perec’s La disparition, a 300-page novel that never uses the letter e. (The English translation of the book, A Void, which also doesn’t contain the letter e, is an equally stunning feat.) Other methods used by the group include anagrams, palindromes, and Fibonacci sequences. By swapping more traditional compositional methods for mechanically inspired ones, the Oulipo anticipated some of the ways we’d use language in the digital age. Every time we tweet, using a 140-character constraint, we could be said to be composing an Oulipian poem. When Twitter gives us a constraint, we agree to comply with it, bending our language to suit its agenda. Few people throw up their arms and say, “I’m refusing to write in 140 characters. I will only write in 190 characters.” Instead, by adapting ourselves to its platform, we find it a perfectly adequate way to express ourselves under a tight constraint. The parameters of Twitter are far from arbitrary: the 140-character constraint emerged from SMS culture, in which the standard character limit is 160 characters, minus 20 characters for the username. People often grumble that on the web we’ve lost the craftsmanship of writing. But on Twitter, I often see a great deal of craft going into the composition of tweets. The constraint alone brings craft to the fore: how can I say something with such limited real estate? And then there is the game of the compositional method itself: watching the character count dwindle, then precisely editing and revising the tweet so it will fit into its allotted space. We substitute ampersands for “ands,” delete commas, double spaces, and redundant words, use hashtags, and employ URL shorteners to craft the most compressed language possible. Many of our tweets go through this highly edited process, finally arriving at a perfect tweet, one in which a punchy statement is made with no characters left. Sometimes at the end of this process when we hit Send, we feel like we’ve posted a small literary jewel. Twitter doesn’t come with a how-to manual. We learn it by playing it. We tailor our writing to the game: be pithy, be clever, be polemical, and there’s a chance you’ll be read and retweeted; be mundane, be dull, only retweet others, and you’ll most likely be on the lower end of the game. As novelist Sheila Heti put it, “You know within a matter of seconds if your tweet was successful.” Twitter is reminiscent of Wittgenstein’s concept of language games, in which he tried to tease out the unwritten rules of how we use language. Wittgenstein conceived of language as a board game involving, at the minimum, two players: a sender and a receiver. Speaking a sentence, he said, is like moving a piece on a board; the other player’s response is the next move. What ensues is a conversation, an elaborate demonstration of the rules, structures—and inevitably, the faults and failings—of human language. Almost like an alien discovering language for the first time—William S. Burroughs referred to language as “a virus from outer space”—Wittgenstein questioned basic linguistic tenets: how our rules were developed, acquired, accepted, their various uses, and importantly, how they can be broken. A language game, Wittgenstein informs us, is a delicate one: failure to play well will result in potentially tragic misunderstanding. Social media sets up the game board, gives you the structure, pieces, and a stage on which to play, but outside of some underlying rules—edicts prohibiting impersonation, violence, threats, violation of copyright, etc.—it comes with no instructions. Like language itself, its norms evolve through community engagement; trial and error shows what works (what people respond to well) and what doesn’t. The rules of the game continually change with the platform, which is constantly tweaked to accommodate those ever-evolving rules, along with user feedback and investor concerns. The language itself inscribed into the interface is determinative of the platform’s tenor. The word “follower” on Twitter or Instagram means something very different than Facebook’s “friend.” Followers imply that there are leaders—a vertically quantifiable power dynamic—whereas the concept of friendship is more ambiguous and horizontal. On Twitter and Instagram, there’s always someone with more followers than you, making them more powerful than you, as opposed to Facebook’s limit of five thousand friends, an accomplishment attainable by many, therefore roughly democratic at heart.* While we often use Twitter followers as a metric of power, we rarely do the same with Facebook friends. Followers, a synonym for sycophants, are endlessly expansive, emphasizing the underlying cutthroat power dynamic in play. These same power dynamics are expressed throughout some of the most popular forums in digital culture. Take the tech blog Boing Boing, for instance. They’re one of the most visible blogs on the web, but they create very little original content. Rather they act as a filter for the morass of information, pulling up the best stuff. The fact of Boing Boing linking to something far outweighs the thing they’re linking to. The culture of citation and name-checking on the web has resulted in a cascade of “re-” gestures: retweeting, reblogging, regramming, and reposting. Good citation determines the worth of, say, your blog or your Twitter feed, warping the once-disdained idea of name-dropping into a widespread, powerful practice. Social media is an economy of citation rather than engagement. For instance, on a larger Twitter feed—which is connected to the site of avant-garde artifacts I’ve run for the past two decades—we’ll tweet out something very obscure, lengthy, or difficult. Within a matter of moments, it’s been retweeted dozens of times. No one had the time to actually engage with what we’ve tweeted, rather it’s something they’ve heard or knew about—name-checking—and were eager to pass along to their followers. Twitter’s tweet activity dashboard shows this to be true. On a tweet that had 31,861 impressions, was retweeted 151 times, and liked 245 times, there was only 66 actual engagements with the content I was linking to. And from that one tweet, the feed only garnered one new follower. This point is made in an even more direct way when I mistweet a broken link. No matter. Broken link and all, it’s still retweeted ad infinitum. While word of mouth has always been the way certain types of information have been passed along, in the digital world, strong cultural capital is accumulated being the originator of something that is widely retweeted or regrammed. As social media evolves, it gets twitchier, charting micromovements in ever-subtler ways—I now see who has retweeted a tweet I have retweeted—which keeps us in the game tallying up the likes and glued to the screen. Twitter’s linguistic roots lie deep in modernism. James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake, perhaps the most unreadable book ever written has, uncannily, set the stage for hashtags. Joyce’s book, published in 1939, was written as a linguistic dreamscape (it was labeled by one critic as “dreamspeak”), one that sought to bring the language of dreams and sleep to the page. To write the Wake, Joyce crammed notebooks with random thoughts and snippets of language he heard spoken on the street, on the radio, or read in newspapers, which became so dense and thick that even Joyce himself, with his notoriously bad eyesight, couldn’t decipher them. Instead, he began transcribing exactly what he saw in its messy state to a typewritten page. He then further mangled the language by splitting up some words and recombining others, forming complex compound words, not dissimilar to the way the German language works. So you get compound neologisms like supershillelagh, happygogusty, soundhearing, smellsniffing, and neverheedthemhorseluggarsandlistletomine. They’re all readable; you just have to be patient and read them closely, carefully deciphering each word. Because hashtags and URLs allow no spaces, compound words became necessary. Some examples of long, Joycean domains are: http://www.thelongestdomainnameintheworldand thensomeandthensomemoreandmore.com/ http://www.abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzabcdefghi jklmnopqrstuvwxyzabcdefghijk.com/ http://llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwlll lantysiliogogogoch.co.uk/ (named after a Welsh village) http://3.141592653589793238462643383279502884197169 399375105820974944592.com/ (the first sixty-five numbers of pi) Throughout Finnegans Wake, Joyce punctuated the text with ten one-hundred-letter words that he called thunderclaps, which are comprised of words in various languages etymologically, visually, and aurally that relate to the theme of thunder. He uses these words to break up the book into several chapters, referring to various periods of cultural history, from the fall of Adam and Eve: bababadalgharaghtakamminarronnkonnbronntonnerron ntuonnthunntrovarrhounawnskawntoohoohoordenen thurnuk . . . to Thor, the Norse god of thunder . . . Ullhodturdenweirmudgaardgringnirurdrmolnirfenrirluk kilokkibaugimandodrrerinsurtkrinmgernrackinarockar . . . which has 101 letters, and is thus able to fit in a 140- character tweet with thirty-nine characters left to spare. The first Twitter hashtag, published by the former Google designer Chris Messina in 2007, was #barcamp, referring to a technology conference called BarCamp. Notice, though, how Messina dropped the capital letters, making it less readable and more perplexing; by stripping out the capitals, he landed himself squarely in Joycean territory. Today, Twitter and Instagram are flooded with words that could be straight out of the Wake: #photooftheday, #follow4follow, #iphone only, #dylanobrienfanpage, or #themazerunnermovie. Aping the speed of technology, linguistic compression was at the heart of modernism. In 1906, the anarchist art critic Félix Fénéon published anonymously composed three-line novellas as filler in the Paris daily newspaper Le Matin. They were intended as sidebars or distractions to the bigger stories of the day, compressed as digestible sound bites of the day’s news: Responding to a call at night, M. Sirvent, café owner of Caissargues, Gard, opened his window; a rifle shot destroyed his face. On the stake where they tied him up, four amateur policemen beat with sticks the young thief Dutoit, of Malakoff, whom they caught. As her train was slowing down, Mme. Parlucy, of Nanterre opened up and leaned out. A passing express cracked both her skull and the door. Fénéon’s faits divers were much more than newspaper filler. Delicately meshing form with function, they were tiny poems in the guise of compressed Zolaesque potboilers, meant to quietly explode on the newspaper page where they were snuggled among more “important” stories. Intended to fly under the radar, they were subversive and, like well-honed tweets, gorgeously crafted. It’s no wonder that a century later they’d be recognized as poetry. Predictably, Fénéon’s “novellas” today have their own Twitter feed. Perhaps inspired by gestures like Fénéon’s, a group of Italian futurists in 1915 claimed: “It’s stupid to write one hundred pages where one would do.” It was advice that Ernest Hemingway would heed when he composed the shortest novel ever, consisting of six words—a mere thirty-three characters (spaces and punctuation included)—which he penned in the 1920s: For sale: baby shoes, never worn. Allegedly written on a lark as a bet among a group of drunken writers in a New York restaurant as to who could write a six-word novel, Papa scribbled his quickly down on a cocktail napkin and won. While it displays all of Hemingway’s characteristic wit and brilliance, research has shown the story to be apocryphal. These words had been kicking around in various forms in newspapers and advertisements before Hemingway snagged them. In 1906, an ad read: “For sale, baby carriage; never been used. Apply at this office.” And in 1912, another ad, perhaps inspired by the first, said: “Baby’s hand made trousseau and baby’s bed for sale. Never been used.” Like a game of telephone, variations on this theme continued throughout the early twentieth century. Clearly, Hem—a newspaperman—dug into his vast mental knowledge of the field and, on the spot, reframed preworn ad copy, claiming it as an original— and brilliant—novel. Hemingway’s gesture is a reminder that all language is preexisting and that smart recontextualization can often make used words new. On the web—an environment where language is cut and pastable—claiming originality is a tricky game. If you can think of it, it already exists on the Internet, which is why people often come up with the identical concept at the same time, a phenomenon known as multiple discovery. As the mathematician Farkas Bolyai noted: “When the time is ripe, these things appear in different places in the manner of violets coming to light in early spring.” In 2014, the visual artist Cory Arcangel published a book about procrastination called Working On My Novel, which was repurposed from his Twitter feed, which only retweeted tweets that contained the phrase “working on my novel.” He then culled the best of them into a paperbound book. Each page contains one tweet: Currently working on my novel and listen to really nice music. Yeah I’m a writer deal with it. Sierra Brown—1:25 AM—1 Dec 12 I’m working on my novel again, and it feels good, you guys. I love my mind. Stephen Mangol—11:44 PM —23 Sep 12 As Arcangel explains, “Part of the fun was that if you’re twittering about how you’re working on your novel, you’re probably not working on your novel! I love these situations.” What were they doing instead of writing? Wasting time on the Internet—which is exactly what Arcangel was doing when he wrote this book, though artists routinely waste time as part of their creative process, thereby cleverly and self-reflexively conflating procrastination with production. In 2010, the Pulitzer Prize–winning fiction writer Jennifer Egan published an 8,500-word story consisting of tweets—one tweet a minute, in one-hour-daily bursts—over nine days on the New Yorker website. Although the text was written beforehand, Egan’s story was as much about critiquing distribution—isn’t Twitter supposed to be spontaneous?—as it was about what she was writing. But what she was writing was good: each tweet stands alone as a self-contained tweet, yet builds, tweet by tweet, into a narrative. Her Twitter novel begins: People rarely look the way you expect them to, even when you’ve seen pictures. The first thirty seconds in a person’s presence are the most important. If you’re having trouble perceiving and projecting, focus on projecting. Necessary ingredients for a successful projection: giggles; bare legs; shyness. The goal is to be both irresistible and invisible. It ends 607 tweets later with: You won’t know for sure until you see them crouching above you, their faces taut with hope, ready to jump. Egan’s twitter novel is a lovely rebuttal to Arcangel’s book. She had actually been working on her novel for over a year, but then distributed it quickly and “spontaneously,” blasted out in crystalline perfection over social media. Since 2010, Steve Roggenbuck has been producing poetry that is made, distributed, and viewed almost exclusively on the web, taking the form of Facebook posts, YouTube videos, and image macros. He became best known for a series of videos that show Roggenbuck either in bare apartments or out in the forest, manically improvising poems that celebrate the cosmos and our place in it. In one video, he screams at a gray sky: “Make something beautiful before you are dead . . . Maybe you should stand in the rain! You’re alive right now!” But this ain’t no tree hugger or Iron John. There’s an intensity and an edge to his work verging on violence, which is at once terrifying, hypnotic, and completely moving. Roggenbuck uses shaky handheld cameras, hazy inspirational background music, and rough jump cuts. Purposely aping the look of amateur videos strewn across YouTube, they are meticulously crafted infomercials for poetry. In another video, Roggenbuck, with his boyish acned face, thick eyebrows, and scruffy hair, stares intensely into the camera and asks: “I’m interested in marketing, but I’m mainly interested in marketing the moon. Do you love the light of the moon, sir? And if you don’t, can I convince you?” Along with Tao Lin, Roggenbuck is one of the bright stars of Alt Lit, an online writing community that emerged in 2011 and harnesses the casual affect and jagged stylistics of social media as the basis of their works—poems, stories, novels, tweets, and status updates. Its members have produced a body of distinctive literature marked by direct speech, expressions of aching desire, and wide-eyed sincerity. (“language is so cool. i can type out these shapes and you can understand me,” or “Yay! Dolphins are beautiful creatures and will always have a wild spirit. I have been very lucky because I have had the awesome experience of swimming with dolphins twice.”) The poems and stories, published on blogs and Twitter feeds, are usually written in the Internet vernacular of lowercase letters, inverted punctuation, abundant typos, and bad grammar. While other web- based poetry movements exploit appropriated text—cutting and pasting or scooping vast amounts of preexisting data—Alt Lit tends to use emo-heavy, homespun language that bears the urgency and candor of a status update; no sentiment is too trite to be repurposed as poetry. This type of writing has deep roots, extending back to the cosmological visions of William Blake, through the direct observation poems of the imagists, the anti-art absurdities of Dada, and the nutty playfulness of surrealism. In the second half of the twentieth century, a major touchstone is the beats, particularly Allen Ginsberg’s spontaneous mind poems, Jack Kerouac’s unfiltered spew, and Gary Snyder’s environmental consciousness. The concrete poet Aram Saroyan’s purposely misspelled single-word poem “lighght” is a model for much of the wordplay that occurs here (gorgeous moments like the reimagining of the words “can,t” and “youuuuu”). But there’s a punk-inspired outlaw energy rippling through much of the work here. Alt Lit and its siblings Weird Twitter (a group of writers who abuse the platform’s 140-character conventions) and Flarf (an early Internet poetry movement), cull poems that feel like the Internet itself, jammed with screen caps of Twitter updates, image macros, and photoshopped collages that appear between lineated verse, short stories, and blog entries. One prominent Weird Twitter poet is Jacob Bakkila, then a BuzzFeed employee who between 2011 and 2013 wrote under the pseudonym of @Horse_ebooks, a feed that was widely presumed to have been written by a spambot. The feed was widely followed; people were charmed that a bot could’ve come up with lines like: “Their negativity only served to push me deeper into the realms of soap making” or “HOLY COW!! . . . DOG TOYS ARE GETTING EXPENSIVE WHY NOT.” In 2013, Bakkila announced that the feed was indeed authored by him and that the project was finished. When @Horse_ebooks was thought to be a machine, the misspellings, non sequiturs, and fractured sentences were charming, the by-products of an inferior literary “mind” whose struggle to get it right humanized it. In his video “‘AN INTERNET BARD AT LAST!!!’ (ARS POETICA),” Roggenbuck talks about his debt to the past. “Five and a half years ago, I read Walt Whitman and it changed my life,” he says. “Walt Whitman had made me appreciate my life more actively than I had ever appreciated it before. Walt makes you step back and say, the world is wonderful, this whole thing that is going on is wonderful. Pay attention to what is going on.” Technology is the key. “The purpose of the Bard is my purpose,” he says. “This is the dream for poets, to be a poet when the Internet exists. Man! We got an opportunity!” The video concludes with Roggenbuck connecting the past and present: “You know that Walt Whitman would die for this, that Walt Whitman would be on a TweetDeck, kicking his legs up, and going ha-a-a- ard.” CODA The Revolution Will Be Mobilized AT&T recently ran a series of ads promoting its merger with DirecTV that had the tagline: “The revolution will not only be televised, the revolution will be mobilized.” One ad opens by showing various nighttime locations in New York City with lots of screens—places like Times Square and sports bars. At the same time the denizens of those locations are all glued to their mobile devices. It’s a hyperconnected, super-distracted world; everyone is furiously multitasking, keeping one eye on their device and the other on the huge public screens. Suddenly, without warning, the screens glitch and go black. In the silent darkness, the camera pans across legions of bewildered and frightened faces that look up from their devices hoping for some explanation. Then, in another instant, the screens blink and flash back to life. The camera pans across the crowd, visibly relieved. Their smiling faces are now glued to the reactivated screens, which display clips from films like The Matrix, with Morpheus saying, “After this, there is no turning back.” A user picks up his smartphone to find Mr. Spock proclaiming, “History is replete with turning points.” A woman swipes a giant touch screen that displays a jubilant fist-pumping A-Rod, as a voice-over screams, “When fantasy becomes reality!” The ad ends with the final scene of Casablanca, projected on the skyscrapers of Wall Street: “Louie, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship,” ballyhooing the convergence of TV and mobile media. The future has arrived and it’s better than we expected. In that one glitch, it’s as if the entire world got a huge reboot into the future. The ad, with its mix of hope, fear, and redemption, brought to mind the Y2K hysteria. Just past midnight in 2000 on that New Year’s Eve when the world didn’t end, my sister-in-law, a historian at Berkeley, explained to us that traditionally a moment of doubt occurs right before cultures fully embrace new circumstances. She compared the Y2K crisis to previous millennial frenzies, suggesting that our thousand-years’ fears this time around were being displaced not on God, but on technology. She added that cycles of guilt, repentance, and grace often accompany such trials, which always turn out to be nothing more than fear-fueled mirages. The Y2K introspection was the final barrier to our full embrace of technology, which was collectively vanquished that evening. With the dawn of the new millennium, we were poised to move into—in the words spouted by a cartoon character on the AT&T ad—“The future, to the glorious future!” The theorist Paul Virilio has a concept he calls the “integral accident,” which says that every time a technology is invented, an accident is invented with it. So, when the ship is invented, you get a shipwreck; the train, a train wreck; the airplane, the plane crash. These early technological accidents impacted a geographically specific area: the woods where the plane went down was affected in isolation. But when it comes to electromagnetic waves, such as radiation from a nuclear accident, the results of that accident are no longer felt locally but have networked implications. When the Fukushima reactor melted down, the radiation traveling through the Pacific Ocean food chain endangered fish on the West Coast of America. Similarly, market meltdowns in China crash Western economies. A virus in an electronic network can act with devastating results, infecting many, not just one. The integral or whole accident moves from local to general. Little did we know that a mere year and a half later, an older technology—airplanes—would engender an integral accident in ways that Y2K could not. On 9/11 in New York City, overloaded cell phone networks went dead and overtaxed sites like CNN.com and NYTimes.com refused to load. Subways, buses, and commuter trains—many of them controlled by computers—stopped running. The island was sealed off from the rest of the world, thrown back to the darkness of earlier times. Broadcast television for much of Manhattan was unavailable as the giant TV antennas atop the Twin Towers were no more. Like those screen-addled citizens in the AT&T ad, we sat there in the dark bereft of our devices, huddled close to our transistor radios trying to get the latest news as if it were the great New York City blackout of 1965. For the next week or two, our technology barely worked; even our data-driven stock markets went dark. Lower Manhattan, closed to vehicular traffic, resembled a cross between a nineteenth-century village and post-WWII Berlin. We languidly ambled down the great avenues as if they were country lanes, while in the background great plumes of acrid smoke spewed from the Lower West Side. Without distraction from our technology, we rediscovered each other, looking into faces rather than screens, slowing down for person-to-person chats while we sat in silent parks, soaking in the glorious mid-September sunshine. There was an eerie silence in the city, one that was punctuated only by the frequent wailing of sirens. It was an escape from the stress of recent events, an enforced return to a lost time, but one that could not last. As the networks sprang back to life and the transportation began running again, we picked up right where we had left off, roaming the streets with Blackberrys glued to our palms, each in our own bubble. Over the next few years, crises like blackouts and hurricanes would plunge us back into darkness for short periods. These enforced digital detoxes became more harrowing than refreshing. During Hurricane Sandy, impromptu charging stations powered by generators sprung up on the streets, as groups of New Yorkers huddled together in the cold, waiting an eternity for their devices to charge before they headed back to their primitive dark caves. AT&T’s ads of course were riffs on Gil Scott-Heron’s 1970 song “The Revolution Will Not Be Televised,” which proclaimed that media would play absolutely no role in the forthcoming social and political revolutions that had begun in the 1960s. Forty-five years ago, Scott- Heron had seen how all experience had been influenced, framed, and saturated by media, robbing us, he felt, of our human experience. We had been turned into zombies, bent on consumerism and stripped of our political import. He was pleading for deprogramming, hoping we might reject media spectacles and instead take to the streets, where the revolution would happen away from the cameras, in “real time,” where there would be no “instant replay.” After all, if the urban riots of the 1960s showed anything, they demonstrated that highly technological civilizations could be plunged into darkness and chaos with basic means: the striking of a single match or the throwing of a Molotov cocktail. AT&T’s snarky usurping of Scott-Heron’s political message proclaimed total victory; corporate-sponsored technology was now a foregone conclusion and there would be no turning back. Ever. The future had arrived, and it looked an awful lot like Big Brother. But the truth is more complex than that. AT&T’s ads showed us a one-sided, oversimplistic, skewed vision of the “revolution.” At a Black Lives Matter panel I attended recently called “The Fire This Time,” an audience member asked why and how the movement emerged when it did. One of the panelists responded by simply reaching into his pocket and holding up his smartphone. In an unanticipated twist to both AT&T and Scott-Heron, the revolution is, in fact, both televised—uploaded to social media and replayed endlessly—and mobilized (people mobilized by mobile media) in the service of justice. The corporate technological apparatuses that Scott-Heron had so rightly feared had now been distributed among the citizenry to record trespasses that not long ago went unnoticed, able to bring light to the darkest and most unjust corners of the world. The fire this time is a digital flame, capable of illuminating darkness and torching unjust systems. Many articles I read yearn for a return to solitude and introspection, quiet places far removed from the noises of our devices. But those places, away from the rabble of the street, are starting to remind me of gated communities: highly patrolled spaces where discourse is circumscribed and vetted. What they are ignoring is that for many communities, the presence of devices to record and distribute events that entrenched powers that be would rather not have anyone see, are tools of social justice, crucial to pointing out abuses of power. I read that our devices are removing us from life, but when a device records an injustice, it’s an indicator of presence, not absence. In another one of those AT&T ads, the line between presence and absence is obliterated as image after image is shown of people watching their devices while they are doing something else. A guy in a stuffy concert hall sneaks a peek at his smartphone while a voice- over decries: “Flip between the fight, the game, and the ballet you didn’t want to go to!”; or someone sweating it out on a treadmill, phone in his hand: “Binge while you lose weight!”; a surfer in the curl of a wave: “Channel-surf while you surf!”; or a mountain climber dangling in midair: “Enjoy a good cliffhanger while you hang from a cliff!” Like many, AT&T would like you to think we use our devices in one way only: to indulge in frivolous media while we are doing things we don’t want to be doing. However, the truth is more complicated. Our use of media mimics our circadian rhythms, as we cycle through periods of being awake and being asleep. We are neither complete zombies, nor completely present: usually it’s a mix of the two. The smartphone that captured the police shooting death of Walter Scott might have been, just a moment before, playing Candy Crush Saga, and right afterward, wasting time on the Internet. APPENDIX 101 Ways to Waste Time on the Internet What follows is a set of ideas on how to waste time on the Internet. They were authored by my class in the initial offering of Wasting Time on the Internet at the University of Pennsylvania, January–April 2015. 1. Have one person browse the Internet while connected to a big monitor. A group stands behind that person loudly screaming what to click on. It would begin by one person at a time yelling commands: Click that link! Type this into the status update window! Then it gradually increases to a polyphonic cacophony of unbearable intensity. 2. Instagram something with the intention of it being taken down by Instagram. Take a screenshot of it; keep a record of it. Instagram the screenshot. Screenshot that Instagram. If it is taken down again, repeat the process until all you’re posting is a screenshot of a screenshot of a screenshot . . . of the original photo. 3. Sit in a circle and pass your laptop to the person next to you. For one minute, they can open anything on your computer. Once something is opened, it must be left opened. You may not alter or delete anything, just expose. At the end of one minute, you pass that laptop to the person on your left and they get one minute with it. By the time it arrives back to you, everyone will have had their turn with your laptop. Everything that people have opened will remain open on your screen for you to see. 4. Delete as much as you can from Facebook. Avoid deleting friends, and avoid deleting your account. Keep a tally and see among your friends who can delete the most. 5. In a group, skype a person not in the group. Refuse to answer any questions about why you did this. 6. In a partner’s Facebook account, find their oldest message and who it was sent to or by. On your own account, message that person and have a conversation. 7. Go on Netflix, and look at the first suggestion for your Top Picks. If you’ve already seen it, then pick the next suggestion. Read a generic Wikipedia article about the show/movie, and write a Facebook status using what you’ve learned (develop an opinion or a question or a statement). The status should not mention that you haven’t seen the show/movie. Tag at least one person in the status. 8. For a period of hours, record your face with your webcam as you use your computer. Choose a long enough time span that you will forget the camera is on. 9. Delete your Facebook profile picture and leave it blank for as long as you can. 10. Attend a lecture, meeting, performance, meal, or movie and be on your smartphone the entire time. 11. Sit in a circle with a group and open your laptops. Plug your headphones into the computer to your right. Play music for your partner with this goal: Make the listening environment as annoying as possible. Play music the person hates. Play several songs at once. 12. Browse only using the earliest version of Internet Explorer you can find, for as long as you can. You may not close any pop-ups or tabs that appear. 13. In a group, sit in a circle with laptops. Plug your headphones into the laptop of the person to your left and play music for your partner. Let the vibes of the music your partner plays determine the next song you play for your partner. Try to get the circle to reach an equilibrium. 14. In a public place, have a partner receive instructions on their cell phone from the other partner sending them. Have the receiver do whatever the instructions say while the sender watches from the side. 15. Find a music mashup online and write a serious review of it as though you are a New York Times theater critic. 16. Post something to a friend’s Facebook wall as if you were talking to someone else. Be as specific as you can. 17. Find a piece of audio you believe summarizes and represents the entire Internet. 18. Find a social media profile of someone you know or do not know and re-create their profile on your own page. 19. Make a dating profile for a partner and get them as many dates as you can. 20. On an online shopping website, attempt to fully re-create what you are wearing. Then find photos of other people wearing those clothes and collect them in a folder. In a group, compare to see who can find the most photos of their current outfit. 21. Take a resume from LinkedIn or an online resume sample site and apply for several jobs using this resume, as well as an online sample cover letter if one is required. Apply to these same jobs with your own resume and cover letter. 22. Display provocative captions on a projector and cycle through them quickly. Have a group post a Facebook status impulsively to each one. 23. Take a screenshot of as many viral YouTube videos as you can. Make a slideshow that displays the images as rapidly as possible. 24. Place a camera in a heavily used room. Make sure everyone who goes through the room is aware that the camera could record them, but that it may not. Covertly turn on and off the camera during the period of time. 25. Find a very public space, sit in a closed circle with your laptops. One person selects a video from Pornhub. At the count of three, everyone clicks on the video and watches it together. 26. Find your biggest fear on the Internet and send it to a friend. 27. Think of ten friends who have different ideas about the Internet than you. Send a message to each of them asking what there is to do on the Internet. See what they tell you to do. Do nothing until one of them responds, then do it as quickly as you can, and ask another. While waiting for responses, think about what you asked them, how you phrased it, and why some did and did not respond. 28. Watch people in a public area and write down their physical attributes as if you were writing a crime report. Then look online at public police postings to find a crime with a suspect description that matches yours. Determine if they committed the crime or not. 29. Take an article you vehemently disagree with, post it as your Facebook status, and then say how you align yourself with everything it’s saying. Like this status. Share it. Post it on other people’s walls. Do the same thing on Twitter. 30. Interview a person for six seconds using Vine. Do not tell them the interview will last six seconds. 31. In a group, play different songs from as many devices as you can. Try to write down what you can discern from the noise. 32. With a partner, watch a short video in turns with one both recording the other with a camera as well as taking notes on the other’s affective response. Put the original video, and the two reaction videos side by side in a new video. 33. Find a room or space that is reserved by someone else. Convince them there was a booking error with the online system and that it is actually yours. 34. Collaboratively take turns reading from each member’s Facebook feed. Write the lines into a document as a poem. 35. Spend hours writing a document with a group however you like, but delete it when anyone leaves or enters the room. 36. Find sites of relaxation on the Internet. Spend some time on these sites and relax. When you are done, find rain sound audio on YouTube and listen to it while you write about drowning. Keep writing and writing until you cannot write more. Then delete everything you have written and move on with your life. 37. Using Google Maps satellite view, stitch together a new city. Give it a name, and invent laws for it. 38. Use a screen recorder like QuickTime to record your computer screen as you browse the Internet for eight minutes. Call a friend on Skype and make sure that’s included in there. 39. Using their publicly available online profile, create a fake obituary for someone you know. 40. In public, open a laptop and surf the Internet. Have a partner watch you and the way people respond to you and the way you respond to others. 41. Ask each other about passwords. Talk about how you picked your password. Ask how other people picked their passwords. Share your password if you want and explain what you like and don’t like about it. 42. Venmo $100 to the person to your right. They must then Venmo $100 to the person to their right and so on until your money goes full circle and returns to you. 43. Find a database of scary stories generated on the Internet. In a group, collaboratively write a new story by each taking deliberate lines from the database and stitching them together. 44. Ask as many people in a public place how happy they are, and graph happiness relative to location on Google Maps. 45. Find a Facebook friend and message as many of their friends as you can asking them what they think of your person. 46. Take a compatibility quiz online with a partner. Then, check your answers by comparing your compatibility to whether your zodiac signs are compatible. 47. Create an Instagram account and use whatever means necessary to get followers. 48. Find a YouTube video and make it viral. 49. Work in a group to invent a rumor. Spread the rumor on as many social media sites as possible. 50. Go on a video chat website like Omegle and ask people to put a shoe on their head. Share the screenshots. 51. Check out as many books as you can from a library. Compare how the information differs from commonly used websites on the same subjects. 52. Create a Twitter account that only posts lyrics from a specific lyricist. Do this for as many lyricists as you would like to get to know. Have each account follow each other, plus some other accounts of your choosing. 53. Open a text document and raid a partner’s computer with as much text as you can from their personal files. Send your text document to your friends. 54. Clog as much as you can. Clog online forums for your school or work. Post a series of blank posts on your Facebook feed, send a bunch of blank e-mails to everyone you know, open a bunch of blank tabs, and just clog everything. CLOG. What does it feel like to apply force to the Internet? 55. Within the constraint of two hundred words, try to offend as many people as possible in a Facebook post. 56. Narrate the life story of the person across a table from you using only GIFs. Make it as long or short as you want but make sure to highlight what you think might have been key moments in that person’s life or even better, make something up. Do not caption your work. 57. Snapchat your surroundings to a partner with the timer on one second. Send only one Snapchat each minute. Try to guess where the other person is. 58. Find the first friend you made on Facebook and have a conversation with them. 59. In a library, find someone who is wasting time on the Internet. Ask them what they are doing and what they would be doing if they were being productive. 60. Go to a random urban location on Google Street View. Share this with another person and see how long it takes them to determine the location. Consider what factored into the time and ultimate guess the person made. 61. Cross arms with people in a group and use your hands to type on the laptops in front of your left and right partners as they type on your own. Try to navigate. 62. Send a Snapchat to buddies of a partner but not to them. 63. Like twenty posts on a single person’s Facebook wall from that person’s account. 64. Plan the most expensive three-day vacation in the world to the dollar amount using travel websites. 65. Watch a video and consciously misinterpret it. Spread your misinterpretation as far as you can. 66. In a group, attempt to find the shortest route from one Wikipedia article to another by clicking on links in the page. 67. Generate a random phrase using an online generator. For every letter in the phrase, find a song that begins with that letter. Compile the results into a playlist named after your phrase. 68. Write a travel review for a trip you didn’t take. Post it, then delete it and reflect on the memory of your trip. 69. In a group, have one person choose two behavior rules. Distribute one rule to all but one of the other members of the group, and the other to only one. Make it discreet so you do not know who got the majority rule and who got the minority. In a chat room, have everyone type and act according to the rule they were given. See if the majority can identify the minority and vice versa, and if they can determine each other’s rules. 70. Take as many pictures of the room you are in as possible. Upload the pictures to social media. Consider new ways to capture a space to re-create it elsewhere. 71. Pick a genre of music you don’t usually listen to or that you dislike. Listen to five minutes of it without doing anything else. Once you pick a song, you have to listen to the whole thing. Don’t touch the computer as you listen. After the five minutes, write about what you felt/were thinking about. How did it feel to do nothing but listen to something you don’t like? 72. Charge fifteen people publicly on Venmo for $0.01–$3,000 for reasons you make up. 73. Exchange phones with a partner and text someone from that phone whatever you feel like. 74. In a group, choose one person to be the “gimp,” so to speak. This person must have every avenue (social media, e-mail, different chat programs such as Skype, Google Chat, Canvas, etc.) Flood this person with as much spam as possible. Do what you will. The victim must copy and paste every message into a Word document. 75. Give your Facebook password to a partner and have them delete your account. 76. Open three video chat platforms at once and talk to three separate people. 77. Skype a buddy during one class for the whole class. Have the video chat muted but talk to them through text the entire class. 78. Sit down in the middle of a crowded walkway and open your laptop to surf the Internet. 79. Click on a spam advertisement and try to claim whatever promotion it’s offering. Get yourself that iPhone for $20 or a free $100 Walmart gift card. 80. Look through your Facebook messages and go back as far as you can. Find the oldest message to which you never responded. Write back. Make the responses really long and detailed. Make it super awkward. Don’t explain why you’re writing back now or apologize for not writing back earlier. 81. Open an image on a screen and use as many devices as you can to iteratively take a picture of that image. Use as many people and as many cameras as you can, but plan it so that it takes the shortest amount of time for the image to travel from the first screen to the last. Configure the cameras and screen in physical space cleverly to do this. 82. Send as many people as you can lyrics from a song. Keep sending them even if people ask you to stop. 83. Using TV Trope, describe the people around you as tropes from the website. 84. Graffiti the Facebook wall of the person to your left. Post anything you want and everything you want. Vandalize it. Make it so their grandmas on Facebook call them asking what’s wrong. 85. As a group, choose a popular album of music. Find the worst possible versions of each song on the web, be it a terrible cover on YouTube, a bad quality download, a virus-laden download, a misheard lyrics version, or a horrible remix. Reconstruct the album out of these new versions. 86. Choose a partner and flood their social media accounts with the phrase “I love you” as many times and in as many specific places as possible. The partner must respond to each instance with the phrase “I love you too” as quickly as they can. Repeat with “I hate you.” 87. Go onto ChatRoulette or Omegle and try to get people to tell you a secret. Post it to YouTube. 88. Find an interesting person in a different country and completely re-create their social media profile through your own Facebook. Proceed to comment on ten posts on your newsfeed only in that person’s native language. If you don’t know their language, that’s even better: use Google Translate. 89. Join a chat room anonymously and admit as many secrets as you can. 90. Ask everyone around you to send you a picture of themselves they haven’t posted online. 91. In a group, have everyone put their addresses in a bowl in the middle and each person draws one at random. Go on eBay and buy that person a present for less than one dollar. 92. In a public place, record the noise you hear with your phone. Then go to a silent private place and listen to it. Send the noise to a partner and ask them where they think it is from. 93. Using Google Patent Search, find schematics of interesting devices. Post them to Instagram with a description in which you hashtag every other word. 94. In a group, select a person to take notes on the emotions, facial tics, and affects of a group of users surfing the Internet. 95. Find a niche piece of media that you love and find a place on the Internet where people are discussing it as recently as a month ago. 96. Delete a photo from the phone of a partner and do not tell them which you deleted. 97. Do a background check on the person to your left. Find every detail about them: addresses, schools, e-mail, hobbies, groups, publications, work, criminal record, family members, etc. Find everything you can by any means necessary. Hack into their accounts if necessary. Save what you find in a document. Send it to them. 98. For fifteen minutes, see who can tally the largest dollar amount by putting things in their Amazon shopping cart. The one with the most at the end of the time wins. Delete everything in your cart. Or don’t. 99. Delete any document on your partner’s computer. Don’t tell them which one you erased. Then give them your laptop and have them do the same to you. 100. Make a website and fill it with spam. 101. Make a BuzzFeed account and post lists of how you waste time on the Internet. Compiled by Chase Harrow. Contributors: Alan Chelak, Nina Friend, Chase Harrow, Bree Jackson, Melissa Kantrowitz, Justin Sheen, Parker Stakoff, Zoe Stoller, Patrick del Valle, John Vella, and Feimei Zeng. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Portions of these chapters appeared in Ausgabe, the Los Angeles Review of Books, the New Yorker, the Poetry Foundation, Rhizome, Schwa Fire, and the Wire. In addition, sections of this book were presented live or excerpted from publications at the following venues: Fachhochschule Nordwestschweiz FHNW Basel, Transmediale, Kunsthaus Graz, LABOR, the Liverpool Biennial, MaMa Zagreb, Museum of Contemporary Art Barcelona, the Museum of Modern Art, the Institute of Fine Arts–NYU, Ràdio Web MACBA, the RISD Museum, the University of Cincinnati, and the Wattis Institute. I wish to thank the editors and the institutions for their support. To my reader, critic, advisor, and lifelong companion, Cheryl Donegan, without whom this book would not exist. Special thanks to my agent, Paul Bresnick, and to my editors at HarperCollins, Barry Harbaugh and Eric Meyers as well as to Paula Cooper Hughes for her thoughtful insights on this book. I’d also like to thank Laura Beiles, Vicki Bennett, Claire Bishop, the Center for Programs in Contemporary Writing at the University of Pennsylvania, Roc Jiménez de Cisneros, Kathleen Donegan, Pamela Echeverria, Frenchie Ferenczi, Al Filreis, Henriette Gallus, Rainer Ganahl, David Haglund, Pablo Helguera, Sheila Heti, Katia Huemer, Jean Boite Éditions, Grant Jenkins, Shea Matthew Kennisher, Marcell Mars, Chus Martinez, Tomislav Medak, Ingo Niermann, Peter Pakesch, Lucrecia Palacios, Anna Ramos, Mingo Reynolds, Marisol Rodriguez, Agustin Pérez Rubio, Dubravka Sekulić, Arjan Singh, Caleb Smith, Danny Snelson, Sasha Weiss, Terry Winters, and Wendy Woon. And finally a huge shoutout to the students of UPenn’s ENG 165 who tested, challenged, confirmed, and refined many of the ideas in this book. ENDNOTES The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was made. To locate a specific passage, please use the search feature on your e-book reader. INTRODUCTION: LET’S GET LOST 1 “nuclear deal with Iran”: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/15/opinion/thomas-friedman- obama-makes-his-case-on-iran-nuclear-deal.html, August 17, 2015. 5 “talking cure”: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/27/opinion/sunday/stop-googling-lets- talk.html, October 12, 2015. 8 “books are vanishing”: http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2015/01/09/reinier_gerritsen_photographs_readers_ on_the_subway_in_his_series_the_last.html, March 15, 2016. 8 “the vested interests”: Excerpt from: Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965), unpaginated, iBooks. 14 “I don’t have a lot of time” : Michael Barbaro and Steve Eder. “Under Oath, Donald Trump Shows His Raw Side.” New York Times, July 28, 2015, p. A1. 15 “the content of writing”: McLuhan, Understanding Media. 15 “merely the sum of my posts”: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/travel/going-off-the- grid-on-a-swedish-island.html, July 12, 2015. 18 “a security blanket”: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/sunday-review/addicted-to- your-phone-theres-help-for-that.html, July 12, 2015. 18 “and yet in psychoanalytic theory”: https://thinkingthoughtsdotorg.wordpress.com/2013/05/14/d-w-winnicott-on-transitional- object-and-transitional-space/, July 12, 2015. 24 “a tissue of quotations”: http://www.ubu.com/aspen/aspen5and6/threeEssays.html#barthes, January 14, 2016. CHAPTER 1: THE SOCIAL NETWORK 29 “we spend our lives in front of screens”: https://www.english.upenn.edu/courses/undergraduate/2015/spring/engl111.301, January 17, 2016. 40 “the figure of the ghost”: http://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jun/17/hauntology-critical, December 31, 2015. CHAPTER 2: THE WALKING DEAD 50 “they are such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life”: http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology/supreme-court-cellphone-ruling- hints-at-broader-curbs-on-surveillance/2014/06/25/2732b532-fc9b-11e3–8176- f2c941cf35f1_story.html, October 13, 2015. 51 “I believe in the future resolution”: http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/andre-breton, January 17, 2016. 51 “every day they want to spend”: Ruth Brandon. Surreal Lives. New York: Grove Press, 1999, 201. 52 “when will we have sleeping logicians”: André Breton. Manifestos of Surrealism. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1969, 12. 55 “walking, then, is an act of reading”: Michel de Certeau. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California, 1984. 57 “I’m struggling with my picture”: Mark Stevens and Annalyn Swan. De Kooning: An American Master. New York: A. A. Knopf, 2004. 60 “search for encrypted”: http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/social-media-newsfeed- edward-snowden-on-social-media-twitter-isis-threats/206133, October 13, 2015. 65 “the warmth of a seat”: http://www.dada- companion.com/duchamp/archive/duchamp_walking_on_infrathin_ice.pdf, October 29, 2015. 65 “optimistic, futuristic”: http://www.sfgate.com/default/article/Q-and-A-With-Brian-Eno- 2979740.php, July 25, 2015. 69 “look at those images objectively”: http://www.wired.com/2012/04/an-essay-on-the- new-aesthetic/, October 13, 2015. 72 “odd gestures of any kind”: Paul Auster. “Fogg in the Park” in Central Park: An Anthology. Ed. Andrew Blauner. New York: Bloomsbury, 2012, 101–2. 72 “in big cities, beneath the roar of traffic”: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/26/nyregion/pope-francis-visits-new-york-city.html, October 29, 2015. CHAPTER 3: OUR BROWSER HISTORY IS THE NEW MEMOIR 78 “I do a lot of exercises”: William Burroughs and Brion Gysin. The Third Mind. New York: Seaver Books/Viking, 1978, 1. 82 “mindfulness in its original Buddhist tradition”: http://op- talk.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/the-mindfulness-backlash/?_r=0, August 14, 2015. 83 “it’s not that what is past casts its light”: Walter Benjamin. The Arcades Project. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999, 462, N2a,3. 84 “to compress all the possibilities”: Raoul Hausmann. “Manifesto of PREsentism” in Manifesto: A Century of ISMs. Ed. Mary Ann Caws. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2001, 164. 84 “memory is not an instrument for exploring”: Walter Benjamin. Selected Writings. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2004, 661. 86 “studies show that most people happily use the web”: https://kasperskycontenthub.com/usa/files/2015/06/Digital-Amnesia-Report.pdf, September 7, 2015. 88 “there is a definite relationship between inertia”: John Armitage. “From Modernism to Hypermodernism and Beyond: An Interview with Paul Virilio.” Theory Culture and Society 16 (1999): 40. CHAPTER 4: ARCHIVING IS THE NEW FOLK ART 90 “if that’s real”: Deborah Bright. “Shopping the Leftovers: Warhol’s Collecting Strategies in Raid the Icebox” in Art History 24 (2001): 2. 93 “the grid announces”: Rosalind E. Krauss. The Originality of the Avant-garde and Other Modernist Myths. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1986, 9. 95 “boyhood bug collection”: http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/05/pinterest-interview-ben- silbermann-social-media, January 5, 2015. 96 “among children, collecting is only one process of renewal”: Walter Benjamin. “Unpacking My Library” in Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings. 1931–1934. Vol. 2. Pt. 2. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2004, 488. 96 “catalog of ideas”: http://phys.org/news/2015–07-pinterest-ceo-site-future-ideas.html, January 8, 2015. 96 “if there is a counterpart”: Benjamin, “Unpacking My Library,” 487. 97 “adults and children”: John Berger. Ways of Seeing. London: Penguin Books, 1972, 30. 98 “like everything else [curating] has been democratized”: “Hans Ulrich Obrist interviews STEWART BRAND.” Undated. Unpublished. E-mailed to author by Obrist, June 15, 2015. 99 “you have read all these books”: Benjamin, Selected Writings, 71. 99 “even if all knowledge”: Ann M. Blair. Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the Modern Age. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010, 5. 99 “sheer cognitive exhaustion”: Ibid., 5. 100 “$10 billion”: http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2013/01/aaron_swartz_jstor_mit_c an_honor_the_internet_activist_by_fighting_to_make.html, February 17, 2013. 101 “range of arcane subjects”: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/02/11/philip-parker- books_n_2648820.html, October 22, 2015. 102 “Iraq War alone”: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WikiLeaks, July 22, 2013. 102 “United States diplomatic cable leaks”: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_diplomatic_cables_leak, July 22, 2013. 102 “there’s a principle that says”: http://blog.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2010/11/28/has_wikileaks_finally_gone_too_far, July 22, 2013. 103 “and with every new leak”: http://www.newsweek.com/how-much-did-snowden-take- not-even-nsa-really-knows-253940, October 23, 2015. 103 “if recorded”: http://www.davidzwirner.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/2009-OK-DZ- press-release.pdf, August 29, 2015. 104 “Philosophical Transactions”: http://pirateproxy.ca/torrent/6554331, July 22, 2013. 106 “it feels like the end”: Darren Wershler. E-mail to author, February 24, 2013. 108 “LABOR, UbuWeb, and Kenneth Goldsmith”: http://printingtheInternet.tumblr.com/post/54177453547/proposal, September 10, 2013. 109 “please don’t print the Internet”: http://www.change.org/petitions/please-don’t-print-the- Internet, September 10, 2013. 109 “Know Your Meme”: http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/events/printing-out-the-Internet, August 30, 2015. 111 “the composition of vast books”: Jorge Luis Borges. Ficciones. New York: Grove Press, 1962, 15. 112 “THE ARTIST MAY CONSTRUCT”: http://ubu.com/papers/weiner_statements.html, September 17, 2013. 112 “in conceptual art the idea or concept”: http://emerald.tufts.edu/programs/mma/fah188/sol_lewitt/paragraphs%20on%20concep tual%20art.htm, September 17, 2013. 113 “do not forget that a poem”: Ludwig Wittgenstein. Zettel. Ed. G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von Wright, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967, sec. 160. CHAPTER 5: DREAM MACHINES AND ETERNIDAYS 116 “a kind of curator of culture”: Deborah Solomon. Utopia Parkway: The Life and Work of Joseph Cornell. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997, 359. 117 “three thousand books”: Lynda Roscoe Hartigan. “Joseph Cornell’s Dance with Duality” in Joseph Cornell: Shadowplay Eterniday. New York and London: Thames and Hudson, 2003, 15. 120 “everybody should have two television sets”: Joseph Gelmis. “Andy Warhol” in I’ll Be Your Mirror. Ed. Kenneth Goldsmith. New York: Carroll and Graf, 2004, 166. 121 “the distracted person is not just absent”: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx? cc=mqr;c=mqr;c=mqrarchive;idno=act2080.0048.410;rgn=main;view=text;xc=1;g=mqrg , September 21, 2015. 122 “this extension of [Narcissus]”: McLuhan, Understanding Media. unpaginated iBooks. 127 “I am the first to be surprised and often terrified”: https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/1168–2, January 19, 2016. 129 “today, no exhibition is complete”: Claire Bishop. “Digital Divide.” Artforum, September 2010, 436. 129 “noticed his hands”: Solomon, Utopia Parkway, 244. 131 “Harry Jay Knowles is sprawled on the edge of his bed”: http://www.nytimes.com/1997/11/16/magazine/the-two-hollywoods-harry-knowles-is- always-listening.html?pagewanted=all, August 3, 2015. 132 “I was their experiment”: http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/aint-cools-harry- knowles-cash-430734, July 23, 2015. 133 “a contemporary brain”: Lynda Roscoe Hartigan. Joseph Cornell: Shadowplay Eterniday. London: Thames and Hudson, 2003, 25. 135 “ultimate work of appropriation art”: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/04/arts/design/04marclay.html?_r=0, April 11, 2016 136 “if you make something good”: http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/03/12/the- hours-daniel-zalewski, April 11, 2016 138 “a commons to which all humanity is entitled”: Jonathan Crary. 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep. iBooks. 139 “light from other days”: Hartigan. Joseph Cornell, 2003, 148. CHAPTER 6: I SHOOT THEREFORE I AM 145 “in the case of Instagram”: http://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/23/instagram-hits-400-million- users-beating-twitter.html, January 19, 2016. 149 “perhaps part of the beauty”: E-mail to author, October 12, 2015. 151 “we protest against”: http://www.notbored.org/generic.jpg, October 11, 2015. 154 “given its cultural significance”: http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography- blog/2014/jun/13/photoshop-first-image-jennifer-in-paradise-photography-artefact-knoll- dullaart, August 10, 2015. 154 “the world was young”: http://rhizome.org/editorial/2013/sep/5/letter-jennifer-knoll/, August 10, 2015. 154 “a fake painting”: Susan Sontag, On Photography. New York: RosettaBooks, 1973/2005, 66. 155 “a writer could not do that”: Mel Gussow. Conversations with Beckett. New York: Grove Press, 2001, 47. 156 “Jennifer in Photoshop”: http://jennifer.ps/, October 29, 2015. 156 “the beauty of the Internet”: http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography- blog/2014/jun/13/photoshop-first-image-jennifer-in-paradise-photography-artefact-knoll- dullaart, August 10, 2015. 158 “what Prince is doing”: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/05/27/richard-prince- instagram_n_7452634.html, September 19, 2015. 158 “once you have shared User Content”: https://help.instagram.com/155833707900388, October 29, 2015. 162 “the two propositions”: Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophy and Language. London: Routledge, 1972, 304. 162 “Google, Volume 1”: http://www.jean-boite.fr/box/google-volume-1, April 11, 2016. 163 “I’m Google”: http://dinakelberman.tumblr.com/, January 5, 2016. 163 “results visually in a colorful grid”: http://dinakelberman.tumblr.com/, December 31, 2015. 166 “a history which the museum”: Fred Wilson (med.). “Services: Working-Group Discussions.” October 80 (Spring 1997): 117–48. 166 “not for sex”: http://www.villagevoice.com/2007–02–13/art/critiqueus-interruptus/, viewed November 15, 2011. CHAPTER 7: LOSSY AND JAGGY 170 “5 percent”: http://www.wired.com/2012/02/why-neil-young-hates-mp3-and-what-you- can-do-about-it/, October 11, 2015. 170 “we live in the digital age”: Ibid. 172 “The Ghost in the MP3”: http://theghostinthemp3.com/, April 11, 2016 173 “MP3s’ sizzle” http://radar.oreilly.com/2009/03/the-sizzling-sound-of-music.html, July 14, 2015. 173 “iPhone actually won out”: http://appleinsider.com/articles/15/02/02/neil-youngs-400- pono-hi-def-music-player-loses-to-apples-iphone-in-blind-audio-test, July 14, 2015. 174 “streaming has ended for me”: https://www.facebook.com/NeilYoung/posts/10155765667375317:0, August 8, 2015. 175 “discarded 35 mm movie film” Lev Manovich. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002, 47. 177 “twenty-three million animated GIFs”: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/04/technology/gifs-go-beyond-emoji-to-express- thoughts-without-words.html?_r=0, October 11, 2015. 177 “five million animations”: Ibid. 179 “due to its high compression rates”: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-definition_video, January 17, 2016. 179 “In the class society of imagery”: Hito Steyerl. “In Defense of the Poor Image” in The Wretched of the Screen. Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2012, 33. 180 “The poor image is a rag or a rip”: Ibid., 32. 180 “perfect cinema—technically and artistically”: http://www.ejumpcut.org/archive/onlinessays/JC20folder/ImperfectCinema.html, July 18, 2015. 181 “this is precisely why”: Steyerl, “In Defense of the Poor Image,” 42. 181 “Whereas before, a chosen few produced images”: http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the- weak-universalism/, July 18, 2015. 182 “worst possible quality JPEGS”: http://www.foto8.com/live/thomas-ruff-interview/, July 19, 2015. 183 “How much visual information”: http://www.anothermag.com/art- photography/1840/thomas-ruff, July 19, 2015. CHAPTER 8: THE WRITER AS MEME MACHINE 192 “This ethos is evident”: http://thejogging.tumblr.com/, September 9, 2015. 200 “commit to making every message”: http://five.sentences/, August 3, 2015. 201 “We holler these trysts”: http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem-alone/241332? iframe=true, January 20, 2016. 208 “Responding to a call at night”: Félix Fénéon. Novels in Three Lines. New York: New York Review of Books, 2007. 209 “It’s stupid to write one hundred pages”: F. T. Marinetti, Emilio Settimelli, and Bruno Corra. “The Futurist Synthetic Theatre”: in Manifesto, ISMs. Ed. Mary Ann Caws. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2001, 695. 209 “For sale: baby shoes”: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/For_sale:_baby_shoes,_never_worn, November 30, 2015. 210 “Currently working on my novel”: http://www.vice.com/read/working-on-my-novel-cory- arcangel-interview-124, November 30, 2015. 211 “Part of the fun”: http://www.bookforum.com/review/13895, November 30, 2015. 211 “People rarely look the way you expect them”: http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/06/04/black-box-2, November 30, 2015. ABOUT THE AUTHOR KENNETH GOLDSMITH is a conceptual artist, and the first poet laureate of the Museum of Modern Art. He is the author of Seven American Deaths and Disasters and the book of essays Uncreative Writing, breaking down the art form he pioneered. Goldsmith teaches at the University of Pennsylvania, where he taught the controversial Wasting Time on the Internet class that inspired this book. He lives in New York with artist Cheryl Donegan and their two sons. Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com. PRAISE FOR WASTING TIME ON THE INTERNET “For decades, Kenneth Goldsmith has forced us to question what constitutes and what does not constitute art. In Wasting Time on the Internet, he performs a crucial intellectual act, demonstrating persuasively and precisely the myriad ways in which the web undergirds contemporary art and ambitious contemporary art engages seriously with the implications of the web.” —David Shields, author of Reality Hunger: A Manifesto “The Internet made the world an intelligence and vastly increased my own. I got my theory from Hawthorne’s House of the Seven Gables, Wells’s World Brain, and McLuhan, but now I have the Internet instruction book: Wasting Time on the Internet. It’s also a pretty good history of the future.” —Glenn O’Brien, author of The Style Guy and How to Be a Man “Face it: You already know how to waste time on the Internet. But Kenneth Goldsmith reveals a completely different mode of thinking about what we’re all going to do anyway. Deeply versed in avant- garde and surreal modes of seeing and playing in the so-called ‘real world,’ he proves a brilliant guide to the worlds we describe as digital or virtual. And insights aside, it’s pure pleasure to browse and surf and swipe and poke at contemporary tech culture in his company.” —Rob Walker, coeditor Significant Objects “I have been a fan of Kenneth Goldsmith ever since I read his mind- boggling Soliloquy over a decade ago. Respected and reviled for doing the ‘wrong thing at the wrong time,’ he returns here with a rebuke to the popular notion that we’re losing something important— intellectually, socially, and, as readers and thinkers—in this age of too much, too fast. I read it feeling offended, anxious, liberated, and gleeful.” —Sheila Heti, author of How Should a Person Be? ALSO BY KENNETH GOLDSMITH Capital: New York, Capital of the 20th Century Seven American Deaths and Disasters Uncreative Writing CREDITS Cover design by Milan Bozic Cover photograph © Benjamin Simeneta/Getty Images COPYRIGHT WASTING TIME ON THE INTERNET. Copyright © 2016 by Kenneth Goldsmith. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books. FIRST EDITION ISBN 978-0-06-241647-6 EPub Edition August 2016 ISBN 9780062416483 16 17 18 19 20 RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 ABOUT THE PUBLISHER Australia HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd. Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia www.harpercollins.com.au Canada HarperCollins Canada 2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada www.harpercollins.ca New Zealand HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive Rosedale 0632 Auckland, New Zealand www.harpercollins.co.nz United Kingdom HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 1 London Bridge Street London SE1 9GF, UK www.harpercollins.co.uk United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 195 Broadway New York, NY 10007 www.harpercollins.com * The flaneur was always conceptualized as a “he,” since during the nineteenth century, women were not able to walk around the city with the same freedom as men. † While Facebook has invested heavily in the VR company Oculus, it’s far from ready for prime time. New York Times reported during the 2016 CES show, “A decade from now, we may well look back on 2016 as the year virtual reality turned the corner from a futuristic novelty into a mainstream possibility.” Farhad Manjoo. “On Display at CES, Tech Ideas in Their Awkward Adolescence.” New York Times, January 6, 2016, p. B1. * JSTOR eventually made these files free for public download. * This Preview icon came with the Mac Mavericks OS. In the next OS, Yosemite, the child was removed and the magnifying lens was replaced with what looks like a 35 mm camera lens. In terms of narrative and choices, it still makes very little sense. There has been much online speculation about who “preview kid” actually is and why he is there but no one seems to have come up with an answer. † Only later in his career, when he wanted to generate original footage, Cornell would hire young filmmakers like Larry Jordan or Stan Brakhage as cameramen to shoot it for him. * In December 2015, Prince was sued by the photographer Donald Graham for copyright infringement for reproducing a black-and-white image of a Rasta smoking a joint that Graham had posted on his Instagram, which Prince included in his New Portraits series. * Young’s “never say never” may, in fact, be drawing to a close with streaming lossless FLAC files. † Although this might be changing with the introduction of the Apple Watch, which as of this writing has yet to catch on in a significant way. * It seems inevitable that Facebook will increase its five thousand friends limit. TRILCE CÉSAR V ALLEJO Laberintos CÉSAR V ALLEJO 36 Trilce  TRILCE Edición de divulgación basada en la de Ricardo González Vigil (99) Lima, 2007 [Madrid, 1922] Laberintos César Vallejo CÉSAR V ALLEJO 2 2008 DERECHOS RESERVADOS DE ESTA EDICIÓN EN FORMATO ELECTRÓNICO Centro Peruano de Estudios Culturales Ediciones Laberintos es una marca comercial del Centro Peruano de Estudios Culturales Edición distribuida por Páginas del Perú S. A. C. www.paginasdelperu.com DIGITACIÓN Alumnos de la promoción 2003 del Colegio Trilce Surco, dirigidos por Karem Robertson y Óscar Limache PRIMERA REVISIÓN Rosario Rivas T arazona REVISIÓN FINAL Paul Forsyth DISEÑO Y DIAGRAMACIÓN Ana María T essey SUPERVISIÓN Y EDICIÓN GENERAL Ó scar Limache y Alexander Forsyth PINTURA DE PORTADA Ricardo Wiesse Trilce 3 ÍNDICE DE LOS PRIMEROS VERSOS Quién hace tánta bulla, y ni deja 7 Tiempo Tiempo. 8 Las personas mayores 9 Rechinan dos carretas contra los martillos  Grupo dicotiledón. Oberturan 2 El traje que vestí mañana 3 Rumbé sin novedad por la veteada calle 4 Mañana esotro día, alguna 5 Vusco volvvver de golpe el golpe. 6 Prístina y última piedra de infundada 7 He encontrado a una niña 18 Escapo de una finta, peluza a peluza. 19 Pienso en tu sexo. 20 Cual mi explicación 21 En el rincón aquel, donde dormimos juntos 22 T engo fe en ser fuerte. 23 Destílase este 2 en una sola tanda, 24 Oh las cuatro paredes de la celda. 25 A trastear, Hélpide dulce, escampas, 26 Al ras de batiente nata blindada 27 En un auto arteriado de círculos viciosos, 28 Es posible me persigan hasta cuatro 29 T ahona estuosa de aquellos mis bizcochos 30 Al borde de un sepulcro florecido 32 Alfan alfiles a adherirse 33 El verano echa nudo a tres años 34 Me da miedo ese chorro, 36 CÉSAR V ALLEJO 4 He almorzado só lo ahora, y no he tenido 37 Zumba el tedio enfrascado 38 Quemadura del segundo 39 Esperanza plañe entre algodones. 40 999 calorías. 4 Si lloviera esta noche, retiraríame 42 Se acabó el extraño, con quien, tarde 43 El encuentro con la amada, 44 Pugnamos ensartarnos por un ojo de aguja, 45 He conocido a una pobre muchacha 46 Este cristal aguarda ser sorbido 47 Quién ha encendido fósforo! 48 Quién nos hubiera dicho que en domingo 49 La Muerte de rodillas mana 50 Esperaos. Y a os voy a narrar 5 Quién sabe se va a ti. No le ocultes. 52 Este piano viaja para adentro, 53 Me desvinculo del mar 56 La tarde cocinera se detiene 57 Ciliado arrecife donde nací, 58 T engo ahora 70 soles peruanos. 59 Murmurado en inquietud, cruzo, 60 El cancerbero cuatro veces 62 Mentira. Si lo hacía de engaños, 63 Y nos levantaremos cuando se nos dé 64 Quién clama las once no son doce! 66 Forajido tormento, entra, sal 67 Samain diría el aire es quieto y de una contenida 68 T odos los días amanezco a ciegas 69 Craterizados los puntos más altos, los puntos 70 En la celda, en lo sólido, también 7 Trilce 5 La esfera terrestre del amor 73 Es de madera mi paciencia, 74 Esta noche desciendo del caballo, 75 Alfombra 77 Amanece lloviendo. Bien peinada 78 Hitos vagarosos enamoran, desde el minuto 79 Madre, me voy mañana a Santiago, 80 Dobla el dos de Noviembre. 82 Canta cerca el verano, y ambos 83 Estamos a catorce de Julio. 84 Qué nos buscas, oh mar, con tus volúmenes 86 T odos sonríen del desgaire con que voy- 87 Serpea el sol en tu mano fresca, 88 Lento salón en cono, te cerraron, te cerré, 89 Ha triunfado otro ay. La verdad está allí. 90 Hubo un día tan rico el año pasado...! 9 Estáis muertos. 92 De la noche a la mañana voy 93 Graniza tánto, como para que yo recuerde 94 CÉSAR V ALLEJO 6 Trilce 7 I Quién hace tánta bulla, y ni deja testar las islas que van quedando. Un poco más de consideración en cuanto será tarde, temprano, y se aquilatará mejor el guano, la simple calabrina tesórea que brinda sin querer, en el insular corazón, salobre alcatraz, a cada hialóidea grupada. Un poco más de consideración, y el mantillo líquido, seis de la tarde DE LOS MÁS SOBERBIOS BEMOLES Y la península párase por la espalda, abozaleada, impertérrita en la línea mortal del equilibrio. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 8 II Tiempo Tiempo. Mediodí a estancado entre relentes. Bomba aburrida del cuartel achica tiempo tiempo tiempo tiempo. Era Era. Gallos cancionan escarbando en vano. Boca del claro día que conjuga era era era era. Mañana Mañ ana. El reposo caliente aún de ser. Piensa el presente guárdame para mañana mañana mañana mañana. Nombre Nombre. ¿Qué se llama cuanto heriza nos? Se llama Lomismo que padece nombre nombre nombre nombrE. Trilce 9 III Las personas mayores ¿a qué hora volverán? Da las seis el ciego Santiago, y ya está muy oscuro. Madre dijo que no demoraría. Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel, cuidado con ir por ahí, por donde acaban de pasar gangueando sus memorias dobladoras penas, hacia el silencioso corral, y por donde las gallinas que se están acostando todavía, se han espantado tanto. Mejor estemos aquí no más. Madre dijo que no demoraría. Y a no tengamos pena. V amos viendo los barcos ¡el mío es más bonito de todos! con los cuales jugamos todo el santo día, sin pelearnos, como debe de ser: han quedado en el pozo de agua, listos, fletados de dulces para mañana. Aguardemos así, obedientes y sin más remedio, la vuelta, el desagravio de los mayores siempre delanteros dejándonos en casa a los pequeños, como si también nosotros no pudiésemos partir. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 0 Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel? Llamo, busco al tanteo en la oscuridad. No me vayan a haber dejado solo, y el único recluso sea yo. Trilce  IV Rechinan dos carretas contra los martillos hasta los lagrimales trifurcas, cuando nunca las hicimos nada. A aquella otra sí, desamada, amargurada bajo túnel campero por lo uno, y sobre duras áljidas pruebas espiritivas. T endime en són de tercera parte, mas la tarde –qué la bamos a hhazer– se anilla en mi cabeza, furiosamente a no querer dosificarse en madre. Son los anillos. Son los nupciales trópicos ya tascados. El alejarse, mejor que todo, rompe a Crisol. Aquel no haber descolorado por nada. Lado al lado al destino y llora y llora. T oda la canción cuadrada en tres silencios. Calor. Ovario. Casi transparencia. Háse llorado todo. Há se entero velado en plena izquierda. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 2 V Grupo dicotiledón. Oberturan desde él petreles, propensiones de trinidad, finales que comienzan, ohs de ayes creyérase avaloriados de heterogeneidad. ¡Grupo de los dos cotiledones! A ver. Aquello sea sin ser más. A ver. No transcienda hacia afuera, y piense en són de no ser escuchado, y crome y no sea visto. Y no glise en el gran colapso. La creada voz rebélase y no quiere ser malla, ni amor. Los novios sean novios en eternidad. Pues no deis 1, que resonará al infinito. Y no deis 0, que callará tánto, hasta despertar y poner de pie al 1. Ah grupo bicardiaco. Trilce 3 VI El traje que vestí mañana no lo ha lavado mi lavandera: lo lavaba en sus venas otilinas, en el chorro de su corazón, y hoy no he de preguntarme si yo dejaba el traje turbio de injusticia. A hora que no hay quien vaya a las aguas, en mis falsillas encañona el lienzo para emplumar, y todas las cosas del velador de tánto qué será de mí, todas no están mías a mi lado. Quedaron de su propiedad, fratesadas, selladas con su trigueña bondad. Y si supiera si ha de volver; y si supiera qué mañana entrará a entregarme las ropas lavadas, mi aquella lavandera del alma. Qué mañana entrará satisfecha, capulí de obrería, dichosa de probar que sí sabe, que sí puede ¡CÓ MO NO V A A PODER! azular y planchar todos los caos. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 4 VII Rumbé sin novedad por la veteada calle que yo me sé. T odo sin novedad, de veras. Y fondeé hacia cosas así, y fui pasado. Doblé la calle por la que raras veces se pasa con bien, salida heroica por la herida de aquella esquina viva, nada a medias. Son los grandores, el grito aquel, la claridad de careo, la barreta sumersa en su función de ¡ya! Cuando la calle está ojerosa de puertas, y pregona desde descalzos atriles trasmañanar las salvas en los dobles. Ahora hormigas minuteras se adentran dulzoradas, dormitadas, apenas dispuestas, y se baldan, quemadas pólvoras, altos de a 1921. Trilce 5 VIII Mañana esotro día, alguna vez hallaría para el hifalto poder, entrada eternal. Mañana algún día, sería la tienda chapada con un par de pericardios, pareja de carnívoros en celo. Bien puede afincar todo eso. Pero una mañana sin mañana, entre los aros de que enviudemos, margen de espejo habrá donde traspasaré mi propio frente hasta perder el eco y quedar con el frente hacia la espalda. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 6 IX Vusco volvvver de golpe el golpe. Sus dos hojas anchas, su válvula que se abre en suculenta recepción de multiplicando a multiplicador, su condición excelente para el placer, todo avía verdad. Busco volvver de golpe el golpe. A su halago, enveto bolivarianas fragosidades a treintidós cables y sus múltiples, se arrequintan pelo por pelo soberanos belfos, los dos tomos de la Obra, y no vivo entonces ausencia, ni al tacto. Fallo bolver de golpe el golpe. No ensillaremos jamás el toroso V aveo de egoísmo y de aquel ludir mortal de sábana, desque la mujer esta ¡cuánto pesa de general! Y hembra es el alma de la ausente. Y hembra es el alma mía. Trilce 7 X Prístina y última piedra de infundada ventura, acaba de morir con alma y todo, octubre habitación y encinta. De tres meses de ausente y diez de dulce. Cómo el destino, mitrado monodáctilo, ríe. Cómo detrás desahucian juntas de contrarios. Cómo siempre asoma el guarismo bajo la línea de todo avatar. Cómo escotan las ballenas a palomas. Cómo a su vez éstas dejan el pico cubicado en tercera ala. Cómo arzonamos, cara a monótonas ancas. Se remolca diez meses hacia la decena, hacia otro más allá. Dos quedan por lo menos todavía en pañales. Y los tres meses de ausencia. Y los nueve de gestación. No hay una violencia. El paciente incorpórase. y sentado empavona tranquilas misturas. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 8 XI He encontrado a una niña en la calle, y me ha abrazado. Equis, disertada, quien la halló y la halle, no la va a recordar. Esta niña es mi prima. Hoy, al tocarle el talle, mis manos han entrado en su edad como en par de mal rebocados sepulcros. Y por la misma desolación marchóse, delta al sol tenebloso, trina entre los dos. “Me he casado” , me dice. Cuando lo que hicimos de niños en casa de la tía difunta. Se ha casado. Se ha casado. T ardes años latitudinales, qué verdaderas ganas nos ha dado de jugar a los toros, a las yuntas, pero todo de engaños, de candor, como fue. Trilce 9 XII Escapo de una finta, peluza a peluza. Un proyectil que no sé donde irá a caer. Incertidumbre. Tramonto. Cervical coyuntura. Chasquido de moscón que muere a mitad de su vuelo y cae a tierra. ¿Qué dice ahora Newton? Pero, naturalmente, vosotros sois hijos. Incertidumbre. T alones que no giran. Carilla en nudo, fabrida cinco espinas por un lado y cinco por el otro: Chit! Y a sale. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 20 XIII Pienso en tu sexo. Simplificado el corazón, pienso en tu sexo, ante el hijar maduro del día. Palpo el botón de dicha, está en sazón. Y muere un sentimiento antiguo degenerado en seso. Pienso en tu sexo, surco más prolífico y armonioso que el vientre de la Sombra, aunque la Muerte concibe y pare de Dios mismo. Oh Conciencia, pienso, sí, en el bruto libre que goza donde quiere, donde puede. Oh, escándalo de miel de los crepúsculos. Oh estruendo mudo. ¡Odumodneurtse! Trilce 2 XIV Cual mi explicación. Esto me lacera de tempranía. Esa manera de caminar por los trapecios. Esos corajosos brutos como postizos. Esa goma que pega el azogue al adentro. Esas posaderas sentadas para arriba. Ese no puede ser, sido. Absurdo. Demencia. Pero he venido de Trujillo a Lima. Pero gano un sueldo de cinco soles. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 22 XV En el rincón aquel, donde dormimos juntos tantas noches, ahora me he sentado a caminar. La cuja de los novios difuntos fue sacada, o talvez qué habrá pasado. Has venido temprano a otros asuntos, y ya no estás. Es el rincón donde a tu lado, leí una noche, entre tus tiernos puntos, un cuento de Daudet. Es el rincón amado. No lo equivoques. Me he puesto a recordar los días de verano idos, tu entrar y salir, poca y harta y pálida por los cuartos. En esta noche pluviosa, ya lejos de ambos dos, salto de pronto... Son dos puertas abriéndose cerrándose, dos puertas que al viento van y vienen sombra a sombra. Trilce 23 XVI T engo fe en ser fuerte. Dame, aire manco, dame ir galoneándome de ceros a la izquierda. Y tú, sueño, dame tu diamante implacable, tu tiempo de deshora. T engo fe en ser fuerte. Por allí avanza cóncava mujer, cantidad incolora, cuya gracia se cierra donde me abro. Al aire, fray pasado. Cangrejos, zote! Avístase la verde bandera presidencial, arriando las seis banderas restantes, todas las colgaduras de la vuelta. T engo fe en que soy, y en que he sido menos. Ea! Buen primero! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 24 XVII Destílase este 2 en una sola tanda, y entrambos lo apuramos. Nadie me hubo oído. Estría urente abracadabra civil. La mañana no palpa cual la primera, cual la última piedra ovulandas a fuerza de secreto. La mañana descalza. El barro a medias entre sustancias gris, más y menos. Caras no saben de la cara, ni de la marcha a los encuentros. Y sin hacia cabecee el exergo. Y erra la punta del afán. Junio, eres nuestro. Junio, y en tus hombros me paro a carcajear, secando mi metro y mis bolsillos en tus 21 uñas de estación. Buena! Buena! Trilce 25 XVIII Oh las cuatro paredes de la celda. Ah las cuatro paredes albicantes que sin remedio dan al mismo número. Criadero de nervios, mala brecha, por sus cuatro rincones cómo arranca las diarias aherrojadas extremidades. Amorosa llavera de innumerables llaves, si estuvieras aquí, si vieras hasta qué hora son cuatro estas paredes. Contra ellas seríamos contigo, los dos, más dos que nunca. Y ni lloraras, di, libertadora! Ah las paredes de la celda. De ellas me duelen entre tanto, más las dos largas que tienen esta noche algo de madres que ya muertas llevan por bromurados declives, a un niño de la mano cada una. Y sólo yo me voy quedando, con la diestra, que hace por ambas manos, en alto, en busca de terciario brazo que ha de pupilar, entre mi donde y mi cuando, esta mayoría inválida de hombre. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 26 XIX A trastear, Hélpide dulce, escampas, cómo quedamos de tan quedarnos. Hoy vienes apenas me he levantado. El establo está divinamente meado y excrementado por la vaca inocente y el inocente asno y el gallo inocente. Penetra en la maría ecuménica. Oh sangabriel, haz que conciba el alma, el sin luz amor, el sin cielo, lo más piedra, lo más nada, hasta la ilusión monarca. Quemaremos todas las naves! Quemaremos la última esencia! Mas si se ha de sufrir de mito a mito, y a hablarme llegas masticando hielo, mastiquemos brasas, ya no hay donde bajar, ya no hay donde subir. Se ha puesto el gallo incierto, hombre. Trilce 27 XX Al ras de batiente nata blindada de piedra ideal. Pues apenas acerco el 1 al 1 para no caer. Ese hombre mostachoso. Sol, herrada su única rueda, quinta y perfecta, y desde ella para arriba. Bulla de botones de bragueta, libres, bulla que reprende A vertical subordinada. El desagüe jurídico. La chirota grata. Mas sufro. Allende sufro. Aquende sufro. Y he aquí se me cae la baba, soy una bella persona, cuando el hombre guillermosecundario puja y suda felicidad a chorros, al dar lustre al calzado de su pequeña de tres años. Engállase el barbado y frota un lado. La niña en tanto pónese el índice en la lengua que empieza a deletrear los enredos de enredos de los enredos, y unta el otro zapato, a escondidas, con un poquito de saliba y tierra, pero con un poquito, no má- .s. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 28 XXI En un auto arteriado de círculos viciosos, torna diciembre qué cambiado, con su oro en desgracia. Quién le viera: diciembre con sus 31 pieles rotas, el pobre diablo. Y o le recuerdo. Hubimos de esplendor, bocas ensortijadas de mal engreimiento, todas arrastrando recelos infinitos. Cómo no voy a recordarle al magro señor Doce. Y o le recuerdo. Y hoy diciembre torna qué cambiado, el aliento a infortunio, helado, moqueando humillación. Y a la ternurosa avestruz como que la ha querido, como que la ha adorado. Pero ella se ha calzado todas sus diferencias. Trilce 29 XXII Es posible me persigan hasta cuatro magistrados vuelto. Es posible me juzguen pedro. ¡Cuatro humanidades justas juntas! Don Juan Jacobo está en hacerio, y las burlas le tiran de su soledad, como a un tonto. Bien hecho. Farol rotoso, el día induce a darle algo, y pende a modo de asterisco que se mendiga a sí propio quizás qué enmendaturas. Ahora que chirapa tan bonito en esta paz de una sola línea, aquí me tienes, aquí me tienes, de quien yo penda, para que sacies mis esquinas. Y si, éstas colmadas, te derramases de mayor bondad, sacaré de donde no haya, forjaré de locura otros posillos, insaciables ganas de nivel y amor. Si pues siempre salimos al encuentro de cuanto entra por otro lado, ahora, chirapado eterno y todo, heme, de quien yo penda, estoy de filo todavía. Heme! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 30 XXIII T ahona estuosa de aquellos mis bizcochos pura yema infantil innumerable, madre. Oh tus cuatro gorgas, asombrosamente mal plañidas, madre: tus mendigos. Las dos hermanas últimas, Miguel que ha muerto y yo arrastrando todavía una trenza por cada letra del abecedario. En la sala de arriba nos repartías de mañana, de tarde, de dual estiba, aquellas ricas hostias de tiempo, para que ahora nos sobrasen cáscaras de relojes en flexión de las 24 en puntos parados. Madre, y ahora! Ahora, en cuál alvéolo quedaría, en qué retoño capilar, cierta migaja que hoy se me ata al cuello y no quiere pasar. Hoy que hasta tus puros huesos estarán harina que no habrá en qué amasar ¡tierna dulcera de amor, hasta en la cruda sombra, hasta en el gran molar cuya encía late en aquel lácteo hoyuelo que inadvertido lábrase y pulula ¡tú lo viste tánto! en las cerradas manos recién nacidas. T al la tierra oirá en tu silenciar, cómo nos van cobrando todos el alquiler del mundo donde nos dejas y el valor de aquel pan inacabable. Trilce 3 Y nos lo cobran, cuando, siendo nosotros pequeños entonces, como tú verías, no se lo podíamos haber arrebatado a nadie; cuando tú nos lo diste, ¿di, mamá? CÉSAR V ALLEJO 32 XXIV Al borde de un sepulcro florecido transcurren dos marías llorando, llorando a mares. El ñandú desplumado del recuerdo alarga su postrera pluma, y con ella la mano negativa de Pedro graba en un domingo de ramos resonancias de exequias y de piedras. Del borde de un sepulcro removido se alejan dos marías cantando. Lunes. Trilce 33 XXV Alfan alfiles a adherirse a las junturas, al fondo, a los testuces, al sobrelecho de los numeradores a pie. Alfiles y cadillos de lupinas parvas. Al rebufar el socaire de cada caravela deshilada sin ameracanizar, ceden las estevas en espasmo de infortunio, con pulso párvulo mal habituado a sonarse en el dorso de la muñeca. Y la más aguda tiplisonancia se tonsura y apeálase, y largamente se ennazala hacia carámbanos de lástima infinita. Soberbios lomos resoplan al portar, pendientes de mustios petrales las escarapelas con sus siete colores bajo cero, desde las islas guaneras hasta las islas guaneras. T al los escarzos a la intemperie de pobre fe. T al el tiempo de las rondas. T al el del rodeo para los planos futuros, cuando innánima grifalda relata sólo fallidas callandas cruzadas. Vienen entonces alfiles a adherirse hasta en las puertas falsas y en los borradores. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 34 XXVI El verano echa nudo a tres años que, encintados de cárdenas cintas, a todo sollozo, aurigan orinientos índices de moribundas alejandrías, de cuzcos moribundos. Nudo alvino deshecho, una pierna por allí, más allá todavía la otra, desgajadas, péndulas. Deshecho nudo de lácteas glándulas de la sinamayera, bueno para alpacas brillantes, para abrigo de pluma inservible ¡más piernas los brazos que brazos! Así envérase el fin, como todo, como polluelo adormido saltón de la hendida cáscara, a luz eternamente polla. Y así, desde el ó valo, con cuatros al hombro, ya para qué tristura. Las uñas aquellas dolí an retesando los propios dedos hospicios. De entonces crecen ellas para adentro, mueren para afuera, y al medio ni van ni vienen, ni van ni vienen. Trilce 35 Las uñas. Apeona ardiente avestruz coja, desde perdidos sures, flecha hasta el estrecho ciego de senos aunados. Al calor de una punta de pobre sesgo ESFORZADO, la griega sota de oros tórnase morena sota de islas, cobriza sota de lagos en frente a moribunda alejandría, a cuzco moribundo. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 36 XXVII Me da miedo ese chorro, buen recuerdo, señor fuerte, implacable cruel dulzor. Me da miedo. Esta casa me da entero bien, entero lugar para este no saber dónde estar. No entremos. Me da miedo este favor de tornar por minutos, por puentes volados. Y o no avanzo, señor dulce, recuerdo valeroso, triste esqueleto cantor. Qué contenido, el de esta casa encantada, me da muertes de azogue, y obtura con plomo mis tomas a la seca actualidad. El chorro que no sabe a cómo vamos, dame miedo, pavor. Recuerdo valeroso, yo no avanzo. Rubio y triste esqueleto, silba, silba. Trilce 37 XXVIII He almorzado solo ahora, y no he tenido madre, ni súplica, ni sírvete, ni agua, ni padre que, en el facundo ofertorio de los choclos, pregunte para su tardanza de imagen, por los broches mayores del sonido. Cómo iba yo a almorzar. Cómo me iba a servir de tales platos distantes esas cosas, cuando habráse quebrado el propio hogar, cuando no asoma ni madre a los labios. Cómo iba yo a almorzar nonada. A la mesa de un buen amigo he almorzado con su padre recién llegado del mundo, con sus canas tías que hablan en tordillo retinte de porcelana, bisbiseando por todos sus viudos alvéolos; y con cubiertos francos de alegres tiroriros, porque estánse en su casa. Así, qué gracia! Y me han dolido los cuchillos de esta mesa en todo el paladar. El yantar de estas mesas así, en que se prueba amor ajeno en vez del propio amor, torna tierra el bocado que no brinda la MADRE, hace golpe la dura deglusión; el dulce, hiel; aceite funéreo, el café. Cuando ya se ha quebrado el propio hogar, y el sírvete materno no sale de la tumba, la cocina a oscuras, la miseria de amor. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 38 XXIX Zumba el tedio enfrascado bajo el momento improducido y caña. Pasa una paralela a ingrata línea quebrada de felicidad. Me extraña cada firmeza, junto a esa agua que se aleja, que ríe acero, caña. Hilo retemplado, hilo, hilo binómico ¿por dónde romperás, nudo de guerra? Acoraza este ecuador, Luna. Trilce 39 XXX Quemadura del segundo en toda la tierna carnecilla del deseo, picadura de ají vagoroso, a las dos de la tarde inmoral. Guante de los bordes borde a borde. Olorosa verdad tocada en vivo, al conectar la antena del sexo con lo que estamos siendo sin saberlo. Lavaza de máxima ablución. Calderas viajeras que se chocan y salpican de fresca sombra unánime, el color, la fracción, la dura vida, la dura vida eterna. No temamos. La muerte es así. El sexo sangre de la amada que se queja dulzorada, de portar tánto por tan punto ridículo. Y el circuito entre nuestro pobre día y la noche grande, a las dos de la tarde inmoral. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 40 XXXI Esperanza plañe entre algodones. Aristas roncas uniformadas de amenazas tejidas de esporas magníficas y con porteros botones innatos. ¿Se luden seis de sol? Natividad. Cállate, miedo. Cristiano espero, espero siempre de hinojos en la piedra circular que está en las cien esquinas de esta suerte tan vaga a donde asomo. Y Dios sobresaltado nos oprime el pulso, grave, mudo, y como padre a su pequeña, apenas, pero apenas, entreabre los sangrientos algodones y entre sus dedos toma a la esperanza. Señor, lo quiero yo... Y basta! Trilce 4 XXXII 999 calorías Rumbbb... Trrraprrrr rrach... chaz Serpentínica u del bizcochero engirafada al tímpano. Quién como los hielos. Pero no. Quién como lo que va ni más ni menos. Quién como el justo medio. 1,000 calorías. Azulea y ríe su gran cachaza el firmamento gringo. Baja el sol empavado y le alborota los cascos al más frío. Remeda al cuco; Roooooooeeeis...... tierno autocarril, móvil de sed, que corre hasta la playa. Aire, aire! Hielo! Si al menos el calor (—— Mejor no digo nada. Y hasta la misma pluma con que escribo por último se troncha. Treinta y seis trillones trescientos treinta y tres calorías. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 42 XXXIII Si lloviera esta noche, retiraríame de aquí a mil años. Mejor a cien no más. Como si nada hubiese ocurrido, haría la cuenta de que vengo todavía. O sin madre, sin amada, sin porfía de agacharme a aguaitar al fondo, a puro pulso, esta noche así, estaría escarmenando la fibra védica, la lana védica de mi fin final, hilo del diantre, traza de haber tenido por las narices a dos badajos inacordes de tiempo en una misma campana. Haga la cuenta de mi vida o haga la cuenta de no haber aún nacido no alcanzaré a librarme. No será lo que aún no haya venido, sino lo que ha llegado y ya se ha ido, sino lo que ha llegado y ya se ha ido. Trilce 43 XXXIV Se acabó el extraño, con quien, tarde la noche, regresabas parla y parla. Y a no habrá quien me aguarde, dispuesto mi lugar, bueno lo malo. Se acabó la calurosa tarde; tu gran bahía y tu clamor; la charla con tu madre acabada que nos brindaba un té lleno de tarde. Se acabó todo al fin: las vacaciones, tu obediencia de pechos, tu manera de pedirme que no me vaya fuera. Y se acabó el diminutivo, para mi mayoría en el dolor sin fin, y nuestro haber nacido así sin causa. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 44 XXXV El encuentro con la amada tánto alguna vez, es un simple detalle, casi un programa hípico en violado, que de tan largo no se puede doblar bien. El almuerzo con ella que estaría poniendo el plato que nos gustara ayer y se repite ahora, pero con algo más de mostaza; el tenedor absorto, su doneo radiante de pistilo en mayo, y su verecundia de a centavito, por quítame allá esa paja. Y la cerveza lírica y nerviosa a la que celan sus dos pezones sin lúpulo, y que no se debe tomar mucho! Y los demás encantos de la mesa que aquella núbil campaña borda con sus propias baterías germinales que han operado toda la mañana, según me consta, a mí, amoroso notario de sus intimidades, y con las diez varillas mágicas de sus dedos pancreáticos. Mujer que, sin pensar en nada más allá, suelta el mirlo y se pone a conversarnos sus palabras tiernas como lancinantes lechugas recién cortadas. Trilce 45 Otro vaso, y me voy. Y nos marchamos, ahora sí, a trabajar. Entre tanto, ella se interna entre los cortinajes y ¡oh aguja de mis días desgarrados! se sienta a la orilla de una costura, a coserme el costado a su costado, a pegar el botón de esa camisa, que se ha vuelto a caer. Pero hase visto! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 46 XXXVI Pugnamos ensartarnos por un ojo de aguja, enfrentados, a las ganadas. Amoniácase casi el cuarto ángulo del círculo. ¡Hembra se continúa el macho, a raíz de probables senos, y precisamente a raíz de cuanto no florece. ¿Por ahí estás, V enus de Milo? T ú manqueas apenas, pululando entrañada en los brazos plenarios de la existencia, de esta existencia que todaviiza perenne imperfección. V enus de Milo, cuyo cercenado, increado brazo revuélvese y trata de encodarse a través de verdeantes guijarros gagos, ortivos nautilos, aunes que gatean recién, vísperas inmortales. Laceadora de inminencias, laceadora del paréntesis. Rehusad, y vosotros, a posar las plantas en la seguridad dupla de la Armonía. Rehusad la simetría a buen seguro. Intervenid en el conflicto de puntas que se disputan en la más torionda de las justas el salto por el ojo de la aguja! T al siento ahora al meñique demás en la siniestra. Lo veo y creo Trilce 47 no debe serme, o por lo menos que está en sitio donde no debe. Y me inspira rabia y me azarea y no hay cómo salir de él, sino haciendo la cuenta de que hoy es jueves. ¡Ceded al nuevo impar potente de orfandad! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 48 XXXVII He conocido a una pobre muchacha a quien conduje hasta la escena. La madre, sus hermanas qué amables y también aquel su infortunado “tú no vas a volver” . Como en cierto negocio me iba admirablemente, me rodeaban de un aire de dinasta florido. La novia se volvía agua, y cuán bien me solía llorar su amor mal aprendido. Me gustaba su tímida marinera de humildes aderezos al dar las vueltas, y cómo su pañuelo trazaba puntos, tildes, a la melografía de su bailar de juncia. Y cuando ambos burlamos al párroco, quebróse mi negocio y el suyo y la esfera barrida. Trilce 49 XXXVIII Este cristal aguarda ser sorbido en bruto por boca venidera sin dientes. No desdentada. Este cristal es pan no venido todavía. Hiere cuando lo fuerzan y ya no tiene cariños animales. Mas si se le apasiona, se melaría y tomaría la horma de los sustantivos que se adjetivan de brindarse. Quienes lo ven allí triste individuo incoloro, lo enviarían por amor, por pasado y a lo más por futuro: si él no dase por ninguno de sus costados; si él espera ser sorbido de golpe y en cuanto transparencia, por boca ve- nidera que ya no tendrá dientes. Este cristal ha pasado de animal, y márchase ahora a formar las izquierdas, los nuevos Menos. Déjenlo solo no má s. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 50 XXXIX Quién ha encendido fósforo! Mésome. Sonrío a columpio por motivo. Sonrío aún más, si llegan todos a ver las guías sin color y a mí siempre en punto. Qué me importa. Ni ese bueno del Sol que, al morirse de gusto, lo desposta todo para distribuirlo entre las sombras, el pródigo, ni él me esperaría a la otra banda. Ni los demás que paran solo entrando y saliendo. Llama con toque de retina el gran panadero. Y pagamos en señas curiosísimas el tibio valor innegable horneado, trascendiente. Y tomamos el café, ya tarde, con deficiente azúcar que ha faltado, y pan sin mantequilla. Qué se va a hacer. Pero, eso sí, los aros receñidos, barreados. La salud va en un pie. De frente: marchen! Trilce 5 XL Quién nos hubiera dicho que en domingo así, sobre arácnidas cuestas se encabritaría la sombra de puro frontal. (Un molusco ataca yermos ojos encallados, a razón de dos o más posibilidades tantálicas contra medio estertor de sangre remordida). Entonces, ni el propio revés de la pantalla deshabitada enjugaría las arterias trasdoseadas de dobles todavías. Como si nos hubiesen dejado salir! Como si no estuviésemos embrazados siempre a los dos flancos diarios de la fatalidad! Y cuánto nos habríamos ofendido. Y aún lo que nos habríamos enojado y peleado y amistado otra vez y otra vez. Quién hubiera pensado en tal domingo, cuando, a rastras, seis codos lamen de esta manera, hueras yemas lunesentes. Habríamos sacado contra él, de bajo de las dos alas del Amor, lustrales plumas terceras, puñales, nuevos pasajes de papel de oriente. Para hoy que probamos si aún vivimos, casi un frente no más. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 52 XLI La Muerte de rodillas mana su sangre blanca que no es sangre. Se huele a garantía. Pero ya me quiero reír. Murmúrase algo por allí. Callan. Alguien silba valor de lado, y hasta se contaría en par veintitrés costillas que se echan de menos entre sí, a ambos costados; se contaría en par también, toda la fila de trapecios escoltas. En tanto, el redoblante policial (otra vez me quiero reír) se desquita y nos tunde a palos, dale y dale, de membrana a membrana, tas con tas. Trilce 53 XLII Esperaos. Y a os voy a narrar todo. Esperaos sossiegue este dolor de cabeza. Esperaos. ¿Dónde os habéis dejado vosotros que no hacéis falta jamás? Nadie hace falta! Muy bien. Rosa, entra del último piso. Estoy niño. Y otra vez rosa: ni sabes a dónde voy. ¿Aspa la estrella de la muerte? O son extrañas máquinas cosedoras dentro del costado izquierdo. Esperaos otro momento. No nos ha visto nadie. Pura búscate el talle. ¡A dónde se han saltado tus ojos! Penetra reencarnada en los salones de ponentino cristal. Suena música exacta casi lástima. Me siento mejor. Sin fiebre, y ferviente. Primavera. Perú. Abro los ojos. Ave! No salgas. Dios, como si sospechase algún flujo sin reflujo ay. Paletada facial, resbala el telón cabe las conchas. Acrisis. Tilia, acuéstate. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 54 XLIII Quién sabe se va a ti. No le ocultes. Quién sabe madrugada. Acaríciale. No le digas nada. Está duro de lo que se ahuyenta. Acaríciale. Anda! Cómo le tendrías pena. Narra que no es posible todos digan que bueno, cuando ves que se vuelve y revuelve, animal que ha aprendido a irse... No? Sí! Acaríciale. No le arguyas. Quién sabe se va a ti madrugada. ¿Has contado qué poros dan salida solamente, y cuáles dan entrada? Acaríciale. Anda! Pero no vaya a saber que lo haces porque yo te lo ruego. Anda! Trilce 55 XLIV Este piano viaja para adentro, viaja a saltos alegres. Luego medita en ferrado reposo, clavado con diez horizontes. Adelanta. Arrástrase bajo túneles, más allá, bajo túneles de dolor, bajo vértebras que fugan naturalmente. Otras veces van sus trompas, lentas asias amarillas de vivir, van de eclipse, y se espulgan pesadillas insectiles, ya muertas para el trueno, heraldo de los génesis. Piano oscuro ¿a quién atisbas con tu sordera que me oye, con tu mudez que me asorda? Oh pulso misterioso. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 56 XLV Me desvinculo del mar cuando vienen las aguas a mí. Salgamos siempre. Saboreemos la canción estupenda, la canción dicha por los labios inferiores del deseo. Oh prodigiosa doncellez. Pasa la brisa sin sal. A lo lejos husmeo los tuétanos oyendo el tanteo profundo, a la caza de teclas de resaca. Y si así diéramos las narices en el absurdo, nos cubriremos con el oro de no tener nada, y empollaremos el ala aún no nacida de la noche, hermana de esta ala huérfana del día, que a fuerza de ser una ya no es ala. Trilce 57 XLVI La tarde cocinera se detiene ante la mesa donde tu comiste; y muerta de hambre tu memoria viene sin probar ni agua, de lo puro triste. Mas, como siempre, tu humildad se aviene a que le brinden la bondad más triste. Y no quieres gustar, que ves quien viene filialmente a la mesa en que comiste. La tarde cocinera te suplica y te llora en su delantal que aún sórdido nos empieza a querer de oírnos tánto. Y o hago esfuerzos también; porque no hay valor para servirse de estas aves. Ah! que nos vamos a servir ya nada. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 58 XLVII Ciliado arrecife donde nací, según refieren cronicones y pliegos de labios familiares historiados en segunda gracia. Ciliado archipié lago, te desislas a fondo, a fondo, archipiélago mío! Duras todavía las articulaciones al camino, como cuando nos instan, y nosotros no cedemos por nada. Al ver los párpados cerrados, implumes mayorcitos, devorando azules bombones, se carcajean pericotes viejos. Los párpados cerrados, como si, cuando nacemos, siempre no fuese tiempo todavía. Se va el altar, el cirio para que no le pasase nada a mi madre, y por mí que sería con los años, si Dios quería, Obispo, Papa, Santo, o talvez sólo un columnario dolor de cabeza. Y las manitas que se abarquillan asiéndose de algo flotante, a no querer quedarse. Y siendo ya la 1. Trilce 59 XLVIII T engo ahora 70 soles peruanos. Cojo la penúltima moneda, la que sue- na 69 veces púnicas. Y he aquí, la finalizar su rol, quémase toda y arde llameante, llameante, redonda entre mis tímpanos alucinados. Ella, siendo 69, dase contra 70; luego escala 71, rebota en 72. Y así se multiplica y espejea impertérrita en todos los demás piñones. Ella, vibrando y forcejeando, pegando grittttos, soltando arduos, chisporroteantes silencios, orinándose de natural grandor, en unánimes postes surgentes, acaba por ser todos los guarismos, la vida entera. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 60 XLIX Murmurado en inquietud, cruzo, el traje largo de sentir, los lunes de la verdad. Nadie me busca ni me reconoce, y hasta yo he olvidado de quién seré. Cierta guardarropía, sólo ella, nos sabrá a todos en las blancas hojas de las partidas. Esa guardarropía, ella sola, al volver de cada facción, de cada candelabro ciego de nacimiento. T ampoco yo descubro a nadie, bajo este mantillo que iridice los lunes de la razón; y no hago más que sonreír a cada púa de las verjas, en la loca búsqueda del conocido. Buena guardarropía, ábreme tus blancas hojas: quiero reconocer siquiera al 1, quiero el punto de apoyo, quiero saber de estar siquiera. En los bastidores donde nos vestimos, no hay, no Hay nadie: hojas tan sólo de par en par. Trilce 6 Y siempre los trajes descolgándose por sí propios, de perchas como ductores índices grotescos, y partiendo sin cuerpos, vacantes, hasta el matiz prudente de un gran caldo de alas con causas y lindes fritas. Y hasta el hueso! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 62 L El cancerbero cuatro veces al día maneja su candado, abriéndonos cerrándonos los esternones, en guiños que entendemos perfectamente. Con los fundillos lelos melancólicos, amuchachado de trascendental desaliño, parado, es adorable el pobre viejo. Chancea con los presos, hasta el tope los puños en las ingles. Y hasta mojarrilla les roe algún mendrugo; pero siempre cumpliendo su deber. Por entre los barrotes pone el punto fiscal, inadvertido, izándose en la falangita del meñique, a la pista de lo que hablo, lo que como, lo que sueño. Quiere el corvino ya no hayan adentros, y cómo nos duele esto que quiere el cancerbero. Por un sistema de relojería, juega el viejo inminente, pitagórico! a lo ancho de las aortas. Y sólo de tarde en noche, con noche soslaya alguna su excepción de metal. Pero, naturalmente, siempre cumpliendo su deber. Trilce 63 LI Mentira. Si lo hacía de engaños, y nada más. Y a está. De otro modo, también tú vas a ver cuánto va a dolerme el haber sido así. Mentira. Calla. Y a está bien. Como otras veces tú me haces esto mismo, por eso yo también he sido así. A mí, que había tánto atisbado si de veras llorabas, ya que otras veces sólo te quedaste en tus dulces pucheros, a mí, que ni soñé que los creyeses, me ganaron tus lágrimas. Y a está. Mas ya lo sabes: todo fue mentira. Y si sigues llorando, bueno, pues! Otra vez ni he de verte cuando juegues. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 64 LII Y nos levantaremos cuando se nos dé la gana, aunque mamá toda claror nos despierte con cantora y linda cólera materna. Nosotros reiremos a hurtadillas de esto, mordiendo el canto de las tibias colchas de vicuña ¡y no me vayas a hacer cosas! Los humos de los bohíos ¡ah golfillos en rama! madrugarían a jugar a las cometas azulinas, azulantes, y, apañuscando alfarjes y piedras, nos darían su estímulo fragante de boñiga, para sacarnos al aire nene que no conoce aún las letras, a pelearles los hilos. Otro día querrás pastorear entre tus huecos onfalóideos ávidas cavernas, meses nonos, mis telones. O querrás acompañar a la ancianía a destapar la toma de un crepúsculo, para que de día surja toda el agua que pasa de noche. Y llegas muriéndote de risa, y en el almuerzo musical, cancha reventada, harina con manteca, con manteca, Trilce 65 le tomas el pelo al peón decúbito que hoy otra vez olvida dar los buenos días, esos sus días, buenos con b de baldío, que insisten en salirle al pobre por la culata de la v dentilabial que vela en él. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 66 LIII Quién clama las once no son doce! Como si las hubiesen pujado, se afrontan de dos en dos las once veces. Cabezazo brutal. Asoman las cabezas a oír, Pero sin traspasar los eternos trescientos sesenta grados, asoman y exploran en balde, dónde ambas manos ocultan el otro puente que les nace entre veras y litúrgicas bromas. Vuelve la frontera a probar las dos piedras que no alcanzan a ocupar una misma posada a un mismo tiempo. La frontera, la ambulante batuta, que sigue inmutable, igual, sólo más ella a cada esguince en alto. V eis lo que es sin poder ser negado, veis lo que tenemos que aguantar, mal que nos pese. ¡Cuánto se aceita en codos que llegan hasta la boca! Trilce 67 LIV Forajido tormento, entra, sal por un mismo forado cuadrangular. Duda. El balance punza y punza hasta las cachas. A veces doyme contra todas las contras, y por ratos soy el alto más negro de los ápices en la fatalidad de la Armonía. Entonces las ojeras se irritan divinamente, y solloza la sierra del alma, se violentan oxígenos de buena voluntad, arde cuanto no arde y hasta el dolor dobla el pico en risa Pero un día no podrás entrar ni salir, con el puñado de tierra que te echaré a los ojos, forajido! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 68 LV Samain diría el aire es quieto y de una contenida tristeza. V allejo dice hoy la Muerte está soldando cada lindero a cada hebra de cabello perdido, desde la cu- beta de un frontal, donde hay algas, toronjiles que cantan divinos almácigos en guardia, y versos anti- sépticos sin dueño. El miércoles, con uñas destronadas se abre las propias uñas de alcanfor, e instila por polvorientos harneros, ecos, páginas vueltas, sarros, zumbidos de moscas cuando hay muerto, y pena clara esponjosa y cierta esperanza. Un enfermo lee La Prensa, como en facistol. Otro está tendido palpitante, longirrostro, cerca de estarlo sepulto. Y yo advierto un hombro está en su sitio todavía y casi queda listo tras de éste, el otro lado. Y a la tarde pasó diez y seis veces por el subsue- lo empatrullado, y se está casi ausente en el número de madera amarilla de la cama que está desocupada tanto tiempo allá................................................. enfrente. Trilce 69 LVI T odos los días amanezco a ciegas a trabajar para vivir; y tomo el desayuno, sin probar ni gota de él, todas las mañanas. Sin saber si he logrado, o más nunca, algo que brinca del sabor o es sólo corazón y que ya vuelto, lamentará hasta dónde esto es lo menos. El niño crecería ahito de felicidad oh albas, ante el pesar de los padres de no poder dejarnos de arrancar de sus sueños de amor a este mundo; ante ellos que, como Dios, de tanto amor se comprendieron hasta creadores y nos quisieron hasta hacernos daño. Flecos de invisible trama, dientes que huronean desde la neutra emoción, pilares libres de base y coronación, en la gran boca que ha perdido el habla. Fósforo y fósforo en la oscuridad, lágrima y lágrima en la polvareda. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 70 LVII Craterizados los puntos más altos, los puntos del amor, de ser mayúsculo, bebo, ayuno, ab- sorbo heroína para la pena, para el latido lacio y contra toda corrección. ¿Puedo decir que nos han traicionado? No. ¿Qué todos fueron buenos? T ampoco. Pero allí está una buena voluntad, sin duda, y sobre todo, el ser así. Y qué quien se ame mucho! Y o me busco en mi propio designio que debió ser obra mía, en vano: nada alcanzó a ser libre. Y sin embargo, quién me empuja. A que no me atrevo a cerrar la quinta ventana. Y el papel de amarse y persistir, junto a las horas y a lo indebido. Y el éste y el aquél. Trilce 7 LVIII En la celda, en lo sólido, también se acurrucan los rincones. Arreglo los desnudos que se ajan, se doblan, se harapan. Apéome del caballo jadeante, bufando líneas de bofetadas y de horizontes; espumoso pie contra tres cascos. Y le ayudo: Anda, animal! Se tomaría menos, siempre menos, de lo que me tocase erogar, en la celda, en lo líquido. El compañero de prisión comía el trigo de las lomas, con mi propia cuchara, cuando, a la mesa de mis padres, niño, que me quedaba dormido masticando. Le soplo al otro: Vuelve, sal por la otra esquina; apura... aprisa... apronta! E inadvertido aduzco, planeo, cabe camastro desvencijado, piadoso: No creas. Aquel médico era un hombre sano. Y a no reiré cuando mi madre rece en infancia y en domingo, a las cuatro de la madrugada, por los caminantes, CÉSAR V ALLEJO 72 encarcelados, enfermos y pobres. En el redil de niños, ya no le asestaré puñetazos a ninguno de ellos, quien, después, todavía sangrando, lloraría: El otro sábado te daré mi fiambre, pero no me pegues! Y a no le diré que bueno. En la celda, en el gas ilimitado hasta redondearse en la condensación, ¿quién tropieza por afuera? Trilce 73 LIX La esfera terrestre del amor que rezagóse abajo, da vuelta y vuelta sin parar segundo, y nosotros estamos condenados a sufrir como un centro su girar. Pacífico inmóvil, vidrio, preñado de todos los posibles. Andes frío, inhumanable, puro. Acaso. Acaso. Gira la esfera en el pedernal del tiempo, y se afila, y se afila hasta querer perderse; gira forjando, ante los desertados flancos, aquel punto tal espantablemente conocido, porque él ha gestado, vuelta y vuelta, el corralito consabido. Centrífuga que sí, que sí, que Sí, que sí, que sí, que sí, que sí: NO! Y me retiro hasta azular, y retrayéndome endurezco, hasta apretarme el alma! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 74 LX Es de madera mi paciencia, sorda, vejetal. Día que has sido puro, niño, inútil, que naciste desnudo, las leguas de tu marcha, van corriendo sobre tus doce extremidades, ese doblez ceñudo que después deshiláchase en no se sabe qué últimos pañales. Constelado de hemisferios de grumo, bajo eternas américas inéditas, tu gran plumaje, te partes y me dejas, sin tu emoción ambigua, sin tu nudo de sueños, domingo. Y se apolilla mi paciencia, y me vuelvo a exclamar: ¡Cuándo vendrá el domingo bocón y mudo del sepulcro; cuándo vendrá a cargar este sábado de harapos, esta horrible sutura del placer que nos engendra sin querer, y el placer que nos DestieRRa! Trilce 75 LXI Esta noche desciendo del caballo, ante la puerta de la casa, donde me despedí con el cantar del gallo. Está cerrada y nadie responde. El poyo en que mamá alumbró al hermano mayor, para que ensille lomos que había yo montado en pelo, por rúas y por cercas, niño aldeano; el poyo en que dejé que se amarille al sol mi adolorida infancia... ¿Y este duelo que enmarca la portada? Dios en la paz foránea, estornuda, cual llamando también, el bruto; husmea, golpeando el empedrado. Luego duda, relincha, orejea a viva oreja. Ha de velar papá rezando, y quizás pensará se me hizo tarde. Las hermanas, canturreando sus ilusiones sencillas, bullosas, en la labor para la fiesta que se acerca, y ya no falta casi nada. Espero, espero, el corazón un huevo en su momento, que se obstruye. Numerosa familia que dejamos no ha mucho, hoy nadie en vela, y ni una cera puso en el ara para que volviéramos. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 76 Llamo de nuevo, y nada. Callamos y nos ponemos a sollozar, y el animal relincha, relincha más todavía. T odos están durmiendo para siempre, y tan de lo más bien, que por fin mi caballo acaba fatigado por cabecear a su vez, y entre sueños, a cada venia, dice que está bien, que todo está muy bien. Trilce 77 LXII Alfombra Cuando vayas al cuarto que tú sabes, entra en él, pero entorna con tiento la mampara que tánto se entreabre, cása bien los cerrojos, para que ya no puedan volverse otras espaldas. Corteza Y cuando salgas, di que no tardarás a llamar al canal que nos separa: fuertemente cojido de un canto de tu suerte, te soy inseparable, y me arrastras de borde de tu alma. Almohada Y sólo cuando hayamos muerto ¡quién sabe! Oh nó. Quié n sabe! entonces nos habremos separado. Mas si, al cambiar el paso, me tocase a mí la desconocida bandera, te he de esperar allá; en la confluencia del soplo y el hueso, como antaño, como antaño en la esquina de los novios ponientes de la tierra. Y desde allí te seguiré a lo largo de otros mundos, y siquiera podrán servirte mis nós musgosos y arrecidos, para que en ellos poses las rodillas en las siete caídas de esa cuesta infinita, y así te duelan menos. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 78 LXIII Amanece lloviendo. Bien peinada la mañana chorrea el pelo fino. Melancolía está amarrada; y en mal asfaltado oxidente de muebles hindúes, vira, se asienta apenas el destino. Cielos de puna descorazonada por gran amor, los cielos de platino, torvos de imposible. Rumia la majada y se subraya de un relincho andino. Me acuerdo de mí mismo. Pero bastan las astas del viento, los timones quietos hasta hacerse uno, y el grillo del tedio y el jiboso codo inquebrantable. Basta la mañana de libres crinejas de brea preciosa, serrana, cuando salgo y busco las once y no son más que las doce deshoras. Trilce 79 LXIV Hitos vagarosos enamoran, desde el minuto montuoso que obstetriza y fécha los amotinados ni- chos de la atmósfera. V erde está el corazón de tánto esperar; y en el canal de Panamá ¡hablo con vosotros, mitades, ba- ses, cúspides! retoñan los peldaños, pasos que suben, pasos que baja- n. Y yo que pervivo, y yo que sé plantarme. Oh valle sin altura madre, donde todo duerme horrible mediatinta, sin ríos frescos, sin entradas de amor. Oh voces y ciudades que pasan cabalgando en un dedo tendido que señala a calva Unidad. Mientras pasan, de mucho en mucho, gañanes de gran costado sabio, detrás de las tres tardas dimensiones. Hoy Mañana Ayer (No, hombre!) CÉSAR V ALLEJO 80 LXV Madre, me voy mañana a Santiago, a mojarme en tu bendición y en tu llanto. Acomodando estoy mis desengaños y el rosado de llaga de mis falsos trajines. Me esperará tu arco de asombro, las tonsuradas columnas de tus ansias que se acaban la vida. Me esperará el patio, el corredor de abajo con sus tondos y repulgos de fiesta. Me esperará mi sillón ayo, aquel buen quijarudo trasto de dinástico cuero, que pára no más rezongando a las nalgas tataranietas, de correa a correhuela. Estoy cribando mis cariños más puros. Estoy ejeando ¿no oyes jadear la sonda? ¿no oyes tascar dianas? estoy plasmando tu fórmula de amor para todos los huecos de este suelo. Oh si se dispusieran los tácitos volantes para todas las cintas más distantes, para todas las citas más distintas. Así, muerta inmortal. Así. Bajo los dobles arcos de tu sangre, por donde hay que pasar tan de puntillas, que hasta mi padre para ir por allí, humildóse hasta menos de la mitad del hombre, hasta ser el primer pequeño que tuviste. Trilce 8 Así, muerta inmortal. Entre la columnata de tus huesos que no puede caer ni a lloros, y a cuyo lado ni el Destino pudo entrometer ni un solo dedo suyo. Así, muerta inmortal. Así. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 82 LXVI Dobla el dos de Noviembre. Estas sillas son buenas acojidas. La rama del presentimiento va, viene, sube, ondea sudorosa, fatigada en esta sala. Dobla triste el dos de Noviembre. Difuntos, qué bajo cortan vuestros dientes abolidos, repasando ciegos nervios, sin recordar la dura fibra que cantores obreros redondos remiendan con cáñamo inacabable, de innumerables nudos latientes de encrucijada. V osotros, difuntos, de las nítidas rodillas puras a fuerza de entregaros, cómo aserráis el otro corazón con vuestras blancas coronas, ralas de cordialidad. Sí. V osotros, difuntos. Dobla triste el dos de Noviembre. Y la rama del presentimiento se la muerde un carro que simplemente rueda por la calle. Trilce 83 LXVII Canta cerca el verano, y ambos diversos erramos, al hombro recodos, cedros, compases unípedos, espatarrados en la sola recta inevitable. Canta el verano y en aquellas paredes endulzadas de marzo, lloriquea, gusanea la arácnida acuarela de la melancolía. Cuadro enmarcado de trisado anélido, cuadro que faltó en ese sitio para donde pensamos que vendría el gran espejo ausente. Amor, éste es el cuadro que faltó. Mas, para qué me esforzaría por dorar pajilla para tal encantada aurícula, si, a espaldas de astros queridos, se consiente el vacío, a pesar de todo. Cuánta madre quedábase adentrada siempre, en tenaz atavío de carbón, cuando el cuadro faltaba, y para lo que crecería al pie de ardua quebrada de mujer. Así yo me decía: Si vendrá aquel espejo que de tan esperado, ya pasa de cristal. Me acababa la vida, ¿para qué? Me acababa la vida, para alzarnos sólo de espejo a espejo. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 84 LXVIII Estamos a catorce de Julio. Son las cinco de la tarde. Llueve en toda una tercera esquina de papel secante. Y llueve más de abajo ay para arriba. Dos lagunas las manos avanzan de diez en fondo, desde un martes cenagoso que ha seis días está en los lagrimales helado. Se ha degollado una semana con las más agudas caídas; hase hecho todo lo que puede hacer miserable genial en gran taberna sin rieles. Ahora estamos bien, con esta lluvia que nos lava y nos alegra y nos hace gracia suave. Hemos a peso bruto caminado, y, de un solo desafío, blanqueó nuestra pureza de animales. Y preguntamos por el eterno amor, por el encuentro absoluto, por cuanto pasa de aquí para allá. Y respondimos desde dónde los míos no son los tuyos desde qué hora el bordón, al ser portado, sustenta y no es sustentado. (Neto.) Trilce 85 Y era negro, colgado en un rincón, sin proferir ni jota, mi paletó, a t o d a s t A CÉSAR V ALLEJO 86 LXIX Qué nos buscas, oh mar, con tus volúmenes docentes! Qué inconsolable, qué atroz estás en la febril solana. Con tus azadones saltas, con tus hojas saltas, hachando, hachando en loco sésamo, mientras tornan llorando las olas, después de descalcar los cuatro vientos y todos los recuerdos, en labiados plateles de tungsteno, contractos de colmillos y estáticas eles quelonias. Filosofía de alas negras que vibran al medroso temblor de los hombros del día. El mar, y una edición en pie, en su única hoja el anverso de cara al reverso. Trilce 87 LXX T odos sonríen del desgaire con que voy- me a fondo, celular de comer bien y bien be- ber. Los soles andan sin yantar? O hay quien les da granos como pajarillos? Francamente, yo no sé de esto casi nada. Oh piedra, almohada bienfaciente al fin. Amémonos los vivos a los vivos, que a las buenas cosas muertas será después. Cuánto tenemos que quererlas y estrecharlas, cuánto. Amemos las actuali- dades, que siempre no estaremos como estamos. Que interinos Barrancos no hay en los esenciales cementerios. El porteo va en el alfar, a pico. La jornada nos da en el cogollo, con su docena de escaleras, escala- das, en horizontizante frustración de pies, por pávi- das sandalias vacantes. Y temblamos avanzar el paso, que no sabemos si damos con el péndulo, o ya lo hemos cruzado. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 88 LXXI Serpea el sol en tu mano fresca, y se derrama cauteloso en tu curiosidad. Cállate. Nadie sabe que estás en mí, toda entera. C állate. No respires. Nadie sabe mi merienda suculenta de unidad: legión de oscuridades, amazonas de lloro. V anse los carros flajelados por la tarde, y entre ellos los míos, cara atrás, a las riendas fatales de tus dedos. T us manos y mis manos recíprocas se tienden polos en guardia, practicando depresiones, y sienes y costados. Calla también, crepúsculo futuro, y recógete a reír en lo íntimo, de este celo de gallos ajisecos soberbiamente, soberbiamente ennavajados de cúpulas, de viudas mitades cerúleas. Regocíjate, huérfano; bebe tu copa de agua desde la pulpería de una esquina cualquiera. Trilce 89 LXXII Lento salón en cono, te cerraron, te cerré, aunque te quise, tú lo sabes, y hoy de qué manos perderán tus llaves. Desde estos muros derribamos los últimos escasos pabellones que cantaban. Los verdes han crecido. V eo labriegos trabajando, los cerros llenos de triunfo. Y el mes y medio transcurrido alcanza para una mortaja, hasta demás. Salón de cuatro entradas y sin una salida, hoy que has honda murria, te hablo por tus seis dialectos enteros. Y a ni he de violentarte a que me seas, de para nunca; ya no saltaremos ningún otro portillo querido. Julio estaba entonces de nueve. Amor contó en sonido impar. Y la dulzura dió para toda la mortaja, hasta demás. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 90 LXXIII Ha triunfado otro ay. La verdad está allí. Y quien tal actúa ¿no va a saber amaestrar excelentes dijitígrados para el ratón Sí... No...? Ha triunfado otro ay y contra nadie. Oh exósmosis de agua químicamente pura. Ah míos australes. Oh nuestros divinos. T engo pues derecho a estar verde y contento y peligroso, y a ser el cincel, miedo del bloque basto y vasto; a meter la pata y a la risa. Absurdo, sólo tú eres puro. Absurdo, este exceso sólo ante ti se suda de dorado placer. Trilce 9 LXXIV Hubo un día tan rico el año pasado...! que ya ni sé qué hacer con él. Severas madres guías al colegio, asedian las reflexiones, y nosotros enflechamos la cara apenas. Para ya tarde saber que en aquello gozna la travesura y se rompe la sien. Qué día el del año pasado, que ya ni sé qué hacer con él, rota la sien y todo. Por eso nos separarán, por eso y para ya no hagamos mal. Y las reflexiones técnicas aún dicen ¿no las vas a oír? que dentro de dos gráfilas oscuras y aparte, por haber sido niños y también por habernos juntado mucho en la vida, reclusos para siempre nos irán a encerrar. Para que te compongas. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 92 LXXV Estáis muertos. Qué extraña manera de estarse muertos. Quien- quiera diría no lo estáis. Pero, en verdad, estáis muertos. Flotáis nadamente detrás de aquesa membrana que, péndula del zenit al nadir, viene y va de cre- púsculo a crepúsculo, vibrando ante la sonora caja de una herida que a vosotros no os duele. Os digo, pues, que la vida está en el espejo, y que vosotros sois el original, la muerte. Mientras la onda va, mientras la onda viene, cuán impunemente se está uno muerto. Sólo cuando las aguas se quebrantan en los bordes enfrentados, y se doblan y doblan, entonces os transfiguráis y cre- yendo morir, percibís la sexta cuerda que ya no es vuestra. Estáis muertos, no habiendo antes vivido jamás. Quienquiera diría que, no siendo ahora, en otro tiem- po fuisteis. Pero, en verdad, vosotros sois los cadáve- res de una vida que nunca fue. Triste destino. El no haber sido sino muertos siempre. El ser hoja seca, sin haber sido verde jamás. Orfandad de orfandades. Y sinembargo, los muertos no son, no pueden ser cadáveres de una vida que todavía no han vivido. Ellos murieron siempre de vida. Estáis muertos. Trilce 93 LXXVI De la noche a la mañana voy sacando lengua a las más mudas equis. En nombre de esa pura que sabía mirar hasta ser 2. En nombre de que la fui extraño, llave y chapa muy diferentes. En nombre della que no tuvo voz ni voto, cuando se dispuso esta su suerte de hacer. Ebullición de cuernos, sinembargo, aptos; ebullición que siempre tan sólo estuvo a 99 burbujas. ¡Remates, esposados en naturaleza, de dos días que no se juntan, que no se alcanzan jamás. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 94 LXXVII Graniza tánto, como para que yo recuerde y acreciente las perlas que he recogido del hocico mismo de cada tempestad. No se vaya a secar esta lluvia. A menos que me fuese dado caer ahora para ella, o que me enterrasen mojado en el agua que surtiera de todos los fuegos. ¿Hasta dónde me alcanzará esta lluvia? T emo me quede con algún flanco seco; temo que ella se vaya, sin haberme probado en las sequías de increíbles cuerdas vocales, por las que, para dar armonía, hay siempre que subir ¡nunca bajar! ¿No subimos acaso para abajo? Canta, lluvia, en la costa aún sin mar! DUCHAMP IS MY LAWYER DUCHAMP IS MY LAWYER THE POLEMICS, PRAGMATICS, AND POETICS OF UBUWEB KENNETH GOLDSMITH Columbia University Press | New York Columbia University Press Publishers Since 1893 New York Chichester, West Sussex cup.columbia.edu Copyright © 2020 Columbia University Press All rights reserved E-ISBN 978-0-231-54691-1 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Goldsmith, Kenneth, author. Title: Duchamp is my lawyer : the polemics, pragmatics, and poetics of UbuWeb / Kenneth Goldsmith. Description: New York : Columbia University Press, [2020] | Includes bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2019058881 (print) | LCCN 2019058882 (ebook) | ISBN 9780231186940 (hardcover) | ISBN 9780231186957 (paperback) Subjects: LCSH: UbuWeb. | Arts—Experimental methods—Computer network resources. Classification: LCC NX260 .G65 2020 (print) | LCC NX260 (ebook) | DDC 700.285—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019058881 LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019058882 A Columbia University Press E-book. CUP would be pleased to hear about your reading experience with this e-book at cup-ebook@columbia.edu. Cover design: Lisa Hamm I often tell people that Duchamp is my lawyer. He’s the legal premise to validate what I’m doing. Virgil Abloh For the Custodians CONTENTS Introduction: The Back Door PART I: POLEMICS PART II: PRAGMATICS 1 Folk Law 2 From Panorama to Postage Stamp: Avant-Garde Cinema and the Internet 3 The Work of Video Art in the Age of Digital Reproduction 4 Shadow Libraries and Preserving the Memory of the World PART III: POETICS 5 Dirty Concrete 6 From Ursonate to Re-Sonate 7 People Like Us 8 Aspen : A “Multimedia Magazine in a Box” 9 Street Poets and Visionaries 10 An Anthology of Anthologies Coda: The Ghost in the Algorithm Appendix: 101 Things on UbuWeb That You Don’t Know About but Should Notes Acknowledgments Index T INTRODUCTION THE BACK DOOR here’s a back door to the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City that few know about. Invisible to the bustling crowds at the main entrance on Fifty-Third Street, it’s desolate except for the occasional noisy school group or quiet academic researcher entering and exiting. There’re no admission fees or snaking queues, only a lonely intern sitting at a desk. If you sign in and take the elevator to the top floor, you’ll find the MoMA Library. It was there in the late 1970s that a librarian named Clive Phillpot created a policy unlike any other in the history of the museum. Without asking permission, he decreed that anybody could mail anything to the MoMA Library, and it would be accepted and become part of the official collection. There was no limit to what could be sent, nor were there specifications of size, medium, or provenance. No judgments were made about quality either. The artist could be world famous or completely unknown—it made no difference. Once something was sent, no questions were ever asked. Whatever was received was accepted. Phillpot estimates that between 1977 and 1994 he got anywhere from 100,000 to 200,000 artists into the MoMA collection this way.1 Bob Dylan once said, “I had gotten in the door when no one was looking. I was in there now and, there was nothing anybody from then on could do ever about it.”2 Similarly, Phillpot’s gesture was so under the radar that the front door—the museum administration and curatorial wing—paid no attention to it. And once they did, it was too late; nobody was going to return all those crates and boxes that had piled up over the years, never mind remove hundreds of thousands of artists from the database. While some artifacts from those acquisitions are quite valuable and are often on display in the galleries, most of them languish in MoMA’s remote storage facility out in Queens, stacked up in the boxes they were originally sent in. And they’re all still part of MoMA’s collection. Sometimes the back door was used to get artworks into the museum. In 1991, Chuck Close was asked to curate an Artist’s Choice exhibition. Close decided to choose a selection of portraits from MoMA’s collection, and he wanted to include Ray Johnson, who at the time was—unbelievably enough—still not actually in the MoMA collection. So to get himself in, Johnson stuffed a funky photocopied cartoon of Willem de Kooning into an envelope and mailed it off to Phillpot, courtesy of the library. Sure enough, the cartoon was entered into the MoMA collection with the credit line “Gift of the artist. The Museum of Modern Art Library, Special Collections”—therefore eligible to be included in Close’s show. The back door is a powerful tool. While all eyes are elsewhere, magical things can happen in the margins. Andy Warhol once said that if you want to collect something in New York, you have to find out what it is that nobody else wants and collect that. Before long, everyone will want it. He was right—once he began collecting ugly ceramic cookie jars, everyone started collecting them. By the time he died, his cookie jar collection, which he paid pennies for, sold at auction for a quarter of a million dollars. Warhol was a back-door collector. Out of the watchful eye of the front door and free to write its own ticket, the back door plays by its own rules. Unburdened by official policy, it can quietly reshuffle the deck according to intuition, whim, and desire. While the front sparkles with glamour and sexy commodities, the back door favors that which is economically worthless but historically priceless. Trading in ephemera and ideas, the back door is unlocked and unguarded, for it’s assumed that there’s not much worth stealing inside that rear door—often a correct hunch. Yet because the back door is always open, its ideas are infinitely democratic, transferrable, and replicable as well as free to all. At once playful—even prankish—and deadly serious, the back door is perverse, embracing contradiction and impurity. It’s also wildly utopian, proposing to make the impossible possible. What begins as a hunch or proposition over time becomes serious. If you do something wrong for long enough, it eventually becomes right— paradoxically transforming the back door into the new front door. Marcel Duchamp once made a door hinged between two frames that was always open and always shut. The door closed one entrance when it opened the other, thereby contradicting the French proverb “Il faut qu’une porte soit ouverte ou fermée [A door must be either open or closed].” It is both and neither at the same time. Writing to André Breton, Duchamp said, “Pour moi il y a autre chose que oui, non et indifferent—C’est par example l’absence d’investigations de ce genre [For me there is something other than yes, no, and indifferent—there is for example the absence of investigations of this kind].”3 Open and closed, pirate and legitimate, serious and playful, UbuWeb has attempted to model itself on Phillpot’s back door and Duchamp’s pendulous door, resulting in a decades-long investigation into the absence of an investigation. Founded in 1996, UbuWeb is a pirate shadow library consisting of hundreds of thousands of freely downloadable avant-garde artifacts. By the letter of the law, the site is illegal; we openly violate copyright norms and almost never ask for permission. Most everything on the site is pilfered, ripped, and swiped from other places, then reposted. We’ve never been sued—never even come close. UbuWeb functions on no money—we don’t take it, we don’t pay it, we don’t touch it; you’ll never find an advertisement, a logo, or a donation box. We’ve never applied for a grant or accepted a sponsorship; we remain happily unaffiliated, keeping us free and clean, allowing us to do what we want to do, the way we want to do it. Most important, UbuWeb has always been and will always be free and open to all: there are no memberships or passwords required. All labor is volunteered; our server space and bandwidth are donated by a likeminded group of intellectual custodians who believe in free access to knowledge. A gift economy of plentitude with a strong emphasis on global education, UbuWeb is visited daily by tens of thousands of people from every continent. We’re on numerous syllabuses, ranging from those for kindergarteners studying pattern poetry to those for postgraduates listening to hours of Jacques Lacan’s Séminaires. When the site goes down from time to time, as most sites do, we’re inundated by emails from panicked faculty wondering how they are going to teach their courses that week. The site is filled with the detritus and ephemera of great artists better known for other things—the music of Jean Dubuffet, the poetry of Dan Graham, the hip-hop of Jean-Michel Basquiat, the punk rock of Martin Kippenberger, the films of John Lennon, the radio plays of Ulrike Meinhof, the symphonies of Hanne Darboven, the country music of Julian Schnabel—most of which were originally put out in tiny editions, were critically ignored, and quickly vanished. However, the web provides the perfect place to restage these works. With video, sound, and text remaining more faithful to the original experience than, say, painting or sculpture, Ubu proposes a different sort of revisionist art history based on the peripheries of artistic production rather than on the perceived, hyped, or market-based center. For example, although famous for his megalithic metal sculptures, Richard Serra has made a lot of important video art. The museum narrative enforces this invisibility. In Serra’s retrospective at the MoMA in New York in 2007, there was no sign of his essential videos Television Delivers People (1973) and Boomerang (1974), both frequently visited resources on UbuWeb. Similarly, Salvador Dalí’s obscure psychedelic film Impressions de la Haute Mongolie— hommage á Raymond Roussel (1976) is the only film besides Un chien Andalou (1929) that he completed in his lifetime. It’s also the only movie you’ll ever watch about Upper Mongolia, giant hallucinogenic mushrooms, and a urine-soaked pen.4 Nearly impossible to see in theaters or museums, it’s playing every day and every night on Ubu. And although you won’t find any of Dalí’s paintings on UbuWeb, you will find a recording of an advertisement he made for a bank in 1967. Not everything at the site is offbeat: there are, in all fairness, lots of artists’ works that perfectly port to the web, such as Hollis Frampton’s structuralist films, Kathy Acker’s collaborations with punk bands, Samuel Beckett’s radio plays, Mary Ellen Solt’s concrete poems, Maurice Blanchot’s mystery novels, and Aleister Crowley’s magical wax-cylinder recordings. Named for Alfred Jarry’s mischievous, foul-mouthed, Dadaist protagonist Ubu Roi, UbuWeb began as a site focusing on visual and concrete poetry. With the advent of the graphical web browser in the mid-1990s, I began scanning old concrete poems and posting them on the web. I was astonished by how fresh those dusty old paperbound pieces looked when backlit by the computer screen. When I emailed the link to a few friends, they seemed to agree; they emailed the link to a few of their friends, and in a short time I found myself surrounded by a group of concrete-poetry fans. Encouraged, I scanned a few more poems before setting out to convert whole important anthologies of the genre to the web. Shortly thereafter, when streaming audio became available, it made sense to extend Ubu’s scope to sound poetry, a historical movement similar to concrete poetry, but instead of words and letters published on the page, words and letters are intoned or spoken. I began transferring old sound-poetry LPs to MP3s and posting them alongside the concrete poems. Unbeknownst to me at the time, sound poetry—a broad and varied genre that often includes instruments and electronic treatments—posed some challenging questions. For instance, certain of John Cage’s readings of his texts could be termed “sound poetry,” so I included them. But just as often Cage accompanied those readings with an orchestral piece, which I included as well. I soon found myself unable to distinguish the difference between “sound poetry” and “music.” I encountered this dilemma time and again, whether it was with the compositions of Maurico Kagel or of Joan La Barbara or of Henri Chopin, all of whom were as well known as “composers” as they were as “sound poets” or “audio artists.” Finally, after a while I gave up trying to name things; I dropped the term sound poetry and began referring to the section under which they were filed simply as “Sound.” A similar thing happened with concrete poetry. For many years, I had been collecting outsider writings scrawled on scraps of paper affixed to New York City walls that expressed highly emotional narratives, conspiracy theories, and political sentiments. They often employed beautiful and innovative graphical letter forms that appeared to me to be a sort of handmade concrete poetry but with an entirely different history and agenda. I scanned and uploaded these scraps but began to question where they should be filed. Could they easily fit alongside the classical modernist concrete poems, or should they be in a category of their own? I ultimately decided that although they resembled visual poems, they were something else, so I created a new section simply called “Outsiders”—named after the genre known as “outsider art”—which grew to become a large repository of audio and visual material created by street poets and visionaries. One of the collections housed in the Outsiders section is The 365 Days Project, which had its inception as a blog where hundreds of people over the course of a year posted one song or album a day of outrageous novelty music, all of which was donated to Ubu when the blog went offline. The range is vast, including a panoply of weird stuff, such as celebrity crooners, offbeat children’s records, amateur song-poems, hammy ventriloquism, and homemade tape recordings. The collection is studded with bizarre gems such as Louis Farrakhan singing calypso and a high school choir’s rendition of the Sweet’s AM radio hit “Fox on the Run.” Buried deep within are rare recordings by the legendary avant-garde conductor-composer Nicolas Slonimsky, inexplicably yowling out copy from old newspaper ads for cod liver oil and toothpaste, accompanied by a detuned piano. Written in 1925, the compositions were a sort of predecessor to pop art, exploring the expressive possibilities of found text. While many listeners to The 365 Days Project might’ve written off these recordings as little more than “weird-old-man-who-can’t-carry-a-tune” novelty records, when these recordings collided with UbuWeb, the backstory (which I recount later in this book) became complicated. For several years previously, we had been hosting a series of world- premiere recordings of modernist composers such as Charles Ives, Carl Ruggles, and Edgard Varèse that Slonimsky conducted during the 1930s. Zooming out and viewing Slonimsky’s career in retrospective, we could connect the dots to the two different personas represented, but the initial shock that both of them live together under the same roof, so to speak, was profound. Ultimately, the files were cross-referenced, once in the Outsiders section under The 365 Days Project and once in the Sound section under “Nicolas Slonimsky,” the consummate inside outsider. Jerome Rothenberg, a scholar, approached Ubu with an idea to build a wing on the site that would focus on sound, visual art, poetry, and essays related to his specialty, ethnopoetics. Rothenberg’s ethnopoetics focused on how the avant-garde dovetailed with the world’s ancient cultures, both those surviving in situ as well as those that had vanished except for transcriptions in books or recordings from earlier decades. It was a perfect match for Ubu. Rothenberg’s sound offerings included everything from the jazz singer Slim Gaillard to Inuit throat singing, each making formal connections to modernist strains of Dada or sound poetry. Examples of ethnopoetic visual poetry ranged from Chippewa song pictures to Guillaume Apollinaire’s graphical arrangements of letters in his Calligrammes. Rothenberg edited a subsection containing dozens of scholarly papers reflecting on ethnopoetics, such as Brent Hayes Edwards’s “Louis Armstrong and the Syntax of Scat” and Kenneth Rexroth’s writings on American Indian song. He also put together a selection of plain-text poetry, including Cecilia Vicuña’s contemporary shamanistic poems, Vietnamese ca dao folk poems, and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s proto–sound poem “Song of the Owl” (1856). There is a precedent for such an eclectic approach to bringing together varied works of art and writing: Aspen magazine, which was published between 1965 and 1971. Though Aspen is long out of print, UbuWeb was fortunate to be given a digitized version of the entire run. Its ten issues attempted to bring together several disciplines under a single curator; any given issue contained poetry, music, film, art criticism, reproductions of paintings, and critical essays. Each issue came in a customized box filled with booklets, flexi-disc phonograph recordings, posters, sketches for sculptures, and postcards; some issues even included spools of Super 8 movie film. The publisher, Phyllis Johnson, claimed that Aspen should be a “time capsule” of a certain period, point of view, or person; hence, whole issues were devoted to subjects such as pop art, conceptual art, swinging mod London, and the psychedelic scene. They were edited by the likes of Andy Warhol and Dan Graham and designed by people such as George Maciunas and Quentin Fiore. Contributors included a who’s who of the period, Lou Reed with notes on rock ’n’ roll; Tony Smith with a make-it-yourself cardboard sculpture kit; Susan Sontag with “The Aesthetics of Silence”; Eva Marie Saint with a statement about painting and film; Roland Barthes with “The Death of the Author”; and Yoko Ono with stark, unaccompanied vocal pieces—in total amounting to several hundred works of art. After absorbing Aspen, UbuWeb was flooded with the work of dozens of artists spanning various genres, timeframes, and practices; the jazzmen Yank Lawson and Peanuts Hucko playing “St. James Infirmary Blues” snuggled up against Richard Hulsenbeck intoning Dada poems. The eclecticism was thrilling and unpredictable. Aspen created an unorthodox environment, one in which a democratic art— an art that functioned outside of galleries and museums—was available to everyone at an affordable price. Its utopian purview was everything UbuWeb strived to be. The Super 8 films from Aspen formed the basis of UbuWeb’s Film & Video section, where more than 5,000 avant-garde films are both streamable and downloadable, from the gritty black-and-white videos of Vito Acconci to the glittery filmic oeuvre of Jack Smith. There are countless filmed biographies and interviews with authors such as Jorge Luis Borges, J. G. Ballard, Allen Ginsberg, and Louis- Ferdinand Céline. The scope is international: there are dozens of obscure Yugoslav Black Wave Cinema films (1962–1972), a four- decade survey of German video art (1964–2004), and a number of samizdat Soviet films from the 1980s. Experimental music films— both documentary and performance—are abundant. UbuWeb hosts Robert Ashley’s epic fourteen-hour Music with Roots in the Aether, a series of composer portraits made in the mid-1970s and featuring artists such as Pauline Oliveros, Terry Riley, and Philip Glass. There’s a lot of contemporary work as well, such as Her Noise (2007), a documentary about women and experimental music; Kara Walker’s difficult-to-see video Fall Frum Grace, Miss Pipi’s Blue Tale (2011); as well as the chaotic MTV-gone-wrong videos of Ryan Trecartin. There are also hours of vintage performance-art documentation by artists such as Marina Abramović and Ulay, a bootleg version of Robert Smithson’s Hotel Palenque (1969), and an astonishing twenty-one-minute clip of Abbie Hoffman making gefilte fish on Christmas Eve of 1973. UbuWeb’s large, boundary-blurring archive of the avant-garde necessarily alters what is meant by avant-garde, a term saddled with the legacies of patriarchy, hegemony, imperialism, colonization, and militarization. Giving voice to these concerns, the poet and critic Dick Higgins wrote, “The very concept of an avant-garde, which relates to the military metaphor of advance troops coming before the main body, is masculine.”5 The avant-garde theater scholar Kimberly Jannarone concurs: “The term ‘avant-garde’—coming to us from the military and first applied to the arts around World War I—is heavily weighted by historical and political critical baggage.... Indeed, the historical avant-garde often relied on sexist, racist, primitivist, and imperialist notions.”6 And it’s true even today: witness how Italy’s far- right-wing party Casa Pound named itself after Ezra Pound, emblazing images of him across their posters, or how one of Vladimir Putin’s main ideologists, Vladislav Surkov, reputedly took techniques from his days as an avant-garde theater director and used them to sow confusion, discord, and chaos—exactly what the avant-garde excelled at—into rightist political situations. When you assemble a collection of the avant-garde, you run the risk of replicating everything wrong that is associated with it. I deployed impurity as a way of muddying, détourning, and playfully reimagining the avant-garde, twisting and warping the rigorous, hard-baked grids of modernism into something more fluid, organic, incorrect, and unpredictable. Think of the many artists who dissembled received notions of avant-garde as part and parcel of their avant-garde practices, such as Cornelius Cardew, Amiri Baraka, Musica Elettronica Viva, and Henry Flynt, or of others who took the idea of avant-garde in directions previously excluded from the canon. My midcentury avant- garde pantheon and inspiration comprise artists such as Moondog, Marie Menken, Harry Partch, Daphne Oram, Conlon Nancarrow, Alice B. Toklas, and Sun Ra. Driven by outsiders and visionaries, my avant-garde revels in eccentricity, impurity, and innovative formal experimentation. And at the same time I still love the denizens of the old-school canon, James Joyce, William Carlos Williams, and Pablo Picasso. But most of all I love it when they all get jumbled together on UbuWeb. Sparks fly when Henry Miller collides with Ana Mendieta, Karlheinz Stockhausen with Hito Steyerl, Fatboy Slim with the Situationist International, Weegee with Carrie Mae Weems, or F. T. Marinetti with Trinh T. Minh-ha, each nudging, reflecting, and shading their neighbors in unpredictable and destabilizing ways. Sometimes the dead patriarch’s works were the basis for new pieces by contemporary artists that critique older notions of the avant-garde. I’m thinking of one artist on UbuWeb who goes down into his Tokyo basement every Wednesday night and screams out Finnegans Wake at the top of his lungs, accompanying himself on drums. He’s taped hundreds of hours of it. Of a poet who took it upon himself to read aloud and record all nine-hundred-plus pages of Gertrude Stein’s The Making of Americans, which is available on Ubu. He quickly became bored and started howling the book like an alley cat, page after page, until he completed his task. These gestures defuse some of the accusations hurled at the avant-garde, showing how it is playful and funny, fodder for deconstructing and remixing. And all of these things lived happily together on my book and record shelves. UbuWeb reflects this approach, and its avant- garde is vast and inclusive, moving away from the patriarchal, militaristic, racist, and imperialistic model. I liked the idea of taking a discredited or orphaned term such as avant-garde and using it against its own bad history in order to reimagine it, similar to the way AIDS activists in the 1980s détourned the Nazi’s pink triangle into a symbol of liberation. I’m not entirely certain what the limits of the avant-garde are, but it’s that uncertainty that makes it work for me. UbuWeb often lacks objectivity, expertise, theoretical justification, and historical accuracy. I could be wrong, but something tells me that those certainties were partially what led parts of the avant-garde astray in the first place. Reflecting these ideas, UbuWeb is a purposely unstable library, a conflicted curation, an archive assembled by embracing the fragmented, the biased, the subjective, and the incomplete. We favor the casual mode of accumulation expressed by Andy Warhol’s massive archival project Time Capsules (1974–1987), where the distinctions among collecting, curating, archiving, and hoarding collapsed into an artistic practice. The Time Capsules consisted of 610 cardboard boxes that Warhol filled with stuff, sealed, numbered, signed, and sent off to a storage facility. Beginning in 1974, he kept an open box next to his desk in his studio at 860 Broadway, into which he tossed whatever came his way, from envelopes containing tens of thousands of dollars in cash to nude photos of Jacqueline Onassis to a mummified human foot belonging to an ancient Egyptian to a 45-rpm test-pressing of a Ramones single signed by Joey Ramone to a McDonalds Big Mac wrapper—and that’s just a fraction of the trash and treasures contained within these capsules. How exactly were they assembled? In his book The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again (1975), Warhol gives us a hint: What you should do is get a box for a month, and drop everything in it and at the end of the month lock it up. Then date it and send it over to Jersey. You should try to keep track of it, but if you can’t and you lose it, that’s fine, because it’s one less thing to think about, another load off your mind. Tennessee Williams saves everything up in a trunk and then sends it out to a storage place. I started off myself with trunks and the odd pieces of furniture, but then I went around shopping for something better and now I just drop everything into the same-size brown cardboard boxes that have a color patch on the side for the month of the year.7 Warhol’s Time Capsules are a kind of folk archiving that takes no real expertise or training to perform but that happens organically through a process of accumulation and desire. As I have previously written, this kind of archiving is a new folk art, something that is widely practiced and has unconsciously become integrated into a great many people’s lives, potentially transforming a necessity into a work of art.8 There’s something about the Time Capsules that resonates with the digital age, when many of us, like Warhol, have become accidental archivists by accruing artifacts in a voracious yet almost unconscious way. Think of the way vast amount of digital artifacts—voice memos, MP3s, airline tickets, tax certificates, pay stubs, photos, and so forth—accumulate daily in our downloads folders, similar to the way flotsam and jetsam accrued in the Time Capsules. If we so desired, we could easily posit our downloads folder as a work of archival folk art, as Warhol did with his boxes, which in true pop-art style made no distinction between valuable and worthless, high and low, art and trash. Similarly, we could envision our furious sharing of artifacts on the web as a type of collective folk archiving, be it the amassing of photos on Instagram, the aggregation of music on MP3 blogs, or the adding of videos to the already groaning archives of YouTube. Alternative or folk models of gathering things—jumble sales, boot sales, garage sales, flea markets, time capsules—seem a more relevant way to theorize the archive in the digital age because machines still are incapable of addressing artifacts in productively illogical and intuitive ways. In the future, everyone will be a world-famous archivist for fifteen minutes. What follows is a Duchampian door, at once open and closed, logical and whimsical, focused and drifty, academic and anecdotal. Part explanation, part justification, part reification, and part provocation, it’s a memoir of sorts, an attempt to answer a question I often ask myself regarding UbuWeb: “What have I done here?” Is it a serendipitous collection of artists and works I personally happen to be interested in, or is it a resource for the avant-garde, making available obscure works to anyone in the world with access to the web? Is it an outlaw activity, or has it over time evolved into a textbook example of how fair use can ideally work? Will the weightlessness and freedom of never touching money or asking permission continue indefinitely, or at some point will the proverbial other shoe drop, when finances become a concern? The answer to these questions is both “yes” and “no.” It’s the sense of not knowing —the imbalance—that keeps this project alive for me. Once a project veers too strongly toward either one thing or the other, a deadness and predictability sets in, and it ceases to be dynamic. Although there’s a substantial user base around UbuWeb, it’s hard to say exactly who these users are since we don’t keep tabs on them. Once in a while when UbuWeb materializes in a physical space—if, for instance, there’s an exhibition of the site in a gallery or when I give a talk about it—I get to meet some folks. Generally speaking, they don’t skew toward any single demographic; rather, reflecting the site’s eclectic offerings, a variety of musicians, poets, academics, artists, dancers, and theory heads show up. I’ve never done much to encourage an online community.9 Instead, I preferred the quieter model of the public library, a large repository of cultural artifacts waiting to be browsed, borrowed, and shared. If there is a UbuWeb community, it’s more at the level of our shadow-library peers, a like-minded circle of individuals and institutions across the globe who are dedicated to the free dissemination of cultural artifacts and intellectual materials. The people who use those resources (which I discuss in depth in chapter 4, “Shadow Libraries and Preserving the Memory of the World”) overlap with the people who use UbuWeb. This book is broken into three parts: “Polemics,” “Pragmatics,” and “Poetics.” The “Polemics” section is just that—a short manifesto to explain UbuWeb. Even though it may be hard to swallow, it’s important to how UbuWeb has evolved over the years. The section is called “Polemics” for a reason. UbuWeb is at its best when it’s at its most assertive. “Pragmatics” comprises a series of essays focusing on the legal, curatorial, distributive, economic, communitarian, and aesthetic issues that have defined the site and the free-culture movement from its inception and that continue to flavor it today. I discussed these concerns with experts in several fields—legal, curatorial, distribution, artistic, and academic—in order to find out how my views hold up. While the answers often confirmed my instincts, they sometimes surprised me; I got some things right, but I also got some wrong. I invoke terms such as folk archiving and folk law to describe the amateur mantles UbuWeb adopted when assembling and protecting its collection. I discuss UbuWeb in relation to the status of the cultural artifact in the digital age and how our presence has nudged that discourse in terms of such artifacts’ legal, economic, distributive, and artistic reception. I also survey the various shadow libraries that constitute UbuWeb’s peer group, The next section, “Poetics,” is a series of six essays focusing on specific genres and artworks that are foundational to the site. I examine various works—historically, philosophically, and aesthetically—through a series of close readings, focusing specifically on boundary-blurring, genre-crossing artists who define expanded notions of the avant-garde. I also delve into several historical publications and anthologies that have served as precedents for UbuWeb, discussing how their curatorial philosophies and distribution models influenced our thinking, ultimately giving us permission to do what we do. After a brief coda, which critiques the nefarious role algorithms and surveillance capitalism play today in the distribution and reception of cultural artifacts, the book’s appendix is an annotated list, “101 Things on UbuWeb That You Don’t Know About but Should.” It’s a guide to some of the hidden treasures on Ubu. UbuWeb comprises hundreds of thousands of cultural artifacts, so this short selection is little more than a trail of breadcrumbs, encouraging you to hack your own path through the thickets contained therein. UbuWeb can be construed as the Robin Hood of the avant-garde, but instead of taking from one and giving to another, we’re giving to all. UbuWeb is as much about the legal and social ramifications of its self-created distribution and archiving system as it is about the content it hosts. In a sense, the content takes care of itself, but keeping it there at the site has proved to be a trickier proposition. The sociopolitical maintenance of free server space with unlimited bandwidth is a complicated dance, often involving the dodging of darts thrown by individuals who call foul play on copyright infringement. Acquisition by a larger entity is impossible: nothing is for sale. You might remember the denouement of the film 24 Hour Party People (2002), where a large record conglomerate swoops in to buy the stubbornly independent Factory Records for millions of pounds. When asked to show evidence of his contracts with his artists, Factory head Tony Wilson can only produce a funky, DIY document signed in blood stating that the bands own the rights to all their material—nothing can be sold. The record execs grin madly as they walk away with the lucrative Factory catalogue for free. Wilson muses in the coda that although Factory Records was financially worthless, it was a great success, a fantastic conceptual-art project, full of integrity, one that never had to make a single compromise. UbuWeb is similar, except what we host, unlike pop music, has never made money. These days there’s a lot of support for the way we go about things. Many think of UbuWeb as an institution. Artists both well established and lesser known write us asking to be on the site. But it wasn’t always this way; for a long time many people despised UbuWeb, fearing that it was contributing to the erosion of long- standing hierarchies in the avant-garde world, fearing that it was leading to the decimation of certain art forms, fearing that it would tank entire art-based economies. Of course, none of that happened. We just happened to be there at the beginning of the web and had to ride the choppy currents of change as each successive wave washed over. Whereas we once used to receive daily cease-and- desist letters, today we rarely get any. It’s not that we’re doing anything different; it’s just that people’s attitudes toward copyright and distribution have evolved as the web has evolved. By the time you read this, UbuWeb may be gone. Never meant to be a permanent archive, Ubu could vanish for any number of reasons: our internet service provider (ISP) pulls the plug, we get sued, or I simply grow tired of it. Beggars can’t be choosers, and we gladly take whatever is offered to us. We don’t run on the most stable of servers or on the swiftest of machines; crashes eat into the archive on a periodic basis; sometimes the site as a whole goes down for days; more often than not, the already small group of volunteers dwindles to a team of one. But that’s the beauty of it: UbuWeb is vociferously anti-institutional, eminently fluid, refusing to bow to demands other than what we happen to be moved by at a specific moment, allowing us flexibility and the ability to continually surprise even ourselves. Pay no attention to the man behind the curtain. I designed UbuWeb to make it seem like an official, well-funded enterprise. With its clean design and its vast content, it feels, for lack of better words, “official” or “real.” I figured that if UbuWeb appeared to be a legit entity, then people would be forced to acknowledge the importance of the difficult and obscure materials we championed. This approach seems to have worked; people have told me that they thought that there was a huge team of well-paid people toiling day and night behind screens, building the internet’s largest archive of avant-garde art. Sounds good to me. If only it were true. Sometimes people come over to my apartment and ask to see UbuWeb. They’re disappointed when I show them an old MacBook Pro hooked up to a wheezing four-terabyte hard drive in a drab room overlooking a gray alleyway in midtown Manhattan. Many assume UbuWeb to be a fortress of bricks and mortar, when in reality it’s just a pile of pixels held together by tissue paper and spit. Throughout this book, the pronouns I and we are interchangeable —because UbuWeb is mostly just me. Over the years, although there have been editors and volunteers, for the past two decades I’ve pretty much been on my own, designing, coding, archiving, and assembling the site. I am completely unqualified for the job. I have a BFA in sculpture that I got from the Rhode Island School of Design in 1984. I took one art history class in college, and it was on baroque art. As a result, everything about UbuWeb is sort of skewed and idiosyncratic, if not entirely wrong: the taxonomies are vague, the collections are incomplete, and why certain things are there and others aren’t is unclear. UbuWeb was assembled in the way artists create their works: by following hunches, trusting intuitions, and blindly following them wherever they may lead—even when they lead to dead ends. This approach is both Ubu’s blessing and its tragic flaw; it’s what makes the site so exciting and dynamic but what makes it a flop when it comes to rigorous academic research. Throughout this book, the examples I use tend to skew toward my own tastes. While UbuWeb is a vast and diverse enterprise, it is still riddled with my subjectivity. Had someone else written this book, it would’ve undoubtedly been a more objective endeavor. The fact that I not only built and curated the site but also am writing its history speaks to an obvious bias, one that is replicated time and again through this book and through the site as a whole. I have toiled for the past quarter of a century putting in, as Mike Kelley once said, “more love hours than can ever be repaid,” building a utopia of avant-garde art, mixing the obscure and the canonical, and making the mix purposely invisible to most web denizens. In the end, UbuWeb remains closest to the spirit of its namesake, an elaborate —and at times obnoxious—exhaustive and illogical endeavor, a pataphysical schoolboy prank illuminated and sanctioned by the bright green candle of Pere Ubu himself. Pshite! A PART I POLEMICS few years ago for UbuWeb’s twentieth anniversary, a group called Custodians Online, who are dedicated to the dissemination of free culture and knowledge, gave UbuWeb two gifts. First, they created multiple mirrors of the site so that even if UbuWeb should disappear, it never will disappear. Second, they wrote a six-point takeaway manifesto inspired by Ubu’s ethos. Although I didn’t write it, I might as well have since it succinctly sums up UbuWeb’s philosophy: 1. Keep it simple and avoid constant technology updates. Ubu is plain HTML, written in a text-editor. 2. Even a website should function offline. One should be able to take the hard disk and run. Avoid the cloud—computers of people you don’t know and who don’t care about you. 3. Don’t ask for permission. You would have to wait forever, turning yourself into an accountant and a lawyer. 4. Don’t promise anything. Do it the way you like it. 5. You don’t need search engines. Rely on word-of-mouth and direct linking to slowly build your public. You don’t need complicated protocols, digital currencies, or other proxies. You need people who care. 6. Everything is temporary, even after twenty years. Servers crash, disks die, life changes and shit happens. Care and redundancy is [sic] the only path to longevity.1 The manifesto reads like a set of best practices of how to remain independent in the increasingly corporately controlled environment that the web has become. I’ll begin by elaborating on each point, one by one, and then tack on additional ones of my own. Keep It Simple There’s a commonly held idea that it’s impossible to be independent on the web anymore. The internet is in many ways now dominated by corporate giants, and we have pretty much accepted that as true. But although much of the web has been colonized, the fact remains that most of it is as free and open as it always has been.2 What we tend to forget is that the bedrock architecture of the web is the same as it was decades ago. Everything I did twenty years ago on UbuWeb I still do today in an identical way, using the identical programs, languages, and tools. What was possible for UbuWeb in the beginning is still possible today. Another commonly held idea is that the web is one giant shopping mall, where everything is either monetized or monetizable. Although that’s true for certain pockets of the web, it’s far from true for all of the web; there are vast swaths where things still get done for little or no money. The gift economy works in parallel with the paid one. And, finally, there is the idea that every move we make is tracked, sold to marketers, or swiped by nefarious foreign agents. Again, that’s true for a lot of the web, but you have the choice not to implement such marketing devices or trackers on your site. With each passing month, we hear about another attack on internet freedom, be it assaults on net neutrality, the enactment of link taxes, or automatic content-upload filters. These threats are real, but by staying independent you can sidestep those nefarious implementations; they need not apply to you. Walk away. Stay free. It might sound obvious, but one of the best things about UbuWeb is that it works. After more than two decades and a mind-boggling array of technical changes to the web, we have stuck with plain HTML, and it was the right decision. No matter what operating system or new code is written, every computer or device anywhere can read UbuWeb’s basic code. We have always refused to use web-building packages, the kind that throw lots of unnecessary and ugly code into your documents. Those programs also don’t allow you to see the code, so you never really know what’s getting slipped into it. And over the years most of these programs have come and gone, leaving you with an unruly mess when you try to load your material into a competitor’s program. Finally, if you sign up for a corporately owned blog or site-development kit that’s marketed to make it “easier” to handle your site, you have no choice but to buy into the corporation’s monetization scheme. If our approach sounds naive and overly simple, you’re right: it’s both—it’s utopian, and it’s realistic. Sometimes you just need to take back control of your digital environment. Don’t get me wrong. I’m no geek. I know the barest bones of HTML. I still write UbuWeb in a plain text editor, same as I always have since 1996. The code is clean, crisp, and legible. As a result, the site not only functions better but is also easier to maintain. Last night, when I added a dozen movies and half-a-dozen LPs to the archive, I was working off the same templates that I wrote in the mid- 1990s when I first learned to code; I’ve never needed to learn anything more than what I knew then, and what I knew then was super basic. UbuWeb was born in the time of dial-up connections. Back then, you had to watch the size of pages so that they would load quickly on the slowest connections. It’s an ethos that we still abide by; after all, the digital divide is real—many folks around the world still struggle with bandwidth issues or view the web on aging cellphones. As a result, our top-level pages are tiny; our front page today is still a mere four kilobytes. It’s only when you get into rich media a few levels down that the pages get heavier. There’s also no junk in the pages: no trackers or sniffers or ad servers or metrics. You will not be receiving one of those annoying General Data Protection Regulation terms of service and conditions notifications from UbuWeb because there are no terms of service or conditions. You don’t have to click to accept our cookies policy because there are no cookies. I can’t tell you how many times over the years people have offered to put the site into a database such as Oracle or MySQL. They are horrified that I have to update each page by hand and use primitive batch-file search-and-replace strings. They promise that with a database I can update thousands of pages with a click of a button. It sounds so great. But what they never tell me is how they—the sysadmin—would always be in control of my site. Each and every backend change would have to go through them. And while often utopian and generous, sysadmins are just as often moody and cranky. And sometimes they get pissed off and walk away with the keys. I remember getting a call from staff at a prominent arts institution in New York City who were panicked because their sysadmin simply vanished and refused to return their calls. He was never seen again, and all their incredible content—including digitized video and audio documentation stretching back to the 1960s—was inaccessible. They had to scrap the site and start from scratch. I guarantee you that they didn’t go down that road again. Elaborate, privatized technologies are an ever-escalating treadmill. With each version comes a new update, and with each update comes a new cost, and with each new cost comes a host of new problems and incompatibilities. HTML is free and always works regardless of the technological changes. Stay backwardly compatible. Stay simple. Stay free. Even a Website Should Function Offline Boy, am I glad that I didn’t build UbuWeb on the cloud. There were times when I actually considered it. I mean, it sounded so good: unlimited server space, large bandwidth, global access, all for free. There were times over the past few years when I felt that MP3 and film blogs, which are based on the cloud, were doing as good or better a job of archiving the avant-garde than UbuWeb; our site felt out of date, even verging on obsolete. But stick around long enough, and you’ll find that because many of these cloud-based storage platforms are profit based, they often go out of business. Easily decimated by copyright-infringement lawsuits, federal investigations, and bankruptcies, they almost always get their plug pulled, leaving a site’s content scrambling for a new home. As I write this, Flickr, one of the earliest photo-sharing sites, founded in 2004, is discontinuing its unlimited free photo storage. Allowing each user only 1,000 images, the new owners of the Flickr photo-sharing website will begin deleting millions and millions of photos unless you upgrade to a premium account.3 My hunch is that the site won’t be around for long. It’s always a losing game. I used cloud lockers—remote servers that allow you to upload, store, and share files—as much as you did. In fact, much of the content on UbuWeb was culled from them and reposted on Ubu. I had paid memberships to cloud lockers such as Megaupload, Rapidshare, and a few others so I could have fast-lane access to their treasures. Even today I still do, with the understanding that they come and go, so I use them cautiously. And, frankly, the price to me —as a ravenous collector, consumer, and distributor of cultural artifacts such as MP3s, MP4s, PDFs, and EPUBs (e-book file format)—was small, much cheaper than buying these artifacts from shops around town (often at inflated collector’s prices) and then having to digitize them and upload them to Ubu. I love the idea of the cloud, but I hate the reality of it. The reality of it is nothing like what’s been promised to us. Trusting the cloud is a mistake: it’s too centralized, too easily blocked, too easily controlled. And it’s privatized, owned, and administrated by someone other than you. The cloud is presumed to be all around us, advertised as “your data when you want it.” But that’s a lie: when I travel, finding unlocked Wi-Fi connections anywhere on the globe (grimly, with the exception of Starbucks) is impossible. And free isn’t always free: I often encounter a highly censored, “family friendly” cloud on public transportation, boasting of hotspot connections as a way of filling seats. Aside from content restrictions, these clouds work sporadically and slowly, if they work at all. Streaming media are censored and tightly controlled on the cloud. YouTube and SoundCloud are not benevolent or free: they are massive entities seeking equally massive profits and are out to control, police, remove, and censor content. (YouTube actually has an algorithm that sniffs out anything in the shape of a sexual organ and removes it, whether it is anatomical or not; it has recently made downloading any video with music in it impossible.) Their free is not free; it’s a hook, a means to their end, making money by selling your data and inundating you with ads. We’re all dazzled by free, but in commercial culture there is no free. Then there’s the issue of politics. There are many places in the world where your particular cloud is blocked, and when you try to access your files in those places, you come up empty-handed. I’ve been in countries where my cloud-based Gmail was unavailable, as were the cloud lockers upon which I relied and my social media accounts. In certain parts of the planet, relying on the cloud blasted me back twenty years in time because I was unable to access much of today’s technology because of politics (for starters, there’s no Google, Twitter, Reddit, Netflix, or Facebook in China if you don’t have a virtual private network [VPN]). But our own domestic policies can have consequences for cloud-based computing that are equally precarious. Just think back to 2009, when the U.S. Department of Justice cracked down on the most prominent cloud-based service, Megaupload, for copyright infringement. The shutdown caused file- sharing lockers to shutter both in the United States and throughout the world. One by one, the cloud-based hosting services dissipated; MP3, film, and literature blogs that relied on the cloud quickly followed. I feel terrible for folks who put their trust in the cloud, building beautiful libraries of cultural materials to share with others, only to have them collapse overnight. While much copyrighted material was hosted on these servers, out-of-print and orphaned works were also posted and shared. The tragedy of seeing such libraries decimated is absolutely heartbreaking. Don’t trust the cloud. Use it, enjoy it, exploit it, but don’t believe in it. Or even the web for that matter. Many people assume that the web—and its riches—will always be there waiting for them. It won’t. Don’t bookmark. Download. Hard drives are cheap. Fill them up with everything you think you might need to consult, watch, read, listen to, or cite in the future. Your local library should be as vast as anything up for offer on the web. Understand that the web and its offerings are temporary and ephemeral; that PDF you bookmarked yesterday may not be there tomorrow. I am fortunate that UbuWeb’s servers have always been run by people who care and are committed to the project. By hosting a vast trove of files without, in many cases, the necessary permissions, they are assuming a great risk—but they are still willing to take it because of their belief in the free and open sharing of cultural artifacts. With a push by sympathetic academics or sysadmins, over the years several universities have hosted UbuWeb. Things proceed smoothly for a while, but sooner or later someone always catches on to the fact that there’s a ton of “illegal” files being hosted on the university server, whereupon we are promptly kicked off (happily no one’s ever lost a job by taking the risk of hosting Ubu). We somehow always land on our feet and move on to the next server. Although the interface and delivery of our content appear so simple and smooth, there’s nothing like a team of trusted allies behind the scenes to keep up that appearance. But this is not just about UbuWeb. You should be able to send an email to a human who cares. Sure it’s cheaper to sign on with some massive web-hosting corporation,4 but we feel it’s worth the extra change to have a sysadmin you know, one who is on your side. Every time we outsource our money to entities who don’t care, we lessen the possibility of supporting those that do. Seek out smaller and independent ISPs and platforms with philosophies that are in line with keeping the internet democratic and open. There are many out there, and they’re not that hard to find. They deserve our support.5 Don’t Ask for Permission When you want to independently host cultural artifacts on your website (rather than embedding things from YouTube or SoundCloud), the common protocol is to reach out to the copyright holders to obtain their permission. But it’s rarely quick or easy; most of the time—particularly if you appear to have money—you enter into protracted negotiations with the copyright holders involving mountains of correspondence. If they ask for money, contracts involving royalty schemes and residuals need to be hashed out. If music is involved, you often need to get in touch with rights agencies to clear those permissions, too. Enter the lawyers. What starts out as a simple idea to host, say, a single MP3 or an artist’s video can become a process that takes years and costs several thousands of dollars. It’s little wonder why there isn’t much primary-source artists’ film and video on most museum websites; for official institutions with substantial budgets, everything needs to done to the letter of the law.6 For UbuWeb, it’s a different story. If we had to ask for permission, we wouldn’t exist. In fact, we have never asked for permission. We post things because we want to, choosing instead to deal with the consequences later. (Spoiler: there are almost no consequences. I discuss why in the following chapter.) When you ask for permission, you ask for trouble. What was fun quickly becomes a burden, reeking of official culture. When you ask for permission, you become a business. These days we walk a fine line between the permissioned and the unpermissioned, the legal and the illegal. But it wasn’t always this way; when we first started, the site was completely unpermissioned. Although we still don’t ask permission, at a certain point things began to change when artists started offering us their works, putting us in a permissions gray zone. For instance, for many years we had been hosting the audio works, writings, and films of the important Canadian artist Michael Snow without having asked his permission. At one point, we had up nearly a dozen of his films. One day out of the blue we received an email from Michael simply asking us to remove two of his films from the site—he didn’t explain why—but said that it was okay to keep the rest up. We saw this as a victory. Having ten Michael Snow films with his permission—without having to launch into torturous negotiations with him—beats having a dozen without or having none, and our having permissioned works by Snow encouraged others to grant us permission. Sometimes when galleries enter the picture, it gets more complicated. Several years ago an elder statesman of conceptual art, John Baldessari, got in touch with us, pointing out that an unpermissioned audio piece of his that we had been hosting was an excerpt of a much longer work. He was pleased to see it there and offered to give us the full-length piece, which we gladly accepted. Then a few years later his commercial gallery sent us a cease-and- desist order on all of his works at UbuWeb—including that audio piece. In light of our warm history with the artist, something didn’t feel right. So we wrote to John telling him of the situation and within a day received a note from a gallery representative stating, “I am writing to confirm that you have permission to share the John Baldessari videos on UbuWeb.”7 That little audio piece took a torturous journey: it started out unpermissioned; after John’s intervention, it became permissioned; after the gallery complained, it became unpermissioned; and today it’s been permissioned once again. All of those flips took a lot of time and correspondence, not to mention a certain emotional toll on me. Now, multiply these gymnastics by hundreds of thousands of cultural artifacts, and you can see why we don’t ask for permission. The downside is that since we play so fast and loose, artifacts don’t last forever on UbuWeb. But, then again, as I said in the introduction, the site was never meant to last forever. Believe me, I’d rather be doing this whole thing above board. But I just don’t have the money, the time, or quite frankly the interest to clear permissions for everything on UbuWeb. Don’t Promise Anything It’s often said that writers write the books that they wish were in the world. I do UbuWeb because it’s the web that I want to exist. If others benefit from it, that makes me happy. But I do it mostly for myself as an artist, as a curator, as a critic, as a fan, and as an educator. Although UbuWeb is publicly accessible, the public has no say about what goes or doesn’t go on the site. We don’t take unsolicited submissions; we post work erratically and sporadically, never according to a schedule. And the works that we choose are there because we want them to be there, not because they fulfill any curriculums, quotas, or canons. While we want to expose people to wonderful and underappreciated works of art (and, of course, provide new perspectives on tired notions of the avant-garde), everything on the site is there primarily because it’s meaningful to us, for reasons we don’t feel the need to explain. And since we don’t take any money, we don’t have to answer to anybody regarding the content we host on the site. Is that approach biased? Yes. Is it incomplete? Yes. Is it imperfect? Yes. Is it the way we want to do it? Yes. All the way. Even though UbuWeb has the feel of an official institution—and in some ways has evolved into an institution—it really isn’t. Institutions are answerable to boards, funders, staff, and the paying public. Institutions must be representative of their constituents; institutions need to keep an eye on several bottom lines. We say, stay independent. You don’t need institutions to support you. Every time someone offers you a handout or a grant, it comes with strings attached. We say no. You can get by without institutional support. Everything on UbuWeb is donated or given or volunteered; it’s a massive gift economy, a potlatch that works. Several of my friends in Europe received grants from the European Union to make a European UbuWeb. They got a ton of money to sit around the table and argue; and when the money ran out, they walked away from the table, and the project ended. It was a very expensive conversation. Needless to say, there never has been a European UbuWeb. We have no secret sources of income (in addition to my work at the university, I am constantly lecturing, giving workshops, and writing books), nor do we have any stealth funders. I made the decision long ago to do this without any grant money or support in order to have maximal freedom. It seemed like a pipedream at the time, a long shot, but a quarter of a century later it’s actually worked beyond my wildest hopes. You Don’t Need Search Engines A little line of code is one of the most important on UbuWeb. Nestled in the header of every page is the tag <meta name="robots" content="noindex">, which means when search-engine spiders come knocking, they’ll be turned away at the front door. Many people write books about how to get your Google ranking higher; we want ours to be lower. In fact, we want to get completely off the ranking list to protect ourselves from copyright trolls, entities seeking to claim ownership of artifacts that are either in the public domain or out of copyright. What many people don’t know is that if you own a domain, you can remove it from Google. Once we did that, for all intents and purposes we vanished from public view. Although doing this might seem to go against UbuWeb’s more democratic impulses—even seeming somewhat elitist in the sense that you have to be “in the know” to find it—for us it’s a means of survival. I like to think about finding UbuWeb the way you used to learn about bands before the internet—by word of mouth from friends, by publications, and by trusted sources such as college or independent radio. It’s the way underground culture has always traveled, and being firmly rooted in the underground, we see no reason to break with that tradition. There are a million links to UbuWeb from other pages, posted by people simply because they’re interested in what we do. Bots, algorithms, artificial intelligence, and other technologies can’t replace people who care about content and the way it is distributed. Never underestimate the power of word of mouth even in our social media world. We’ve never had a mailing list, nor have we ever done a scrap of publicity. I advocate for the site via our Twitter feed, but that’s just a way of sharing a tiny fraction of the treasures contained within the site, a way of letting people know that we’re still alive. With the exception of search-engine spiders, UbuWeb is open to all. We’re hiding in plain sight, right out in the open. You just have to know how to find us. Everything Is Temporary Over the past two decades, UbuWeb has weathered a constant series of crises—technological, legal, mental, and physical. We have been hacked, had our servers pulled out from under us, served with a parade of cease-and-desist orders, to name only a few threats to our existence. There have been countless reasons not to continue to run the site. Over the past two decades, my employment has often been demanding or shaky; I’ve had a couple of kids to boot. But each time I consider shuttering the site because of the work involved or some hassle from an artist or rights holder, I decide to continue. As Samuel Beckett says, “I can’t go on. I’ll go on.” Just when I’m about to end it, I meet someone who tells me how much UbuWeb has meant to him, how when he was a graduate student a decade ago, he did much his research there. Or there will be that tug on my sleeve, urging me to want to contribute to making an increasingly commercial, cruel, and banal online world less so. Running the site is also a giving back that I liken to community service; after uploading dozens of smart, hard-to-find avant-garde films, I walk away from the computer feeling as if in some small way I’ve helped make the web a better or more interesting place by sharing something hard to find but beautiful or compelling or thought provoking. That feeling alone is enough to keep me doing this. A few years ago, on one of those occasions when I wanted to throw in the towel, I mentioned to my friend Marcell Mars that perhaps it had come time to wave the white flag. I was becoming burned out and couldn’t see why I should keep on doing this. Mars, one of the Custodians Online, decided that he wouldn’t let this happen. He quickly marshaled his forces of shadow librarians, who made multiple mirrors and backups of the site. He then offered to host the whole thing at no cost. A few months later, when everything was transferred, Marcell smiled, and said, “See? Now you’ll never be able to get rid of UbuWeb even if you wanted to.” Marcell cares. And the Custodians care. And all the shadow librarians scattered about the web care. There are vast numbers of people who care. Care and redundancy are the path to longevity. Left to my own devices, I would have quit doing UbuWeb long ago. And there were many times when I came close. But when you build something for the right reasons, you find yourself stuck with it, surrounded by people who care. And that’s the greatest thing in the world. Just when you can’t go on, you go on. A Little Bit Every Day Tonight after I put my kids to bed, I’ll pour myself a glass of whisky and do what I do most evenings from 10:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m.— update UbuWeb. I’ll put on some music, crack open my text editor, and start coding the site manually. I’ve been doing it for so long that I can update the site with my eyes closed. I’m really fast; I can add dozens of films or hundreds of MP3s in a few hours. All it takes is lots of copying and pasting. As a ritual, the process is relaxing. I liken it to gardening. Each night I plant some new seeds, pull up some dead roots, clear some underbrush, trim the shrubs, and water the garden. Some nights yield huge harvests; other nights, the fruits of the labor are invisible, as when I’m tinkering with code or fixing broken links. As an academic, I am fortunate to have summers off, and that’s when the garden really grows. It’s then that I have the time to do major plantings that aren’t possible during the semesters. I never planned for this archive to be so substantial. I’m still not sure exactly how many artifacts are hosted on Ubu—I estimate hundreds of thousands—but if you work on something a little bit every day, you end up with something massive. Particularly over the course of decades, it really adds up. Years ago I began ripping books, LPs, and VHS tapes from my shelves. But I rarely need to do that anymore. There’s a rich glut of cultural artifacts waiting to be scooped from various file-sharing sites, MP3 blogs, and invitation- only private groups that truck in these sorts of materials. Each night when I crack my RSS feed, it’s brimming with treasures to download and repost; social media are awash in links to material that are perfectly tailored to Ubu; and every so often a hard drive will arrive in my postal box from a collector halfway across the world, packed with incredible films and music she wishes to share with Ubu. There seems to be no end in sight. I have hundreds of films waiting to be posted and thousands of MP3s waiting in the wings. But there’s no rush. There’s no pressure to publish. Our timeframe is very long. With time, energy, and inspiration, the site grows. And during the fallow periods, there are more films to watch and MP3s to listen to than can be watched and listed to in the next ten lifetimes. Money Is Overrated Operating within an economy of no economy, UbuWeb runs on practically no money. For the past twenty-two years, I’ve forked out $50 a month to my ISP, a few bucks a year for a paid search engine, and some pocket change for video-streaming services. Believe me, it’s not a lot. The bulk of our servers and bandwidth is either donated or given to us for obscenely low rates by sympathetic parties, which, of course, we greatly appreciate. Sometimes these parties have been universities, and other times radio stations. Today UbuWeb is hosted by our shadow-library pals somewhere between Zagreb and Iceland. To be honest, I’m not really sure where UbuWeb lives. I realized long ago that if we took money, we’d have to pay money. It would be only fair. If I am getting rich on this endeavor, then the artists on the site should be getting rich also. If neither of us is, then almost everyone feels better. Though some avant-garde artists have become fantastically wealthy, it bears repeating that the business of the avant-garde, generally speaking, is no business. In 2012, Jonas Mekas said that he hadn’t been paid for a screening in more than sixteen years. That year, when he showed a film at a Brooklyn gallery, he netted $20 in cash, which he framed and hung on his studio wall.8 That said, there are small presses and little record labels that do make gorgeous editions of this stuff. UbuWeb hosts works that are either out of print or hard to find or obscenely expensive. If a little record label reissues something that’s on UbuWeb, and it comes to our attention, we’ll remove that material from the site. These presses and labels deserve our support. They’re not in it for the money. But we’ve been around so long that when those reissues fall out of print —and economics dictate they almost always do—we pounce and put them back up. In this way, UbuWeb is tidal: things flow in, and things flow out. Sometimes a corporation will catch wind that we’re hosting something that it deems valuable and will send us a threatening letter. We comply with the order to cease and desist. Temporarily. Such corporations always move on, and a few months or years later we put the item in question back up. They never seem to catch on a second time. After all, there’s no sense suing an entity that loudly professes to have no money; no corporation in its right mind would throw good money after bad. That’s just not what they do. All Material Is Usable by Everyone Guy Debord wrote: “All the material published by the situationist international is, in principle, usable by everyone, even without acknowledgement, without the preoccupations of literary property. You can make all the détournements that appear useful to you.”9 We couldn’t agree more. UbuWeb is open source. Please use it any way you like, especially the wrong way. Although UbuWeb is used to teach the history of the avant-garde in properly academic ways, we are delighted when people find other uses for it. A few years ago we got word that some music from the site had become popular with dance DJs, who plundered it for new and weird sounds. It’s been reported that samples from Bruce Nauman’s mantric chant “Get Out of My Mind, Get Out of This Room” from his Raw Materials compilation on Ubu have been mixed with beats and are somewhat the rage among unwitting partiers on dance floors in São Paulo. Independent projects using Ubu spring up constantly. One group built an interface called “Ubu Roulette,” which selected and played random films; other people have created radio stations using our MP3 archive; and there seems to be a parade of exhibitions and film festivals around the globe drawn from Ubu’s collection. We love and encourage all of these efforts. Please don’t ask us for permission to use the site in whatever way you want because the answer is always yes. People ask us all the time whether we can grant them permission to use a certain film or music in an exhibition (as I said earlier, museums and film-production studios often tend to stick to the letter of the law when it comes to rights and permissions), and we always emphatically answer, “No, we can’t give you permission for our pilfered materials.” If we can—and in certain cases where artists have actually given us stuff—we steer those seeking permission to the artists. In other cases, we refer them to proper distributors so that the artists can get paid. But usually we have no clue who the actual owner is. A long time ago Creative Commons got in touch with us, asking us to put all our materials under its open license. Although we love the idea of Creative Commons, we responded that we couldn’t possibly license materials to which we didn’t own the rights. And while Creative Commons does protect artists, we’re no fans of licenses of any kind. We’d prefer the materials be used without any restrictions whatsoever. University libraries are full of great things that the general public can’t use. If you were lucky enough to go to a university, that library privilege was often pulled the minute you graduated. UbuWeb is dedicated to building an alternative system—a shadow library that provides access to its materials to anyone regardless of affiliation and free of charge. We also feel that cultural artifacts should be accessed with no strings attached. We don’t track what you have downloaded, how much time you spend on the site, or where you have clicked. Who you are and what you do are no business of ours. The Problem Is Obscurity It has been said that being well-enough known to be pirated is a crowning achievement.10 If your work is well regarded enough to be pirated, that means you have achieved some level of success that most artists will never have. When we decide to pirate an artists’ work, it means that we think that work is worth knowing about and worth preserving. The next time someone pirates your work, you should thank that person. Piracy is preservation. Unpopular culture is preserved by people who love and cherish obscure artifacts. Left to market forces, the kinds of things on UbuWeb would essentially vanish and be lost forever. Thank goodness there are custodians and librarians dedicated to collecting and caring for obscure and unloved cultural artifacts. Every so often someone asks us why we don’t bundle everything on UbuWeb into one big BitTorrent—a peer-to-peer file-sharing protocol—instead of insisting on serving files one at a time via HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol). The answer is simple. Torrents reward the popular and punish the unpopular. If we were to put all our strange avant-garde films, sound poetry, and concrete poetry into a torrent, they would die a quick and lonely death waiting for seeders. We prefer the model of the public library, where works of all degrees of difficulty sit on the shelves, always available to those who wish to access them. UbuWeb believes in artists. But artists who are not visible are forgotten. The worst thing an artist or an artist’s estate can do is to eradicate him or her from the internet. The shortsightedness of doing so is incredible. There are many examples of avant-garde artists getting rediscovered in their old age after starving and struggling for decades. They’re so thrilled to have love and patronage and glamour and sales that they clamp down on their work in open distribution, hoping to squeeze the market for every last dime they can. This late- life bump often goes against everything they previously stood for in their work and ideology when there was no money involved. They seem to have forgotten that once upon a time they were in favor of radical open distribution, sharing, nonremunerative economies, and open source. But time has shown again and again that those who pulled their work from open distribution paid for it dearly by not being written about or talked about or taught and subsequently being forgotten by all except for the marketplace. And the marketplace is the loneliest place on earth, filled with people, as Oscar Wilde famously quipped, who know the price of everything and the value of nothing. But what we’ve discovered is that one thing has nothing to do with the other. People who can afford to buy works of art should not be worried about what’s circulating on the internet. As the artist Seth Price says, “If you have a real Chanel bag, you don’t give a shit that there’s Chanel bootlegs out there.”11 If someone requests that her work be removed from the UbuWeb archive, we try to explain the consequences of her action. We try to convince her that we believe in her work and that for no money whatsoever we are happy to promote and publicize it because we feel that the work is important and that making it known as widely as possible is the right thing to do. If, despite our arguments, the artist threatens and insists, we remove the work and are deeply saddened. If only that person could see the bigger picture. Sometimes UbuWeb feels like a backup for the commercial internet. How many times have you gone looking for that video on YouTube, only to find it removed because of copyright violations or because that “content is not available in your area”? Corporately programmed bots sniff out all sorts of presumed copyright violations and remove them. If you had to rely on YouTube for video alone, you’d often be out of luck. On UbuWeb, things mostly don’t get taken down; instead, they get temporarily darkened—if you wait, they will usually reappear. Not Coming Soon to a Theater Near You In May 2000, I received the following email at UbuWeb: “i really enjoyed your site. it made me think about different cultures other than the ones i experience daily living in a small texas town.— meredith.” I can’t imagine that much of UbuWeb’s materials are available in Meredith’s local library. Chances are that it doesn’t have a very good a collection of, if any, sound poetry or concrete poetry. Odds are that the local bookstore isn’t chock full of this stuff, either. If Meredith were ambitious, she might try searching the web and buying these items online. But then she’d have to fork out $125 to buy a used copy of Emmett Williams’s An Anthology of Concrete Poetry or $90 to purchase the OU Revue box set, which compiles the entire run of the legendary French sound-poetry magazine from the 1960s. Those two items are only the extreme tip of the iceberg, a miniscule amount of what’s available to Meredith for free on UbuWeb, which she can access right in the comfort of her own living room. Most town or city’s theaters don’t show Stan Brakhage’s films, nor would the multiscreen cineplex at the nearby mall. Even in New York, they are shown only every so often at places such as the Anthology Film Archives. Admittedly, the quality of some of the films on UbuWeb is not as good as you would want it to be. However, most of us have learned to live with the blocky pixilation; access has trumped resolution; the postcard has become the painting. Meredith’s note nicely and succinctly sums up everything that I wished to achieve with UbuWeb: the creation of a distribution point for out-of-print, hard-to-find, small-run, obscure materials, where they are available at no cost from any point on the globe. Although the technologies of the web are continually developing in terms of sophistication, UbuWeb embraces the distributive possibilities inherent in the web’s original technologies—the ability to radically distribute artifacts. But it’s always been this way, even before the internet, where floating embers have sparked fires, causing great cultural explosions. A few summers ago I went to see Pietro Sparta, a very successful art dealer living in the tiny French town of Chagny. He had a beautiful industrial space and a stable of internationally known conceptual artists. After seeing his shows, we went to a café for drinks, and he told us how he ended up in this unique situation. His father, a Communist sympathizer, was thrown out of Sicily for his leftist politics and found factory work in Chagny. While the family was there, one of his sons died and was buried in the town. According to Sicilian tradition, a family can never leave the place where a son is buried; hence, Chagny became the Spartas’ new home. Pietro got interested in contemporary art in the early 1970s by reading glossy art magazines he procured from the newsstand in Chagny. He became obsessed and started corresponding with the artists. Before long, when in France the artists came to see him. He soon won their trust and began holding modest exhibitions. The artists were so impressed by his sincerity and devotion to art that they began showing their best work with him. Little by little his reputation grew until he was able to buy the factory that his father worked in when he first came to town and convert it into a spacious and gorgeous gallery. Today, Pietro still lives in Chagny, and his father, still alive and now retired, happily maintains the numerous and luscious plantings on the former factory grounds as his hobby. The World Is Full of Citations When you are doing research, one of the most heartbreaking moments is when, as you are searching for a rare or obscure book or film on the web, you get a bibliographic entry instead of the actual, complete digital artifact of what you’re looking for. With that item locked away in some library halfway around the world, chances are that the listing is as much as you’re going to experience of it, unless you are very well funded. If the digital artifact can be called the “ghost” or bad version of the physical artifact, then the bibliographic entry is the skeleton or residue of the digital artifact. On UbuWeb, we want to give access to primary sources. Everything we host is a link to an actual artwork, not a citation of it. Even if that link provides a crummy copy of the artwork, that copy still beats just a citation. Anything beats just a citation. Completely untrained in library science, we assume custodianship of these artifacts—collecting, maintaining, cleaning, organizing, and protecting them so that you can access them. The ever-shifting economies of the web make it certain that many of the things you love will eventually either disappear or cost dearly to be accessed. To ward off starvation, we’re like squirrels preparing for the winter, gathering nuts that are falling from the trees (or from trees that are about to fall) and hoarding them so that all can continue to partake in the feast far into the cold season. Because the work is harried, our primitive grain silos are sometimes scattershot and sloppy. And because we grab what we can to avoid famine, the quality can be less than desirable. But it’s better to have a few slightly stale nuts than no nuts at all. Love Art, Hate the Art World A few years ago, an artist pal of ours was on the cover of Artforum. He’s a great artist, and we host a lot of his work on UbuWeb. I was really proud of him, so I tweeted as much on Ubu’s feed. Tweets are a great way to tell how engaged your audience is with your content— but when I tweeted my friend’s success, it was crickets. While the art world here in New York was abuzz with excitement, the larger world —UbuWeb’s audience—couldn’t give a fig. I often give talks about UbuWeb around the globe, and judging by the folks who show up, much of UbuWeb’s audience loves art but couldn’t care less about the art world. At the bar after the talk, over drinks, I hear time and again how alienated people feel by the art world—how cliquish and exclusive and intimidating and pretentious and cold and expensive and impenetrable it is. Back in New York, I’m invited to art-world parties and fund-raisers, where I’m seated next to strangers. When I get to talking to them, I discover that they are curators or critics or collectors or directors of museums or galleries— and to a person, not one has ever heard of UbuWeb. Nam June Paik once said that the internet is for everyone who doesn’t live in New York City. Paik’s comment can be read two ways. On one hand, in New York every night there’s another opening or screening or concert or dinner or reading or party. Life here is rich with glorious artifacts situated in meatspace that by Paik’s estimation makes the internet pales by comparison. On the other hand, he might be celebrating the fact that the internet offers even more kinds of cultural choices than New York City does. Typical of Paik’s Zen- based practice—which often turned on koanlike contradictions—it’s probably both at the same time. But Paik died in 2006, when less people in New York were paying attention to the internet than they are now. Today, when you walk into a subway car, almost every person is glued to a device. So, in a way, I think Paik’s statement— although clever, puzzling, and proactive—might be a bit out of date, which makes me think that the art world itself might be a bit out of date. Sometimes the gallery and museum world feels too slow, too out of touch with the rest of culture, like an antiques market: featuring highly priced, unique objects at a time when value is in the multiple, the many, the distributed, the democratic. In this way, the art world is quickly making itself irrelevant. Soon, no one will care. Regrets, I’ve Had a Few ... As you can tell, we’re full of ourselves. We actually believe in these polemics. And sometimes, to be honest, we get a bit carried away. About a decade ago, we got up on our high horse and foolishly decided to publicly call out all those people who demanded their work be removed from Ubu by inventing something we called the “Wall of Shame.” What a bad idea. People got angry, and rightfully so. If someone wants his work off UbuWeb, it’s his work, and that should be that, even though we might try to convince him otherwise. But we couldn’t leave well enough alone. Like the fanatics we are, we took it too far. When we should have been trying to build bridges with artistic communities, we were making a lot of enemies. When we realized how wrong we got it, we broke down the Wall of Shame. Since then, many have come around, able to sympathize with our vision, but for others it was too late. Also, we’ve been too slow in diversifying the site. We inherited a legacy of dead, white, straight, European, male artists, and for too long we didn’t question that history hard enough. And although we love that stuff, there’s also a ton of work outside of it that fits equally into UbuWeb. So for the past decade we’ve been adding works that broaden definitions of the avant-garde, consequently enriching the site in ways that delight us. We’re still too slow, though, and more of these works need to go up on UbuWeb in order to expand and explode received notions of the avant-garde in radical ways. Finally, if anything, we’ve been a bit too bold, a bit too brash, a bit too obnoxious (Exhibit A: this text). It’s been a turnoff for many folks. But, in hindsight, it’s been a necessary stance to take. What we’ve pulled off is so perverse, so weird, and so impossible that if we didn’t cop a bigger attitude than necessary, we wouldn’t have made it past the first year. You need a thick skin to play this game; and although in real life we are as thin-skinned as any artist, on the internet—as they used to say—nobody knows you’re a dog. PART II PRAGMATICS I 1 FOLK LAW t might surprise you to know that Mick Jagger takes a sympathetic view toward file sharing. In an interview with the BBC in 2010, he said that music and technology have been together since the beginning of recording and that file sharing is just another aspect of that: But, you know, it is a massive change and it does alter the fact that people don’t make as much money out of records. But I have a take on that—people only made money out of records for a very, very small time. When The Rolling Stones started out, we didn’t make any money out of records because record companies wouldn’t pay you! They didn’t pay anyone! Then, there was a small period from 1970 to 1997, where people did get paid, and they got paid very handsomely and everyone made money. But now that period has gone. So if you look at the history of recorded music from 1900 to now, there was a 25 year period where artists did very well, but the rest of the time they didn’t.1 Ignoring the fact that Mick walked off with a fortune in that “small period” of time, he still seems to have unusually progressive ideas about file sharing, which has clearly eaten into his royalties as much as it has into anyone else’s. If only everyone’s attitudes were as open and evolved as Mick’s. One evening in 2003 my friend Tim Davis, a poet and photographer, was sitting at his Avenue A apartment downloading a few songs from LimeWire, a peer-to-peer file-sharing client. He was trying to reassemble an out-of-print R&B LP that his father loved called Hollywood Rock ’n’ Roll song by song. Since the LP had never made it to CD, Davis thought that he’d be able to conjure up fond memories from his childhood over the then new digital technology with a few clicks. The next day he got a phone call from an Associated Press reporter informing him that he had been named in a lawsuit by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for copyright infringement. Tim said, “You got the wrong guy. I’m not some kid who is downloading songs. I’m a professor at Yale,” and hung up, which was when he realized that by giving them his status as an elite Ivy League prof, he’d made a terrible mistake. The next day he got a call from his dean at Yale telling him that hundreds of reporters were calling them from all over the world begging to know how a renowned professor could be such a scofflaw. Davis was one of 261 people accused of illegally sharing files in suits brought by the RIAA in late 2003. His codefendants included a seventy-one-year-old grandfather from Texas named Durwood Pickle —who blamed his woes on his grandkids—and a twelve-year-old Manhattan schoolgirl. While the RIAA settled with the girl’s family for $2,000, Davis was hit with an astronomical $10,000 fine. “They’ve pegged me as someone who should pay more,” Davis said. “They thought I should know better.” To help defray the fine, he threw a party in his Tribeca studio and sold T-shirts emblazoned with the words “Free Timmy” for $25. “It didn’t go as well as it should have,” Tim recalled. “I should have been taking money at the door instead of harassing people all night to buy t-shirts.” In the end, he cleared only about $1,000 for the night. The rest he paid out of pocket.2 The RIAA ended up settling only a handful of lawsuits, but stories like Davis’s sent fear ricocheting across file-sharing communities, causing people to flee in droves, which was exactly the RIAA’s intention. It was basically a bluff, as RIAA president Cary Sherman stated: “The music community’s efforts have triggered a national conversation—especially between parents and kids—about what’s legal and illegal when it comes to music on the Internet. In the end it will be decided not in the courtrooms, but at kitchen tables across the country.”3 This lawsuit was not about adjudicating justice—it was about scaring people. In Tim’s case, it worked. To this day, he claims that he has never downloaded a file illegally; in fact, he went back to buying vinyl, which today is filling up his small house in rural upstate New York. The settlement had a chilling effect on his teaching: even if a digital file is permissioned and on a university intranet, Tim won’t touch it, afraid to trigger a repeat of the nightmare he lived through. The RIAA’s action gave way to a torrent of Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA, 1998) takedown notices in its wake. Seeing the success that the RIAA had in instilling fear into file-sharing users, issuers of DMCA takedowns hoped to achieve a similar end. A DMCA takedown notice is what Jason Schultz, professor of clinical law and director of New York University’s Technology Law and Policy Clinic, terms a “performance.” Schultz says that a DMCA takedown is not so much a legal notice as it is a protocol or, as he puts it, a “hello,” an invitation to a dialogue, one that rarely leads to a lawsuit. Schultz told me that “the number of websites that actually get sued for noncommercial works are so small that you could count them on two hands.” And beyond that, Schultz says, it all as usual comes down to economics. “If they don’t see you as a big payout, they’re not going to bother you. People would be a lot more bold if they knew their chances of being sued are very small. But they only hear about the big ones. You never hear about the stories of the thousands of people who never got sued.”4 Even if I weren’t armed with legal knowledge, I always intuited that this was true, particularly when dealing with artifacts whose economic stakes are miniscule. Over the years, I’ve asked myself why there aren’t thousands of UbuWebs, and the answer is fear of copyright. Funded institutions are compelled to follow copyright to the letter of the law, but for us unaffiliated folks there’s more leeway. In spite of the fact that we don’t clear copyrights, several legal experts have told me that UbuWeb makes an excellent argument as a case for fair use. In our approach to copyright, we’ve managed to build a massive archive, one that would, if done properly, take tens of millions of dollars to legitimize. Because we’ve observed that the law works differently in practice than what’s written or what’s threatened, we’ve been able to build something large and substantial. Call it a “folk law” approach. Peter Jaszi, a professor at American University’s Washington College of Law, says that the fear of copyright looms so large that most people can’t distinguish between a nasty letter and a lawsuit. “A nasty letter is an almost reflexive act,” he says. “Lawyers see writing them as a duty rather than as a choice.” Part and parcel of zealous advocacy, such letters constitute an essential element of Schultz’s theory of legal performativity. A certain amount of threatening behavior comes with the turf. But handling it is not easy. Jaszi warns, “If you’re going to be someone who exercises fair-use rights, you need to have nerves of steel.” Threatening letters from lawyers need to be either dealt with or ignored, he says, but they shouldn’t be mistaken for actual legal threats. It feels counterintuitive, but if you stand up and push back, chances are that they’re going to back off. Jaszi claims that many rights holders are cautious about asserting rights against fair use because the last thing that they want is for the situation to be clarified; they thrive on fear, uncertainty, and chaos, and they don’t want you to know your rights. The pervasive myth is that you have no rights. But it is a myth —and once that misinformation has taken root, it is accepted as fact. “People have been conditioned to be timid because the notion that fair use is a right has been strongly resisted in the rhetoric of copyright owners,” Jaszi told me. “Copyright isn’t a right; it’s a privilege, it’s an affirmative defense. Even in the copyright statute itself, it [fair use] is referred to as a right. Fair use is a right.”5 I don’t know if you’ve ever received a DMCA takedown notice, but it’s designed to scare the shit out of you. You get an email with the subject line “Notice of Copyright Infringement,” which alone is enough to make you tremble. When you open the mail, you’re confronted with what seems like miles of impenetrable legalese beginning with Pursuant to 17 USC 512(c)(3)(A), this communication serves as a statement that: 1. I write to you from the ________ agency as the duly authorized representative of the exclusive rights holder for The Estate of ________. 2. Several works to which The Estate of ________ holds exclusive rights are being violated by material available on ________ at the following: Then you are served with a list of the works that you’re accused of infringing upon, all stuff you’ve posted on the web. Most file sharers post things on the web out of enthusiasm and passion; now that posting is being framed as a criminal act. By this time, you’re in such a frenzy that all logical thinking has gone out the window. Finally, you get three more threats: 3. Please note that these works are protected by copyright. 4. I work with the copyright holder and confirm that the use of this material in such a fashion is not authorized by the copyright holder, the ________ Agency as the copyright holder’s agent, or the law; 5. Under penalty of perjury in a United States court of law, I state that the information contained in this notification is accurate, and that I am authorized to act on the behalf of the exclusive rights holder for the material in question. It’s terrifying. For most of us, it feels like something straight out of Kafka. Our life savings, our real estate, our future, our children’s futures, and our grandchildren’s futures—all flash before our eyes. Our heart palpitating and our eyeballs exploding, without a second thought we take down the offending content and scribble a desperate note of apology, begging for mercy. We frantically check our inbox every two minutes hoping to never hear from the sender again. And usually we don’t. The copyright holders have achieved what they wanted without spending a dime. Most DMCA takedowns are not even sent by lawyers—they’re written by people claiming to represent copyright holders. Anyone can copy and paste a standard DMCA takedown notice, plunk in a few details, and so make it have the same effect as a lawyer’s letter. That’s why it’s worth carefully parsing these letters to check the validity of the claims, which are often bogus. Sometimes a takedown notice is sent by someone who is declaring to be a copyright holder but actually isn’t. This is known as “copyright trolling”; a whole shady industry is based on claiming copyrights and collecting fees for the use of artifacts that it doesn’t own. Other times, bots trawl the web for keywords and automatically send you a robot takedown notice, also issued without substantiation but merely in search of a fee. In 2004, the Tape-beatles, a group of sample-based musicians, asked UbuWeb to host their discography as well as a series of cassette compilations they had curated. We happily said yes and put the files on the PennSound servers, our partner site, which is housed at the University of Pennsylvania and hosts works that we have permissions for. The Tape-beatles files peacefully resided on Penn’s servers for fourteen years, until 2018, when I received a frantic email from Penn’s computing center notifying me of a copyright infringement on the Tape-beatles material. They were in a panic and wanted me to take action immediately. The notice came from a legitimate royalty-collection agency from the United Kingdom that had sent out an infringement bot to trawl the web for keywords. It was programmed to seize upon beatles and help. When I discovered this, it quickly became obvious to me what they were after. I pushed back, politely informing the agency in an email that “the files which you reference are by a band called The Tape-beatles, which have nothing to do with the pop group The Beatles. Furthermore, you claim that The Beatles’ song ‘Help!’ is the cause of infringement, when it is not even sampled or cited on any of the tracks for which you requested a cease and desist. Finally, we have full permission from Lloyd Dunn, one of The Tape-beatles to host these files.”6 Shortly afterward, we received a brief response: “After reviewing the information presented and the copyright notification we have decided to retract this claim for copyright infringement.”7 The original letter—as all cease and desists are— was scary and threatening; had I not had years of dealing with these sorts of things, I would’ve taken the files down without question, decimating the Tape-beatles archive. When I asked Dunn to back up our claims, he sent the following statement to the agency: “UbuWeb has the right to host the files in question. The Tape-beatles have declared all their work to be in the public domain. Everyone in the world has the right to host them.”8 Unlike my correspondence with the royalty-collection agency for the Beatles, there are times that even if you want to, you can’t engage in a dialogue because there is literally no one there. Ken Freedman, the station manager at Ubu’s partner WFMU radio has a lot to say about this subject. For the past thirty-odd years, Freedman has helmed the longest-running listener-sponsored, freeform radio station in America, specializing in eclectic, offbeat, and oddball music. When a DJ is given a show there—as I had from 1995 to 2010—he or she is given complete freedom regarding what to play during that slot. The result is some of the strangest radio you’ve ever heard. During one show, for instance, I played a recording of two men snoring for an hour; for my three-hour slot, I looped the piece three times (the piece, a work of performance art, is mirrored on UbuWeb). Did I get phone calls begging me to take it off? You bet I did. But that’s part of the freeform package, the price listeners are willing to pay to support the unique idea of DJ autonomy. These attitudes helped shape UbuWeb’s ethos—philosophically and artistically—to the point where our two endeavors became symbiotic; the station has lent Ubu technical support and shared its trove of cultural artifacts with us (see chapter 4). Freedman believes in testing the limits of copyright law. He once told me that when a WFMU blog post featured a series of weird remixes of Prince’s hits right after singer’s death, the station was hit by a blizzard of cease-and-desist notices issued by an automated bot. One remix consisted of “Little Red Corvette” played backward, accompanied by text that made it clear that the recording was backward. Immediately after the MP3 went up, Freedman’s inbox was flooded with numerous identical copies of a cease-and-desist letter requesting he take down the backward track. He politely responded, telling them that song was not, in fact, what they thought it was. Then, just to make sure he had all his bases covered, he removed the file. But the identical cease-and-desist letters kept arriving day after day. What Freedman finally figured out was that in spite of his efforts to explain, the automated trolling service was still responding to the title of the blog post, which contained the name of the song, thereby triggering the letters. To this day, Freedman still receives those same notifications, which are now filtered into his trash. And, needless to say, he has restored the file, title and all. Then there are people who claim to own material that is not theirs. Freedman once received a takedown notice from a U.K. record label requesting that he remove a series of recordings made during World War II by Charlie and His Orchestra, a Nazi-invented propaganda swing band. Freedman smelled a rat. Nobody owns the copyright to music produced by a government that no longer exists. He threw out the letter, left the files up, and never heard from the label again. Freedman is what I might call a “folklawist,” using common sense to take a reasonably relaxed attitude about the law. He’ll often push back against laws on the books to see whether they’re actually enforced or not. If not, he’ll go on doing what he was doing. The result is a great deal of freedom, which makes other, more conventional radio stations ask him how he manages to get away with what he does. For instance, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) law states that whereas radio stations are allowed to play more than three songs by the same artist in a hour, webcasters technically are not. (Ironically, these days all FCC- governed terrestrial radio stations are also webcasters.) It also says that webcasters are prohibited from playing more than three songs from a box set in an hour. These laws, which have been on the books since 1996, have never been enforced, yet most stations are terrified to break them. Freedman asks, “When Prince died, are you telling me that we couldn’t webcast the same Prince special that we were simultaneously playing over the airwaves? When Prince died, everybody did a Prince special, and nobody got in trouble.”9 But most not-for-profit radio stations are captive to overly cautious institutions and their boards, which make them follow the letter of the law, even when that law is not enforced. Even though you might think that college radio is freer, few have the courage to push against legal boundaries, even when those rules are clearly absurd. Sometimes legal threats can unintentionally have good results. In 2009, WFMU launched the Free Music Archive, which contains more than 200,000 royalty-free songs that anyone can use for no cost. The seeds of the archive began in response to a Library of Congress query in 2004 to decide how much to charge radio stations for streaming content over the web. The initial proposal was so outrageously expensive and far more than a noncommercial station such as WFMU could afford that Freedman decided to create an archive of copyright-free music that the station could fall back on should the fees go into effect. He put out the call to a bunch of the record labels and bands that the station had supported over the years and asked them to give WFMU the rights to their music for the Free Music Archive. The outpouring of support for the station was enormous, and MP3s came pouring in. In a short time, the station had amassed a giant copyright-free and royalty-free library. As it turns out, the dreaded fees never went into effect, and noncommercial stations had to pay only $500 annually, a price they could easily afford. Freedman says, “We had so much success with that, that it was an inspiration to set up the Free Music Archive. The 200,000 songs that have come to comprise the Archive were submitted by artists and labels directly to the Free Music Archive,” which keeps growing to this day.10 Because UbuWeb traffics in decidedly less-than-remunerative fare, it’s not usually the commercial collecting agencies that come knocking, but the estates of artists or their representatives, many of whom have set Google keyword alerts for relevant names and works. Like the bots, they usually don’t look into the context but instead blindly issue takedown notices in threatening legal language. For years—before we removed ourselves from Google—I’d wake up and check my inbox stuffed with angry letters from, say, a deceased sound poet’s siblings who inherited their brother’s archive and were determined on monetizing it. In the email, they would be furious with us for hosting their brother’s works on UbuWeb without their permission, outraged that we were “profiting” from them. Although it always stings to get these kinds of letters, I felt compelled to explain our policies and the mission of UbuWeb, entering into a lengthy correspondence with them, telling them how important their brother’s works were and how they should be more broadly shared with the world. But I also had to break the news to them that no matter how hard they tried, their brother’s sound poetry was never going to be monetized in ways they had imagined. I would tell them that it was better to have their brother’s works freely available to scholars and a general audience who were interested in those works rather than have them languishing in the garage. In the end, more often than not they agreed that UbuWeb was promoting their brother’s work and was not asking for anything in return from its users. What’s to lose? It’s a happy ending and a good story; most important, their brother’s work continued to circulate and find a new audience. In other cases, an artist’s estate has reached out to UbuWeb. The sister of Jack Goldstein, a Pictures Generation artist who died young, found UbuWeb and offered us her brother’s audio recordings, which had been released only on vinyl in limited editions, essentially as artworks. She reasoned that having MP3s of them on Ubu would not affect the sale of the physical objects, nor would giving them away affect the market sales for his exquisite oil paintings, which continue to increase in value with each passing year. If anything, having Goldstein’s audio works freely available expands the historical context of his paintings (for which he is predominately known), providing a fuller picture of the wide spectrum of his artistic practice. One would not usually compare big corporations to sound poets’ siblings, but in some cases they are similar. UbuWeb once received a takedown from the Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC) for a series of really difficult and obscure noncommercial Glenn Gould radio plays. It was clear that the CBC was trolling for the name “Glenn Gould” with little regard to which works were being hosted. After all, UbuWeb would never host Gould playing “The Goldberg Variations,” as much as we love it. It’s really not our thing, and, besides, we know where the Gould estate makes its money, and it’s not from his weird and difficult hörspiele such as The Search for Pet Clark, The Scene, and Three-Cornered World. In its correspondence, the CBC demanded that “all copies of our Glenn Gould materials be destroyed.” We, ahem, “destroyed” all of them. Like most copyright trolls, the CBC assumed that the threatening email was enough to accomplish the “destruction” of its property. They screamed at us, then they went away. As usual, they never returned. A few months later we put the Gould plays back up, where they remain to this day. Recently, a powerful commercial gallery angrily demanded to know exactly where we got our copies of videos by an artist they represent. In part, we responded, “As to your question where did the files come from? The answer is simple: they came from the internet, where hundreds of thousands of those identical artist’s videos are circulating right now as we write and you read this. And while you might be able to suppress a single site, you will never be able to squelch the possibly infinite lovers of his works who are digesting and swapping these videos, all day, every day, year after year.”11 We never heard from that gallery again. Another time we got a cease and desist from WNET asking us to take down An American Family (1973), a twelve-hour documentary chronicling seven months in the day-to-day lives of the Loud family in Santa Barbara, California. Influenced in part by Warhol’s static cinema and in part by cinéma vérité, it was perfect for Ubu. The takedown was sent by WNET’s director of program rights and clearances and was copied to the vice president and general counsel. I wrote back telling them that because the films couldn’t be seen anywhere, we assumed that they were out of print. I let them know that we don’t touch money and that our intentions are pure. It’s funny what a little human discourse can do. The lawyer wrote back to me, very informally and friendly, and began the email, “Understood. I read about your site’s methodology before finding the DMCA page and figured your intentions were honorable.” He then went on to tell me that the reason An American Family has been “out of print” on public television for upward of twenty years and never made available on the web or on video was simply prohibitive music clearance costs. There’s so much high-profile copyrighted music used in the series (including the Beatles, the Stones, the Who, etc.) that anyone who streams it online runs a serious financial risk, even if they do it for free and for purely educational, noncommercial purposes. He told me that as a public-TV station, WNET simply couldn’t afford those clearance costs, nor could it afford to take the risk of streaming the entire series without clearing the music. He turned out to be a sweet guy, and through my engagement with him I got a glimpse of the complicated reasons behind what at first seemed like another cold, nasty takedown. In the end, we removed the episodes for a few years but ended up reposting them; we haven’t heard from WNET since. Folk law works best through reason, politeness, and common sense. I’ve found that if someone is the actual owner of the material and is asking you to take it down, it’s best to correspond with that person to see if you can’t persuade him or her to give you permission. If you are kind and reasonable, this approach often works. But once in a while you have to push back. Several years ago a prominent literary agency sent a boilerplate cease-and-desist letter regarding the numerous William S. Burroughs materials we host. The agency had obviously just plunked Burroughs’s name into UbuWeb’s search engine and cut and pasted everything it found into a DMCA takedown notice, claiming that it owned the rights to each and every instance where his name appeared on our site. But these instances included academic papers that cited Burroughs, song lyrics that had the name “Burroughs,” and even poems that invoked his name. And, beyond that, many of the Burroughs MP3s that the agency claimed ownership of weren’t its property; the copyrights lay elsewhere. But, most absurdly, its boilerplate order included the following statement: “Under penalty of perjury in a United States court of law, I state that the information contained in this notification is accurate, and that I am authorized to act on the behalf of the exclusive rights holder for the material in question.” By claiming that the agency owned the copyrights to things that it didn’t, its representative had already perjured himself! I responded, countering the claims that those works were protected by copyright: “We believe that they are protected by copyright as well, but many of the copyrights are not yours and therefore you have no claim on them.” The cease-and-desist letter had also advised me that by being posted on UbuWeb, Burroughs’s material was being used in a fashion that the agency had not authorized. For instance, the letter flagged an academic paper on plundergraphia published by a Canadian scholar in 2005, where a footnote cited Burroughs’ name: “William Burroughs and Bryon Gysin’s work with cut-up is also closely related to plundergraphia because they maintain the integrity of the original source in its entirety while putting words into startlingly new and charged relationships.”12 Proper names can’t be copyrighted. Nor can footnotes. Clearly the agency had no rights to this citation. It also flagged UbuWeb’s posting of the avant-pop musician Momus’s LP The Poison Boyfriend as violating the Burroughs copyright. Momus had given UbuWeb permission to host his album, so I was puzzled by this accusation. When I investigated the “infringement” further, I found that the agency was claiming a copyright violation for Momus’s liner notes, where he describes his compositional methods as being inspired by Burroughs’s cut-up techniques. I responded to this charge: “Under penalty of law, then, this information is not at all accurate. While UbuWeb is happy to correct the violations that are actually yours, the cutting and pasting of an internet search based on the name of ‘William S. Burroughs’ and claiming that anything on the site with that name is your property is not helpful in achieving your goal.” The facade crumbled. I received a sheepish reply stating that the agency had received the links to UbuWeb by “a concerned party” and apologizing, affirming that “the said items were not held within the agency’s copyright.” I asked the representatives to please resend a new set of links for materials that the agency could legally claim ownership of. A few days later a whole new list arrived, but most of the copyrights still did not belong to that agency. Finally, I composed a note to the executor of the Burroughs’s estate, James Grauerholz, which I asked the agency to forward: Dear Mr. Grauerholz, William wrote, “Tristan Tzara said: ‘Poetry is for everyone.’ And André Breton called him a cop and expelled him from the movement. Say it again: ‘Poetry is for everyone.’ ” [13] At UbuWeb, we take his words as inspiration in, I think, the spirit in which he meant it. Ubu has no interest other than educating people about William’s (and many others’) work. We don’t touch money; nothing has or will ever be sold on the site. All of the works you wish us to take down are long out of print and unavailable (from old Giorno Poetry Systems LPs, etc.). As such, we assumed that by hosting them, we weren’t hurting anyone. And if we have upset you, we sincerely apologize; no harm is meant. Ubu is the largest educational site for the avant-garde on the web. It’s been around for 15 years and is mostly used by students and scholars. We try to take great care to place works in their historical context in a commercial-free environment. To remove William’s work from the site would create a great hole and be a tremendous loss for a worldwide community dying to get their hands on these materials which is otherwise nearly impossible to get a hold of.... It is in this spirit that I ask your permission to let us keep the materials up to ensure that poetry still can be for everyone. Sincerely, Kenneth Goldsmith / UbuWeb I never heard from the agency again. And to this day, all of the William S. Burroughs material on UbuWeb is still there. Other times, specious takedown requests come regarding the quality of images. I recently received one for videos from a powerful New York City gallery, which complained, “The installation of these films is central to their integrity, and to encounter them in this context [i.e., UbuWeb] gives the viewer an incomplete understanding of the work. Because of this, we kindly ask you to remove them from your site.”14 What the gallery failed to note was that infinitely reproducible media such as film and video have no stable presentation. Even if you were to prescribe an optimal viewing situation, it would be unenforceable because there are no “moral rights” in U.S. copyright law, and the issue of “integrity” is beside the point. What UbuWeb provides isn’t a substitute for the original, but the documentation of it —to say nothing of the commentary and critique that such a gesture generates—making it a candidate for fair use.15 By this logic, every single artifact that UbuWeb hosts could be framed as a candidate for fair use. Sometimes people accuse UbuWeb of cutting into their potential market, a concept that Amy Adler, the Emily Kempin Professor of Law at New York University School of Law, finds fraught when applied to contemporary art in general: “An artist who copies another’s work, even without evidence of transformative message, meaning, or purpose, even without any changes whatsoever, will not substitute in the art market for the artist she has copied.” She cites the case of Sherrie Levine, who famously rephotographed a Walker Evans photograph and claimed it as an original appropriative artwork —in terms of market substitution, Levine’s sold for $30,000, while Evans sold for $142,000.16 If anything, such homages reify the value of the original gesture rather than detract from it. Although much of the work on UbuWeb is being hosted without permission, it is work that is mostly otherwise not being commercially exploited. For much of the material on Ubu sadly there is no market (remember the sound poet’s siblings). UbuWeb can’t be a “market substitute”—one of the pillars of fair use—when there is no market. Copying can increase the value of an original, but when that artifact has little economic value (a cassette tape or concrete poem, for instance), its value is in its accessibility, resulting in yet another argument for fair use. Peter Decherney, a professor of cinema and media studies at the University of Pennsylvania and author of Hollywood’s Copyright Wars, argues that in the case of the avant-garde it’s the stories and myths rather than litigation that govern fair use of materials. In fact, from the mid-1960s to the mid-1990s avant-garde film and video encountered “no direct relevant case law and few fair use disputes between filmmakers and copyright holders.”17 Decherney feels instead that the vast majority of fair-use conflicts and questions are resolved not by judges but by gatekeepers, including publishers, film producers, librarians, website managers, and teachers. They determine whether one copyrighted object can be incorporated into another. Decherney also says that there are the gatekeepers in our heads. Uncertainty about fair use has had a chilling effect, causing many inventors, authors, and artists to avoid projects and to discard new ideas for fear of a copyright lawsuit. Decherney cites certain myths surrounding the avant-garde and fair use, the most well known of them about Kenneth Anger’s use of pop music in Scorpio Rising (1964). In reality, Anger hired a lawyer and spent $8,000 to clear the music rights so he could freely show the film at film festivals. But, according to the myth, Anger was a romantic avant-garde outlaw who flaunted copyright, invoked his right to fair use, and went ahead and used all the music without permission. This myth was taken up by later generations of filmmakers as a green light to use uncleared music in their films and thus “stick it to the man.” One of them was then New York University film student Martin Scorsese, who, against his professor’s advice, used unlicensed pop music in his student films. Scorsese, who of course later became famous for his use of music in his films (all permissioned), was encouraged not by Anger’s action but by the myth about it. Anger claimed that “Martin Scorsese learned about soundtracks from me.”18 But what Anger didn’t acknowledge was that as much as Scorsese learned from him aesthetically, he learned equally from disinformation in the myths surrounding him. Scorsese acknowledged Anger when he wrote in his introductory notes to an Anger DVD box set, skirting the elephant in the room: “I was entranced by Scorpio Rising when I saw it for the first time, and it’s had a powerful effect on me and my own films over the years. The way Anger used music in that film, in such perfectly magical harmony with the images, opened my thinking about the role music could play in movies. It could become as important to the characters and the world of the film as it was to all of us at the time.”19 As Decherney says, “In such a system, misinformation can be as powerful as accurate information.”20 Decherney tells of how in 1987 Todd Haynes, then a grad student at Bard, made Superstar: The Karen Carpenter Story using only Barbie dolls. Haynes drifted back to the Anger outlaw myth and decided that he, like Scorsese, would use the music without permission. Haynes later told an interviewer, “It was still in the era when there was a kind of underground cinema that famously ignored issues of rights and stuff like that. I think Kenneth Anger was still working out the rights issues on many of his films—Scorpio Rising— for years after he made it.”21 Even in this statement, the Anger myth was perpetuated; Anger wasn’t “still working out the rights issues” for Scorpio Rising—they had been worked out at the film’s inception. Although Mattel, the doll manufacturer, didn’t bother Haynes, Richard Carpenter did. When Haynes’s film was shown at underground venues, Carpenter was fine with his music being used, but as the film began to grow in cult status, he sent a cease and desist, which backfired when it made the film even more desirable as a bootleg, with copies being spread far and wide. Although Haynes was never sued, Decherney claims that a new set of myths kicked in after Superstar—a cautionary tale that you might get busted if you attempted fair use. Decherney writes that “critics often blame Mattel for the suppression of the film rather than Richard Carpenter and the record label, A&M. In No Logo ... journalist Naomi Klein cites Mattel’s legal action against Superstar as a classic example of growing corporate censorship.”22 In a conversation with me, Decherney concluded: Avant-garde filmmakers ... told stories. Their stories mirrored the aesthetic and ideological tensions they encountered, and at times they may have reflected widespread attitudes toward fair use as well. But this was regulation from below, as indeed is most fair use regulation.... For avant-garde media artists, fair use norms did not evolve systematically or linearly. They were not the product of negotiations with rights holders or responses to the shifts in fair use law. Norms were spread orally through stories, and that should cause us to rethink the methodologies we use for researching and understanding fair use. Perhaps the best methods are not legal or economic. Fair use is largely a narrative system, closer to folklore than to jurisprudence.23 I love how he uses the word folklore. Exactly. When I brought up the idea of folk law, Decherney agreed: “Folk law is the law. It’s outside the law but is more efficient than anything the law could create.” Folk law is often determined by community norms. “In general, if you put up an entire work and for the most part people don’t complain, then maybe the community norm is that it’s okay to circulate it in that way,” he told me. “Then it becomes an instance of community-based folk law. There’s a lot of academic work showing that the courts cared about what’s fair use in a particular community.”24 By Decherney’s reasoning, UbuWeb works as well as it does because of those same community norms. He cites the Grateful Dead concert tapers, whom the band allowed to tape and to sell the tapes in a folk economy as long as it didn’t interfere with the band’s own commercial recordings. The Dead saw the bootleg not as a copy but as a document that would bolster their own ecosystem of fandom and artifacts. But even when the question moves into “official” culture, the conclusion is the same. In the case Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley, Ltd. (448 F.3d 605 [2d Cir. 2006]), DK Books, a big mainstream press, published a book on the Grateful Dead that used seven images of event posters for a collagelike visual history of the band without asking Bill Graham for permission, citing fair use. Graham sued and lost on the grounds that in a new form—the book—the posters were no longer being used for their original function, which was to sell tickets. They had instead become historical artifacts, divorced from any functionality of selling tickets to concerts, thus falling within fair use. In terms of their relevance to UbuWeb, both Dead examples propose expanded notions of copyright. What if a bootleg isn’t a copy but instead a new artifact? What if the identical artifact that once functioned in one context now functions differently in another contest? Is this not the definition of transformative use, the conventional standard for fair use? Most of the material in UbuWeb’s film and video archive is in the public domain, whether the relevant artists, estates, or institutions would want to admit it or not. There is more stuff in the public domain than anybody probably realizes. In the United States before 1976, if you didn’t include the copyright notice on the film at its first public appearance—something most avant-garde filmmakers didn’t bother to do—you forfeited copyright.25 Decherney confirmed this: “Copyright used to be opt in. Now it’s automatic. After the Copyright Act of 1976, everything becomes copyrighted automatically. Before that, you had to register copyright, give two copies to the Library of Congress, pay a fee, and fill out a form. Then you had to put a notice of copyright on the document or film, etc. If they didn’t send two copies or didn’t fill out the form properly, it wasn’t copyrighted. For instance, It’s a Wonderful Life wasn’t copyrighted—that’s why it’s shown on TV all the time.”26 Similarly, Night of the Living Dead entered the public domain because the filmmaker, George Romero, neglected to include a copyright notification. As a result, today it is the most downloaded film from the Internet Archive. Andrew Lampert, a former archivist at Anthology Film Archives, builds on Decherney’s ideas: One of the misunderstandings about copyright—even including works that the artists themselves claim rights to—is because of slippages which often involve messy paperwork, that their works are not copyrighted and are therefore conceivably free to use at will. Of course, there are some exceptions, such as Kenneth Anger and Tony Conrad, whose 16 mm films from the mid-60s all included a copyright card. But for other important filmmakers such as Ken Jacobs, Jack Smith, Joseph Cornell, Harry Smith, there is no legitimate copyright to many of those films. In the case of Jack Smith’s most famous film, Flaming Creatures (1963), first shown the same year, even though it has a title card, it is not registered. Like every Jack Smith film that he made and showed before 1976 it is in the public domain.27 But certain myths about copyright are perpetuated regardless of what a film’s actual legal status might be. Lampert cites the complicated copyright history behind Joseph Cornell’s film Rose Hobart, which was first screened in 1936 at New York’s Julien Levy Gallery with no copyright card. Salvador Dalí was in the audience and was so jealous of the film that he knocked over the projector in a fit of rage. Shortly after the incident, Dalí said, “My idea for a film is exactly that. I never wrote it down or told anyone ... but it is as if he had stolen it.”28 Cornell was so freaked out by Dalí’s accusation that he showed the film only a few times during the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s, he gave it to Anthology Film Archives, where Jonas Mekas and P. Adams Sitney preserved it. Some years after Cornell died, his estate turned over the management of his legacy to MoMA, whereupon MoMA and Anthology Film Archives entered into a protracted legal dispute because the estate wanted all of Cornell’s film masters moved from Anthology, where Cornell had placed them, to MoMA. A deal was struck that allowed Anthology a window of time to make sure that all the preservation work it wanted to do was done and that it would be able to screen the works in perpetuity in its Essential Cinema series. According to Lampert, MoMA has long claimed ownership and copyright to all Cornell’s films. Anthology preserved the large majority of them and has prints of most to fulfill loan requests from other institutions. MoMA had done limited preservation of the materials and for many years had not preserved Rose Hobart. So for years when people wanted to borrow Rose Hobart from Anthology (because it was not in distribution via Film-Makers’ Coop, Canyon Cinema, or MoMA’s Circulating Film and Video Library), MoMA would have to approve the loan as the third-party rights holder. But it turns out that these baroque arguments were pointless because, according to Lampert, “that film has zero copyright. The film itself is made entirely of another film, East of Borneo, which, of course, Cornell didn’t get permission to use. MoMA has no legal right whatsoever to make any cease and desist claim, or ownership claim over it. While they might own physical property, they don’t own intellectual copyright because the film was never copyrighted.”29 So the film has sat on UbuWeb’s servers for decades, undisputed by either Anthology or MoMA or the Cornell estate. Fair use is famously hard to define. Slippery and subjective, it goes into overdrive when confronted with the vagaries and contradictions that are part and parcel of contemporary art. Speculating on those difficulties, Amy Adler writes: The transformative inquiry [of fair use] asks precisely the wrong questions about contemporary art. It requires courts to search for meaning and message when one goal of so much current art is to throw the idea of stable meaning into play. It requires courts to ask if that message is new when so much contemporary art rejects the goal of newness, using copying as a primary building block of creativity.... While some courts search for the artists’ intent, contemporary art revels in the erasure of the artist; while other courts look for meaning in aesthetics, contemporary art rejects the assumption that art is even visual; while other courts look for the viewpoint of the “the reasonable observer,” contemporary art pictures the notion of a stable or reasonable viewer as fiction.... To the extent an artwork has any message or meaning at all, that message may be its defiance of a singular message or meaning, it’s uncertainty, it’s multiplicity.30 When litigating digital copyright-infringement cases, Jason Schultz uses a line of questioning that forces a defendant to admit to the fact that community norms around copying are evolving: “Are you telling me that you never in your entire life downloaded something without permission or posted something on Instagram that you didn’t have permission for, ever?”31 Of course, everyone posts things on the web without getting proper licenses; otherwise, social media—and the internet as we know it—wouldn’t exist.32 Adler notes a similar shift among her students, recalling that years ago they referred to Jeff Koons and Richard Prince as amoral thieves. Today they have softened due to the way images flow freely on the internet: “They understand that copying is a part of their everyday lives, even if they won’t admit it.”33 These arguments resound when I asked most legal scholars whether what UbuWeb does could be considered fair use. “The decision to assemble related material in a way that it makes possible kinds of inquiry and comparison and consumption and appreciation that were not formerly possible is itself a kind of repurposing,” argues Jaszi. “It’s one thing to present an avant-garde film in theatrical isolation as a polished gem of modernism and another to present it in the context of a whole set of similar and related works and follow- on works[, which] is in itself an act of transformation.”34 Decherney agrees, citing the gathering and archiving of materials as transformative in and of themselves: “Maybe the transformative use is preservation, putting it into dialogue with other work, making it available to a community that it wouldn’t normally be available to.”35 Adler frames the project through a legal lens: “Yes, I infringed your copyright. Yes I stole, but I did so in a way that ultimately furthers the purpose of copyright itself, which is to advance the progress of culture. It’s for the public.”36 Every assertion of fair use helps fair use. Every time an academic publisher doesn’t clear the rights to images, that act furthers the cause of fair use; every website that posts things without permission furthers the cause of fair use—all of which leads to an evolution of community norms.37 More than a century ago, Marcel Duchamp legitimized recontextualization by taking a urinal and putting it on a pedestal. The act of moving something from one context to another was an act of transformative use. In 2018, the fashion designer Virgil Abloh, who uses extensive quotation and appropriation in his work without acknowledging sources, said, “I often tell people that Duchamp is my lawyer. He’s the legal premise to validate what I’m doing.”38 When these once-arcane art world defenses—perverse and complicated, as Adler explained—move into the mainstream, you know that norms are changing; shortly after Abloh said that, he was hired to be the artistic director for Louis Vuitton. Following Abloh’s lead, UbuWeb can be considered one enormous appropriative artwork, a giant collage, which appropriates not a single object but rather the entire history of the avant-garde. “In the case of Duchamp, the creative act is not performed by the artist alone; the spectator ... adds his contribution to the creative act,” Adler writes. “The observer in this sense becomes a co-author of the work.”39 In other words, every visitor to UbuWeb contributes to it, affirming it as one gigantic single fair-use artwork. I’ve long maintained that for a certain set of cultural artifacts— specifically the type UbuWeb deals with—copyright doesn’t exist. But Peter Jaszi begs to differ. “For a certain set of cultural artifacts, it is not that copyright doesn’t exist, it’s that copyright actually works. That there are enough features that are designed to protect the user of institutional and individual users—including fair use—that as a practical matter, copyright may exist, but it doesn’t impede. I want to make all sorts of uses possible within the scheme of copyright.”40 O 2 FROM PANORAMA TO POSTAGE STAMP Avant-Garde Cinema and the Internet n a crisp autumn afternoon in 2018, I met Andrew Lampert for a few beers at McSorley’s in New York’s East Village. It was one of those magical times at the bar when the pale-yellow sunlight filters though the paned windows on East Seventh Street, splashing onto the sawdust-covered floor. A few older patrons sat silently around us, reading newspapers, eating cheese-and-onion plates, and sipping dark beers. Over the course of the few hours we spent together, clumps of tourists stopped in, took photos, and left; on occasion, a tour bus emptied out, flooded the bar, and just as quickly departed. For many years, Lampert has been on the front lines of the experimental-film world. From 1998 to 2015, he was the main archivist, curator, and programmer at Anthology Film Archives, a New York–based center for the preservation, study, and exhibition of avant-garde and experimental film and video. And for two decades, Lampert has run interference between UbuWeb and the experimental-film community, which for the most part has been— putting it mildly—suspicious of what we do. Andy has always had a soft spot for UbuWeb. “At the bottom of it all, I’m still a kid from St. Louis who wanted to see the stuff I read about in books and magazines, and for me that’s UbuWeb’s ideal user. It’s not the imagined New York audience that is craving to come to events; instead, it’s people scattered around the world who love this work but lack access.”1 Lampert moved to New York in 1995 to attend New York University. He first went to Anthology just after arriving in town and was hired in 1998, after having already been the director of programming for the New York Underground Film Festival, which was being held there. He began working at Anthology as its theater manager after dropping out of NYU, helping out around the office, and contributing shows to the calendar. At some point, it dawned on him that this job was not leading him any closer to a career in film. Soon after, he learned of a film-preservation program at the George Eastman House in Rochester, New York. Anthology had been without an archivist for more than a decade and desperately needed one. He struck a deal with Jonas Mekas that if he made it into the program, Mekas would raise funds to bring him back as an archivist. He was accepted and spent a year being thoroughly trained in all things celluloid. Mekas held up his end of the bargain and convinced Louise Bourgeois to pay Lampert’s salary. Lampert served as archivist from 2003 to 2011 and curator from 2011 to 2015, overseeing the daily management of Anthology’s media collections, which contain more than 25,000 films, 7,000 videotapes, and 2,500 audio recordings. His duties included fund- raising, selecting titles for preservation, overseeing restoration and digitization projects, acting as a liaison with artists and estates, making acquisitions, loaning works to institutions, overseeing licensing and sales, managing the archival staff, and negotiating contracts. During his tenure, he restored more than 350 films by artists such as Vito Acconci, Stan Brakhage, Carolee Schneemann, Harry Smith, and Robert Wilson. He also managed Anthology’s digitization program, which transferred hundreds of audio recordings and antiquated tapes of early video art onto contemporary formats. Beyond that, he was responsible for coprogramming Anthology’s bulging calendar of more than nine hundred annual public screenings. To say that he knows this world is an understatement— he is this world. When he started at Anthology, the web wasn’t capable of streaming video; by the time he left, Ubu, YouTube, and Vimeo were running full steam, leading him to question the cultural relevance of the work he was doing at Anthology. “I can find a very obscure film and preserve it. I have to get funding to do it. I have to convince a government agency or the Warhol Foundation that this person who you’ve never heard of is important and this is a cultural landmark work. I would spend a year restoring it and premiere the film on a Thursday night at Anthology to an audience of twenty-five people. Did I make this work more culturally relevant? No. You have to be in New York, you have to be free on a Thursday night, you have to be able to come down there and see it. You put the same film up online, it automatically has an audience.” Lampert led the experimental-film world through the changes in technology from analog to digital. He talked its denizens off the edge when they panicked, fearing that the web was snuffing out their art form. He tried to make them see that celluloid and the digital were two very different mediums, with very different métiers and ecosystems and that, if looked at from a certain perspective, one wouldn’t cancel out the other. He turned out to be correct. The digital would eventually strengthen and bolster celluloid, but Lampert recalls that it’s been an uphill battle: Back in 2005, YouTube and Ubu were seen as a threat to film. But what’s happened over time is that we’ve learned to distinguish between experiences. Seeing a film in a theater is not the same as seeing it on Ubu, but at the time it felt like all or nothing. To see a film that’s all about sprocket holes, like a Sharits film, online is a diminished experience. But access is another thing—now somebody in Kansas or Korea can have access to something that was a primarily urban and entitled experience. But in 2005 there was a lot of discussion about legacy, about keeping the institutions that supported this work going and not damaging their bottom line. The prevalence of YouTube and Ubu has actually increased the value of the cinematic experience. People who were young, who were interested, instantly recognized the necessity and the gift that Ubu really is, but the commercial agents and representatives of the work saw it as damaging in part because they weren’t involved. That was very ego bruising. In terms of quality, UbuWeb’s films are truly a disaster, but Lampert says that it’s these inaccuracies that prevent UbuWeb from ever being mistaken for a proper film-distribution service: “If you want to see the real thing, go to Anthology or MoMA or the Pompidou, but don’t expect truth from online versions—expect approximations or remixes.” As an example, he brought up Ubu’s copy of Alfred Leslie’s The Last Clean Shirt (1964), which for a long time contained only one-third of the film. No distributor would ever release a film with two-thirds missing. We did because it was all we had; that one-third stayed up for a few decades until Lampert called it to our attention. Today, the complete film is on the site. But even though the complete film is now available, its quality is far below what any distributor would allow. With no other online version available—the DVD is out of print, and no streaming services offer it —having a subpar copy beats having no copy at all. And, at best, this “thumbnail” might make you want to see the “real” thing when it plays in a cinema. As another example, Lampert cites two of his own films that he gave to UbuWeb in 2007, short, silent, black-and-white portraits of the cellist Okkyung Lee. When he gave us the files, he didn’t realize that they were completely wrong until he saw them on the site. Somewhere along the line—he can’t pinpoint whether he gave us bad files or if they got corrupted by our servers—things got jumbled. One file begins at a random point. The other splices two films together into one. And beyond that, the compression for both films is awful. “When I saw that, instead of writing you to complain, I thought to myself, well how great, Ubu made a new version of my piece! Over the years, I’ve come to look at almost everything I watch online as either authorless or reauthored versions of works that I should be seeing elsewhere.” When I offered to host the correct version of his works, he laughed and said, “I actually don’t mind it. I feel like it was a permutation I didn’t even expect.” Andy Warhol used to say that the action of his static movies, such as Empire (1964) and Sleep (1963), was not to be found on the screen but in the theater. He claimed that because so little was happening on the screen that the real action was in the audience— the comings and goings, talking, falling asleep, fighting, drug use, and sometimes sex. For him, the cinema was a performative space, with the images on-screen as a prompt or backdrop against which these performances could unfold, transforming the normally passive space of cinema into a relational one. Lampert feels similarly that cinema is not a medium. It’s an experience, a collective experience, with people. By hearing them breathe next to me, I’m sharing that experience, I’m experiencing cinema. The cinematic experience is defined by a projector behind you projecting above your heads, onto a surface in front of you. Usually the room is dark, the walls are black, and the screen is white. But the room itself is comprised of viewers, and we’re experiencing things simultaneously. I think it’s that simultaneous viewing that defines cinema because we could all watch the exact same content on our phones, at home, anywhere else, talk about it the next day at the water cooler, but cinema is about the experience of all of us watching at the same time in the same space. That’s especially true if there’s a mistake. For me cinema is alive when there’s a focus problem, when the sound drops out, when a splice breaks, and we have to wait five minutes together in the dark while they get the projector running again. I don’t want a fluid experience. This is cinema. Following Lampert’s logic, the web can never function as a substitute for cinema, which is distinctly a meatspace experience. It’s an important point. Over the years, one of the film community’s biggest criticisms of UbuWeb is that it’s an inferior version of cinema. After listening to Lampert, I realize that although UbuWeb can give access to a cinema-based experience, UbuWeb is not cinema at all. UbuWeb hosts digital copies of 16mm films by an avant-garde filmmaker named Dominic Angerame. They’re meditations on richly textured urban landscapes constructed by superimposing images on top of each another. On occasion, bodies are overlaid with cityscapes, suggesting the city as body or the body as geography. Angerame’s films are homages to earlier movies, such as Willard Maas’s Geography of the Body (1943), in which body parts are photographed in such minute detail that they appear to be landscapes, and Hilary Harris’s Organism (1975), which compares New York City’s complex systems to those of a single biological organism. Angerame updates these movies by adding pop soundtracks from bands such as the Eurythmics, making them feel like off-kilter, avant-garde MTV videos. Sexy and opaque, they’re new wave in both the Godardian and the post-punk-rock sense. And even though they’ve been transferred to video and compressed, they still retain their cinematic qualities. In May 2016, Angerame emailed UbuWeb with a simple request: “I would like to have Ubu present some of my films. How do I proceed? Thanks.”2 Within a month, we had six films up. Angerame was so pleased that he quickly sent us another half dozen. But our relationship with him wasn’t always this way. In the mid- 2000s, UbuWeb had no greater enemy than Angerame, who was then director of Canyon Cinema, one of the most iconic experimental-film distributors in the world. For years, we received a stream of angry emails from him threatening legal action if we didn’t remove all Canyon Cinema films from our archive. The whole thing came to a head in 2010 when the experimental-film listserv Frameworks criticized UbuWeb. After several heated conversations on the list and a response from me, the resistance from that particular part of the film world evaporated, for reasons I never understood. To my surprise, after the controversy died down, several of my most vehement critics on the list—including Angerame— approached Ubu requesting us to host their films. In 2018, I telephoned Angerame, a soft-spoken man approaching seventy with a thick New York accent, to find out what had changed.3 Angerame was director of Canyon Cinema from 1980 to 2012. He was essentially running the business by himself, doing everything from overseeing the finances to inspecting films upon their rental and return. He was responsible for producing the lavish catalogues that propelled the company to become the leading distributor of avant- garde film. In the early 1980s, Angerame told me, there were just a few experimental-film distributors, notably Filmmakers Co-op on the East Coast and Canyon Cinema on the West. When he arrived at Canyon, the business was failing. It had only two employees, one of whom was Angerame. Both worked part-time for the then hourly minimum wage, $3.85. In the early 1980s, the bulk of the rental market was university film studies programs, which would be the source of many digital rips that ended up first on file sharing and then on UbuWeb. In 1981, to rent a film from Canyon cost a hefty $2 a minute, which the filmmaker split with Canyon 65/35 percent. Even then, things were tough for both the distributor and the artists. “Nobody made a living off of what we gave them,” Angerame recalled. Even the bigger- name artists were having trouble getting paid. “Stan Brakhage was owed thousands of dollars from Filmmakers Co-op. They couldn’t pay because they were in debt. We were the only organization that was paying people.” As a result, filmmakers started fleeing Co-op and joining Canyon, so much so that by the late 1980s Canyon Cinema had 3,000 films to Co-op’s 1,200. Subsisting on grants from the California Arts Council, Angerame remained part-time throughout that decade, still working only thirty hours a week. Even though underground video stores such as Kim’s in New York were full of sloppy VHS rips of underground films (many of which ended up on Ubu), Canyon’s academic market remained strong thanks to university professors who insisted on original formats to show students. But even that source of revenue was beginning to disappear. Many of the films we host on UbuWeb originate from university film and video programs, which in the 1980s, with their budgets being slashed, found it cheaper to rent each 16mm film one time from places such as Canyon and then make copies of it for their libraries. In a sense, university libraries were some of the first pirates, making unauthorized copies long before the internet. Over time, they amassed gigantic media libraries of pirated materials. These rips—first on VHS, then on DVD, and finally as Audio Video Interleaved files (AVIs) and MP4s—were, in turn, copied by students and faculty members, who first circulated them among themselves and then released them on file-sharing networks. Many of these files can be traced back to one “small liberal arts college in upstate New York” (everyone I interviewed requested that the school not be named). “God knows how,” says Lampert, “but I know that a lot of your stuff on Ubu can be traced back to their AV closet.” In 1988, the school acquired a television-recorder-model ELMO machine that transferred 16mm films to VHS. The college allegedly bootlegged every film that came in from every distributor and kept it as a VHS reference. “All you needed was a time-based corrector to get rid of any copy protection that was on it, but most people didn’t bother to copy protect stuff and they charged enough in rentals to cover it,” filmmaker and media scholar Keith Sanborn told me. “Most places that you rented from charged steep prices. A rental VHS would be run through a time-based corrector and burned to a DVD.”4 From there, it was a short step to the digital files that began flooding the internet. Not everybody had the time to screen a full film in class, never mind repeatedly; downloadable MP4s allowed students to write better papers and pay close attention to the films. By charging such high prices, Canyon was unknowingly shooting itself in the foot, hobbling its own business interests. Since rental costs were so high and projection equipment was unavailable, teachers would often rip and burn their own collection—often consisting of thousands of DVDs—and bring them into the classroom to teach from, many of which could not be found elsewhere. These rips, too, were placed on university intranets, ultimately finding their way to file sharing. Over the years, many filmmakers, unaware of these goings on, complained to Lampert that they were shocked to find their films all over the web. Although things began to go awry in the late 1980s, Canyon’s upward swing extended into the early 2000s—2002 was its biggest year—until the appearance of commercial DVDs of underground films visibly began to eat into its business. Angerame told me that once the Stan Brakhage DVD collection By Brakhage: An Anthology, Volumes One and Two, containing fifty-six of his films in high-quality digital transfers, came out in 2003, Canyon Cinema saw its rentals drop in half. It was all downhill from there—once DVDs came in, even Canyon’s academic film rentals started drying up. While the Brakhage discs could have been a wakeup call, Canyon chose to ignore it. Lampert recalls having lunch with Angerame in San Francisco, where he tried to convince him to offer video- distribution copies alongside film reels. Andy told him, “They don’t make projectors anymore. Teachers aren’t teaching on film. It’s a death industry, and you’re permanently tied to it. You could still distribute films, and you could also offer the same works on video in high-quality versions that the artists could approve, made at a lab that you trust, ensuring that it would not be the bootleg experience.” “It really would’ve been a very controlled, smart way to increase access and distribution,” he commented to me, “but the only thing Angerame and a lot of other institutions foresaw was more overhead: ‘Who’s going to do it? I have enough to do every day.’ And that’s the reality of all of these places—they’ve got too much going on.” Lampert pressed, but he could feel he wasn’t getting anywhere. “Dominic totally rejected this idea as being crackpot, that you would do something that might actually enable the work to be seen in the contemporary mediums of distribution. He told me it was a bad idea, and I couldn’t understand why he wasn’t listening to me. It seemed to me to be a win–win situation for everybody.” When I asked Angerame about this conversation, he sighed and said, “We understood film. We had no idea about the digital. We were completely blindsided by it.” Of all the arts, film has taken the biggest hit in the digital age. Although MP3s and EPUBs are fair approximations of physical media, they shrink the filmmakers’ art from engulfing panoramas to the size of a postage stamp. The digital age ripped asunder strong film communities with established hierarchies that stretched back decades; the “elders” (as they’re referred to time and again in interviews) were in firm control of knowledge and were evidently rather stingy about sharing it. Over the many interviews I did with people in the experimental-film community, almost everyone had something to say about the elders’ cryptic elitism. As Rick Prelinger, founder of the Prelinger Archives, told me, In the film community, knowledge of the avant-garde is passed down. It’s largely an oral tradition. People who have spent a lot of time with elder members of the community know stuff that other people don’t know. There’s often a litmus test—“Do you know enough to really talk to me?”—type of thing. It’s an imperfect system for transmitting knowledge about the avant- garde because there’s these people who know everything—the people who know the anecdotes, the people who know the people—which locks out everyone else. The reason I started putting films online had nothing to do with the critique of copyright. It was ready, fire, aim. It was a critique of hierarchy and enclosure. What always killed me was that there was no access, that access was reserved for people with money or people with clout.5 Andy Lampert echoes Prelinger, turning his critique on the avant- garde as a field: The avant-garde vilifies what’s new. The avant-garde is an avant-garde that recognizes itself, and when it sees the next avant-garde coming, it typically hates it. A lot of people are so entrenched in their status within the experimental-film community, within this medium, that they see whatever next new wave or new technology on the horizon as a threat to them rather than a promotional tool that could help bring their work if not to the masses, at least to the unknown. The avant-garde audience is also the most conservative because the thing they care about most is the designation of being avant- garde—it doesn’t have to always be cutting edge as long as it is nonnormative, however conformist that might sometimes be. Being avant- garde is essentially the only status you have because you don’t reap any financial gains by making incredibly difficult work. Furthermore, if somebody does anything that leans in other directions or has a populist tone, there’s an instant rebuttal from that community. Lampert speculates that this is because the experimental-film world has long had an inferiority complex to the art world: There’s an inherent bias to the medium itself which is time-based—you’re required to sit through the entire duration of a film—as opposed to gallery artists whose works you can walk in and out of at any point. Experimental filmmakers are stuck in theaters making short films that play in group programs, where they have virtually no control over how the works are curated or juxtaposed. Experimental filmmakers made work that was not able to be commoditized, as opposed to visual artists like Robert Morris or Richard Serra, who began treating film as a sculptural material. Even the museum hierarchies reinforce these narratives. If you go to MoMA, you’ll find film and video by artists in the main galleries upstairs, whereas experimental film is still shown in the basement theaters. And it’s not just MoMA; it’s the same across the entire film ecosystem.6 Although devoted to Canyon Cinema, Angerame considered it a day job. His real passion was making films, which he continued to do while working there. And in spite of his senior position at Canyon Cinema, like everyone else he was making very little money: “Running Canyon, I realized nobody was really making a living. The most Brakhage ever made in royalties from us was a few thousand dollars a year—impressive, yes, but you can’t live off of that.” In 2012, unable to respond to the digital onslaught, he was fired by the board. After leaving Canyon, he pulled his own films from Canyon’s distribution and began to ponder the next move. “I’m making all this stuff, but I’m not making any money on it. Why not just have people look at the work? I have nothing to lose.” His first impulse was to go with commercial streaming services, but the most his Fandor royalty check ever amounted to was $6.95. “At some point, everybody realized that the work is going to end up on YouTube, so it’s better to be on Ubu,” Angerame admitted. “Anything is better than YouTube.” When I asked him what made Ubu better than YouTube, he replied that it was about caring and context. He was impressed by the fact that Ubu positioned itself as a resource, providing abundant information about the films and filmmakers, which was absent from YouTube. The other thing that impressed him about Ubu was the roster of filmmakers, which in many ways was close to Canyon’s. But finally the decision was economic. From his decades at Canyon Cinema, he was forced to admit the dismal financial circumstances of the experimental-film world. Echoing UbuWeb, he confessed that “when you take the money equation out, things become a lot freer.” Angerame uses Ubu as a way to promote his films. “UbuWeb is a service to me. I might as well have people know my work rather than hiding them in a closet.” He sends curators to Ubu to preview his films before they show them in a gallery or theater. In this way, he’s seen an uptick in screenings and invitations. And the digital turns out to have worked in his favor: “I get more people coming to my movies in theaters than I ever have before because of the reaction against the digital.” And over the years, Angerame has repositioned himself: “I’ve changed my attitude about UbuWeb. I used to hate Ubu because it was competition. We weren’t quite sure if filmmakers were approving the work that was put up on Ubu. We weren’t sure if it was pirated or if the filmmakers gave permission. We felt it was like YouTube. We felt that a lot of filmmakers didn’t want to have their work presented that way.” It turns out he wasn’t the only one. In 2010, UbuWeb was hacked. I never found out who did it or what happened. One day a bunch of files were gone, and I had to darken the site for a while to rebuild. When the word went out, although many were concerned and saddened, others were relieved. At least that’s the message I got from some of the members of Frameworks, the prominent experimental-film listserv. “Ah, this is such good news,” crowed one member.7 Angerame (at the time still hating Ubu) chimed in: “YES YES YES. . . . . . . posting of films on UBU, youtube, and the rest HAS HAS, yes HAS decreased rentals and demands for people to see these works in other ways. . . . . . . . . . . it has impacted the entire field. . . . . . . in a negative way. . . . . . and if it continues the field will not be able to be plowed. . . . . . I cannot be more clear.”8 Others felt differently. The video artist Peter Rose, who had approached UbuWeb early on to host his videos, wrote: I must come to Ubu’s defense. Having been rejected by every major video art distributor in the U.S, having at last let go of the apparently frivolous desire to make any money off of my work, having concluded that the web offered at least some method of broadcasting the work to a larger audience, and having appreciated the opportunities afforded by Ubu to showcase important work to my students, I happily flung 13 titles up onto Ubu and never regretted it. I realize there are copyright and permission issues of substantial importance that have arisen in this context, but I’m not one to be counted amongst those who celebrate their demise.9 The film critic Fred Camper chimed in his support for Ubu, elaborating on some of the arguments that Peter Jaszi, Peter Decherney, and Amy Adler make: Once a cultural product has been put out in the world, and has influenced others, it should not solely be considered the “property” of its maker at least in moral terms, even if, legally, it is, because it has become part of the discourse ... I was invited to present six programs of Brakhage films in Rio de Janeiro. Nobody could remember the last time Brakhage in prints were in that great city. I carried most of them; some were shipped. The shows went splendidly. And many of the people there told me that their interest in Brakhage had been stimulated by the horrible (and, presumably, illegal) copies they had seen on the “Net.” They knew these were bad versions, but were at the least intrigued, and really wanted to see the real thing.10 The hacking of Ubu spurred a vigorous conversation about the viability of the extant ecologies of film in the digital age—its financial systems, quality, distribution, accessibility, and privileges or lack thereof. In the end, most people ended up siding with UbuWeb, while noting its obvious faults: my lack of knowledge of the subject featured (true), Ubu’s poor quality (true), and the infamous Wall of Shame (true). I read the thread carefully at the time. It’s still worth reading today to grasp the extraordinary challenges the field was facing. At some point in the early 2000s, I got a 501(c)(3) tax designation for UbuWeb as a nonprofit, thinking that I might apply for some grants. While that never happened, I had to form a board, with Lampert a member. Andy took a lot of heat for joining Ubu’s board. Some in the experimental-film world accused him of feeding UbuWeb films from Anthology’s vaults. “People would assume that because of the scarcity and type of films you were putting up that places like Anthology were feeding Ubu,” he told me. “Absolutely not. I never gave a single film.” He’s right—they all came from file sharing. But his affiliation with Ubu caused him to absorb every complaint directed at anything digital. “Whether it was Tony Conrad, Dominic Angerame, or Bruce Conner, everyone would come to me and complain.” The irony, Lampert says, is that there are several films on UbuWeb that can’t be found or rented from distributors or seen in cinemas. Henri Michaux’s Images du monde visionnaire (1964), for example, can’t be rented or screened, but it can be found on Ubu. Michaux’s film, which was intended for the medical profession to demonstrate the visual effects of mescaline, was commissioned by Sandoz, the Swiss pharmaceutical company. Michaux disowned it, claiming that it in no way was representative of what it felt like to take drugs. In an essay describing his experiences with mescaline, he wrote: When it was proposed to make a film about mescaline hallucinations, I have declared, I have repeated and I repeat it again, that that is to attempt the impossible. Even in a superior film, made with substantial means, with all one needs for an exceptional production, I must state beforehand the images will be insufficient. The images would have to be more dazzling, more instable, more subtle, more changeable, more ungraspable, more trembling, more tormenting, more writhing, infinitely more charged, more intensely beautiful, more frighteningly colored, more aggressive, more idiotic, more strange. With regard to the film’s speed, it should be so high that all scenes would have to fit in fifty seconds.11 Dissatisfied with the resultant film, he prohibited the film from ever being screened in public, something the Michaux estate vigorously enforces to this day. But the more you try to suppress something, the more people want to get their hands on it. In 2012, we were slipped a copy of the film and posted it even while knowing it was highly illegal. The Michaux estate was quickly alerted to the fact that Images du monde visionnaire was on Ubu, but it never complained, thereby giving us tacit permission. So while you’ll never see this film in the theaters, you’ll always be able to see it on Ubu. The copy we have is good except for one full minute when an update window from some Mac operating-system program pops up out of nowhere, completely obscuring the film. It’s a lovely error, a bootleg watermark, and a reminder that you’re not actually seeing the “real” thing (although in this case the “real” thing is unavailable, somehow making our lousy copy the “real” thing). Piracy also can be a form of preservation. The copy that we have of René Viénet’s Chinois, encore un effort pour etre revolutionnaires (Peking Duck Soup, 1977) is a dub of the only copy that exists. The film, a collage of archival footage of leaders from the People’s Republic of China, applies the method of situationist détournement to the genre of the political documentary. Only one print of the film was ever made, and it was sent to Australia to be shown and, for reasons unknown, never returned. Viénet tried to have another print of it made, but he owed the film lab so much money that it destroyed his negative. Keith Sanborn was passed a PAL VHS from a friend in Australia—already a very degraded copy—which he transcoded to the analog television standard NTSC (losing yet even more quality), translated it, and slapped English subtitles on it. The copy we host on UbuWeb is an umpteenth-generation copy that Sanborn gave us. It’s not great, but at least for the time being it’s as good as it’s going to get. Most of the situationist films on UbuWeb are courtesy of Sanborn, who has taken up the task of translating and subtitling the situationists’ oeuvre—for no money. It’s safe to say that most letterist and situationist films wouldn’t be in English if not for his efforts. When I asked him why he would put in hundreds of hours of his time and thousands of dollars in studio editing time to transfer the tapes, he answered, “It was done as potlatch: a conspicuous destruction of time, energy and money. But more importantly, I thought these films had revolutionary potential, that they could change the way we see things.”12 He gave the films to UbuWeb because he wanted them to be distributed without anyone profiting monetarily from them. Sanborn used his skills as a translator as a way of escaping the confines of his rural upbringing in Kansas. As a teen, he would attend translation seminars in foreign countries each summer and in this way learned half-a-dozen languages. He studied film and media at several U.S. universities, working closely with filmmakers such as Hollis Frampton and Tony Conrad. In 1989, he attended a situationist retrospective at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston at a time when the movement was little known in the United States. There, he saw René Viénet’s La dialectique peut-elle casser des briques? (Can Dialectics Break Bricks?, 1973), which overdubs a cheesy kung-fu flick with Marxist jargon, turning the fighting scenes into metaphors for class struggle. Intrigued, Sanborn set out to find a copy to translate into English. He found a bootleg VHS floating around that had been transferred so many times that the color had washed away, virtually turning it black-and-white. It’s a complicated film to translate, so rife with arcane cultural allusions and complicated wordplay that it left him perplexed. He and another situationist scholar spent hours poring over the tape, which required an enormous amount of research, a feat even more remarkable considering there was little or no internet at the time. The subtitles were burned in by hand using analog technology. When the subtitled film was complete, he showed it to small audiences in San Francisco, taking suggestions from them (who often included a number of French people) as a way to help correct errors. Satisfied that he’d done the best job he could, he set out to become the English situationist translator of record. He began hunting down copies of other situationist and letterist films as well as the films of Guy Debord, many of which he obtained in VHS copies that had been copied off of French television. Because of the situationists’ political ethos, he never sought permission to translate and distribute the films. He knew that Debord had never sued anyone for making bootlegs of his work, and, besides, the Situationist International had always published its works with an effusive anticopyright rhetoric. When someone would approach him about showing the films, Sanborn always made it clear that he had no rights to them, that the inquirer would be legally on her own if she showed the films. He really wasn’t after money, offering this person the option of showing the film with no rental fee if she would agree not to charge admission to the screening. Ironically, in all the years during which he circulated the tapes—they showed in a fair number of venues in the United States and abroad—no venue ever took him up on the option of not charging admission. Potlatch. Anticopyright. Open distribution. The situationists predicted the way that media would flow on the networks. Andy Lampert muses, “When I think back on the filmmakers who complained to me, the real complaints came about quality. My main argument was, ‘Don’t let Ubu do it better than you. Take this as an incentive.’ ” “Take this as an incentive” was my exact response when I penned an open letter to the Frameworks community in response to their discussion: I think that, in the end, Ubu is a provocation to your community to go ahead and do it right, do it better, to render Ubu obsolete. Why should there only be one UbuWeb? You have the tools, the resources, the artwork and the knowledge base to do it so much better than I’m doing it. I fell into this as Ubu has grown organically (we do it because we can) and am clearly not the best person to be representing experimental cinema. Ubu would love you to step in and help make it better. Or, better yet, put us out of business by doing it correctly, the way it should have been done in the first place.13 So what happened? Nothing. Nobody bothered to build a site the way it was supposed to be built. The grumbling subsided, and now, as I write this book nearly a decade later, UbuWeb—warts and all— is still the only resource of its kind. T 3 THE WORK OF VIDEO ART IN THE AGE OF DIGITAL REPRODUCTION here’s a middle-aged, semiretired rare-gem and minerals dealer who lives in a small town in central Arkansas. When he was involved in business, he used to travel for work but never too far—just to do some trade shows around the South and Midwest—but since his husband and business partner died a few years back, he rarely travels. That’s fine with him: he’s a bit of a homebody and didn’t much like traveling anyway. These days he spends most of his time doing dark, smoky graphite drawings of tornadoes, like the kind that haunted him throughout his childhood in the Midwest. He also makes expressionistic self-portraits that communicate the horror he felt when experiencing those storms and maybe even providing insights into his current state of mind. He tends toward periods of depression since the death of his husband, which, coupled with the loneliness, makes it hard to get much done. He doesn’t spend too much time on the internet anymore; his machines are outdated, and his semirural connection is slow. It’s quite a change from how much time he used to spend there, for, as far as I can tell, most of pirated artists’ videos on the web today, including most of what’s on UbuWeb, originated entirely from him. We first met on a private cinema torrent tracker, where I got to know him by his online handle, “videoartcollector,” where he was posting mostly rare artists’ videos, which I scooped up en masse and reposted to Ubu. One day I backchanneled him to say hello. We struck up a correspondence, and at some point he suggested that I mail him a two-terabyte hard drive so that he could fill it with videos and mail it back to me and thus save me from the arduous process of downloading torrents. A few weeks later, a small package arrived in the mail bearing a return address in Arkansas. When I plugged in the hard drive, I was astonished. It contained only two directories —“Artists” and “Compilations”—both of which were packed with thousands of films and videos. It was hard to believe that this box in my hand contained virtually the entire history of artists’ videos, including virtually the entire catalogues of both Electronic Arts Intermix (EAI) and Video Data Bank (VDB), the main video distributors in the United States. The more I dug into the drive, the more I became curious about this guy. The breadth and depth of his collection were so impressive that I started to wonder how and why he obtained such an encyclopedic knowledge—not to mention a nearly complete set of artifacts—of such an arcane field. After all, the viewing of artists’ videos is generally a rare and inaccessible experience for many. In order to see them, you have to be in an urban center; or if you’re teaching, you need to have a sizable budget to rent them. It was clear from our correspondence that he was not in either of these situations. I sensed quite the opposite. He struck me as “one of those guys you meet on the internet,” an outsider, a fan, an autodidact. So one day I phoned him to find out what his story was. My assumptions turned out to be correct. videoartcollector (who wished to remain anonymous for this book) speaks with a light southern accent and is a man on a very specific mission. He’s hell- bent on getting video art to everybody who doesn’t have access to it free of charge. Unlike for independent cinema, there is no Hulu or Netflix for artists’ video. When speaking about the subject, he becomes very passionate. The more he speaks, the more the layers of his southern gentility begin to peel away. With great zeal, he is convinced that his open sourcing of videos has not only enriched the parched intellectual deserts of the internet but in some respects made the world a better place. And he may be right. By my estimation, he alone has ripped, dubbed, and seeded torrents of tens of thousands of artists’ videos for the web. He at once feels he is performing a public service and, like many pirates, exudes an infectious glee about getting away with it—another guy sticking it to the establishment, sticking it to the galleries, sticking it to capitalism, sticking it to the elitist art world—all from his living room in “the middle of bumfuck Arkansas,” as he calls it. Born into a large family in a chaotic home under extremely “difficult circumstances,” as he describes it, he decided early on that he wanted to be an artist. His first exposure to contemporary art came in high school in the mid-1980s when he came across the book What the Songs Look Like: Contemporary Artists Interpret Talking Heads’ Songs (1987), in which artists were commissioned to make artworks to accompany the lyrics of the songs. Around the same time, he began taping episodes of Alive from Off Center, an American arts television series aired by PBS between 1984 and 1996 that featured a lot of the same downtown New York artists he knew from the Talking Heads book. From his location in the middle of America, with TV as his only conduit, he began to observe the trickledown effect that artists such as Nam June Paik were having on, say, Super Bowl commercials, network news, and MTV. As a result, he became an obsessive home taper, recording anything having to do with art. If PBS was broadcasting artists’ videos late at night, as it sometimes did, he taped them. When traveling for work, he’d scour local museums, buying all the tapes he could. He’d scan lists of big exhibitions; if a video artist was in a Whitney Biennial, he’d collect that person’s works. “I was desperate for any artist working with video. I’d comb the web, magazines, festivals. If they made it to a certain level of visibility, then they must be worth collecting.”1 He took to Usenet bulletin boards and began posting lists of the mountains of VHS’s that were piling up around him. Before long, he was involved in swapping artists’ tapes with other collectors. “I had a room upstairs in the house with a bunch of VCRs and stacks and stacks and stacks of blank VHS cassettes that I would babysit for days on end, doing boxes of VHSs that I would send out at my own expense,” he told me. “It got so expensive that I eventually had to declare bankruptcy.” You could say he was the Johnny Appleseed of pirated internet video art, all done by VHS through the U.S. mail. “I was the clearinghouse for most of the artists’ videos that were in circulation on the web,” he confessed to me. “I digitized them and spread them throughout the internet. I would send them to anybody who wanted them. I would look for people looking for the works.” There was an evangelical aspect to his mission: “If you could get to this stuff, it would open up your mind in ways that would change the way you see the world. I needed to get that to people at any cost. I wonder what it would be like if everybody had access to art....” His voice trailed off. Sighing, he continued, “How different things might’ve turned for me if I had access to video art—and the internet —when I was younger,” hinting at his own failed attempt to be an artist. His reputation as a bootlegger grew. Soon he began getting requests from universities to supply them with video libraries. A national public university in Mexico, Centro Nacional de Alto Rendimiento, wrote and asked if he would supply it with a teaching collection that it could in turn dub and distribute to all the satellite campuses around the country. He responded by getting a set of what he considered to be his very best tapes and sent it out to the university, free of charge. He even paid the postage. At some point in the late 1990s or early 2000s, much of what a typical Mexican art student knew about video art was determined by those tapes that videoartcollector sent. Major artists affiliated with blue-chip galleries soon began sending him VHS copies of their work that they wanted released on the web but were afraid to do so themselves, fearing reprisals from their galleries. By this time, with the internet in full swing, videoartcollector filled the web with those works, posting them to YouTube and seeding torrents of them on every sharing site he could. Sometimes he’d meet famous artists on the web, as when in the mid-1990s he saw a comment that Tony Conrad left on Pipilotti Rist’s website asking how he could locate copies of her works. Rist never responded, but videoartcollector did. At the time, he had no idea who Conrad was and assumed that he was just a fellow collector. He emailed Conrad and let him know he had copies of Rist’s works, which he would happily rip for him. In return, Conrad sent him a bunch of tapes of his own works—which then, unbeknownst to the artist, were widely shared without Conrad’s permission. “What did he expect? Since he knew what I was doing, I have to assume he was okay with me sending people copies of those specific works.” Over the years, videoartcollector became a main source of Conrad’s pedagogical materials for his legendary video seminars at the State University of New York at Buffalo, mailing Conrad box after box of tapes. In 2003, the New York Times ran a story about video art and file sharing, where videoartcollector is extensively quoted. He is referred to as a “self-taught video art expert” with a collection of 1,500 works that “rivals those of many museums.”2 The article centers around the format battle between the infinitely reproducible medium of video and galleries’ attempts to sell artists’ videos for astronomical sums as limited editions—a struggle that continues to this day, in particular with Matthew Barney’s The Cremaster Cycle (1994–2002). videoartcollector’s obsession with Matthew Barney began in the late 1990s when he came across a stack of Art in America magazines in a thrift shop and read an article written about Barney’s Cremaster 2, which had just come out. His mind was blown; he had never heard of anything remotely like it. He had to have that tape. He jumped on the internet and blanketed Usenet groups, begging for someone to send him a Barney VHS, which was nearly impossible because Barney adamantly refused to release his tapes commercially. But as time went on, they began to leak; the earliest tapes were copies that Barney passed along to friends and artists for “private use,” which quickly found their way onto the VHS underground. Before long, collectors who had bought the videos at full price were getting into the act, making copies and passing them along to friends and other collectors, and so crummy dubs of the Cremaster Cycle were soon flooding the internet. From that time to this very day, obtaining DVD- quality copies of Barney’s Cremaster Cycle remains the holy grail of the video-file-sharing community, a feat that not even videoartcollector has managed to pull off (he has DVD-quality files for four out of the five films, but his copy of Cremaster 5 is still a VHS rip). Barney’s series was originally released in an edition of twenty and sold to collectors for $100,000 each. In 2007, Sotheby’s sold a single copy of Cremaster 2 for $571,000. But Barney refuses to yield, informing an interviewer in 2018 that “it’s not right for them to be available to be owned in an unlimited way after they’ve been sold in a limited way.”3 Barney is at odds with many artists these days, who view file sharing as one component of a complex and overlapping distributive ecosystem. Generally conceived of as tripartite system—file sharing, cinema/museum distribution, and commercial galleries—the newer approach reflects the botched realities of trying to bottle an infinitely reproducible medium. Back in the mid-1990s, my wife, the artist Cheryl Donegan, when pressured by galleries to shoehorn her video works into one-of-a-kind artifacts, demurred and instead put her videos into open distribution, feeling it was more honest to the medium. She recalled when one day in the early 1990s she was walking down the street in Soho, and a woman came up to her and said she’d seen one of her videos in a bar in Berlin. This woman was thrilled to see Donegan’s work in this casual context. But Donegan’s stomach dropped: “I thought: How did that happen? Who got the tape? How did they show it? Who did I give it to? Who did they give it to? Was it a copy of a copy of a copy?” It was then that she had the sinking feeling that she couldn’t keep track of things. Yet this woman seemed so excited and enthusiastic that Donegan began to question her own assumptions: “Maybe a lot of people saw it, or some young artist was remixing it. And I thought, well, maybe this isn’t so bad. Maybe it was a good thing to be part of instead of being afraid of it and seeing it as a loss. And I just sort of relaxed into it.”4 At the time, Donegan was working with commercial galleries and using the services of EAI, which distributed tapes to institutions in addition to offering duplication and preservation services. The Berlin story made her realize the value of a third system—a grassroots fandom that eventually found its full form on the internet. She came to feel that these various distributive systems didn’t have to conflict with one another, but that each served a unique purpose and audience. The more she thought about it, the more she felt that video has been mislabeled a “medium.” She began to see it instead as a storage facility or a container: “I’ve always compared it to water because it takes the shape that it’s poured into. If you pour it into a phone, it’s going to take the shape of the phone; if you pour it into the screen, it’s going to take the shape of the screen; if you pour it into a projection, it’s going to take the shape of the projection. So, like water, it just kind of seeks its level. Video’s true level is to distribute and to flow.”5 She saw the distributive possibilities as being equally liquid: if your video is flowing into a museum, then you use EAI; if it’s flowing into a gallery, you work commercially; and if it’s flowing through the web, you use internet channels. The artist Pierre Huyghe feels the same way. He says, “For videos, editions are fake. When Rodin could only cast three sculptures of a nude before the mold lost its sharpness, it made sense. But all my works are on my hard drive, in ones and zeros.” Yet his dealer, Marian Goodman, sees things differently, selling “signed” and “certified” copies of Huyghe’s videos for prices that as early as the 2000s were in the high five figures. When confronted with Huyghe’s statement, the gallery responded that limited editions represent a “logical, established tradition which makes that possible.”6 But Donegan questions if that tradition was either established or logical with respect to video: “The way video is positioned in the gallery system is problematic. It isn’t a unique object, which becomes more precious over time. But it isn’t a sculpture either, from which a limited edition of copies could be made. Video was meant to be copied endlessly, especially when it went digital. And the digital, with its water-like qualities, is riddled with gaps, which the galleries and collectors paper over. Ever- escalating prices for a single-channel video struck me as absurd.” She continues, “I’ve always had this patchwork of systems which don’t, in fact, line up. I think there’s no uniformity to it. Video is an incoherent medium, which is one of its beauties.” Commenting on Marian Goodman’s response to Huyghe, she says, “So how can you get upset with an artist who is ‘using it wrong’ when there’s no ‘right’ way to do it? How can you have a completely un-thought-out position which you then proceed to enforce vigorously, one which is based on received ideas and [a] status quo that the nature of video itself defies?”7 About a decade ago I was asked to curate an evening of film and video from UbuWeb by the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center. Naturally, I was flattered and agreed, but I had only one stipulation: that they show AVIs or MP4s downloaded from the site. They hemmed and hawed about how the quality of such small files might not hold up on such a large screen but ultimately concurred. The other thing I insisted upon, following Ubu’s ethos, was that no money be charged for the screening, nor was I to be paid a fee. The big night came, and the theater was packed. I stood up in front of the audience and told them exactly what was going to happen: they were about to see a series of great films in the worst quality imaginable. There was some grumbling in the audience. I continued, saying that the reason I was doing this was to demonstrate the value of high resolution and good distribution. I wanted to say, in essence, that UbuWeb or the internet had no chance of killing the cinematic experience, which at the time was still a big fear. I told them this is proof that we need distributors such as EAI and big-screen theaters like the one we were sitting in that night. After my talk, there was scattered faint applause—and then the show began. Although I was warned how bad the screening of the films would be, I had no idea that it was going to be this bad. Each pixel was the size of a piece of plywood; even if you squinted your eyes, you still couldn’t make out an image. It was as if the screen at the mighty Walter Reade Theater had turned into a giant moving JPEG, reminiscent of the oversize pixelated photographs that Thomas Ruff prints out from tiny JPEGs he grabs from the web. The sound was no better: muffled and garbled, it was barely audible. It wasn’t long before people began trickling out, which soon turned into a stream, ending in a torrent of exiles. Within the first thirty minutes, the theater was empty. We stopped the program then and there, a full ninety minutes before it was scheduled to end. People were eager to see these films, so they left perhaps frustrated and disappointed. Fair enough. No one paid, so no one asked for their money back. But, for me, this experimental screening was an exercise in how once again UbuWeb is not a substitute for either meatspace-based cinema or video. A few weeks later I got a call from Lori Zippay, then director of EAI. Lori and I are old friends (Cheryl’s videos have been represented by EAI for decades), and she was concerned about how much EAI stuff was ending up on UbuWeb without its permission. She requested a face-to-face meeting to iron out these issues. When I arrived at EAI’s Chelsea offices, Abina Manning, the director of VDB, was also there. They began by telling me that I was eating into their businesses. Humiliated, I listened silently, my head bowed, staring at my shuffling feet. Then there was a long uneasy silence that seemed to go on forever; when the conversation resumed, their tone had changed. In a 180-degree turnaround, they told me that as much as UbuWeb was harming them, it was also helping them. They explained that although Ubu was causing them to lose business, an equal amount of traffic was also coming to them because institutions could preview their works on UbuWeb, which ultimately converted into sales and rentals for them. They went on to explain that they were besieged, taking flak from all sides. The galleries were upset with them because they were distributing in open editions what the galleries were trying to pass off to collectors as unique. The educators were upset with them because they were charging what they felt to be exorbitant rental fees for stuff that was going to be used in the classroom. And the free-culture people were upset with them for being, well, profitable nonprofits. By aligning with UbuWeb, they were able to deflect the heat they were getting from free-culture proponents by saying that a large percentage of their material was in fact offered for free on Ubu. But no matter what they did, the galleries, still wedded to the notion of the singular masterpiece, remained both hostile and perplexed. After some discussion, we made a deal. They would survey their artists and ask them if it was okay to have their stuff up on UbuWeb, and I would remove the works of those who were not comfortable being there. A week later I received a small list from each distributor with artists whose works were to be removed, which I did immediately. A decade on, this arrangement has been working well. In all, about fifteen artists’ works were removed from our site. Like Anthology Film Archives, neither EAI nor VDB gave UbuWeb any videos, and they haven’t to this day. Everything on the site came from file sharing or was material that artists gave directly to me. Unconventional, yes, but this arrangement was a first crucial step in the ways that legal and semilegal/gray zones could work in tandem to benefit all. In the beginning, like the experimental-film world, EAI and VDB had assumed that UbuWeb was cutting into their bottom-line rentals. Then they went to a library conference and discovered that the problem wasn’t Ubu at all. Rather, the way libraries had been purchasing videos had changed. EAI and VDB’s revenue stream— attained by charging hundreds of dollars for each disc, one DVD at a time—had begun to dry up. When the libraries stopped buying the DVDs, EAI assumed that it was because much of that same material was available online in places such as Ubu. However, what they discovered was that libraries were gravitating toward streaming subscriptions and in the late 2000s began paying organizations such as Kanopy a flat fee to have access to a huge database of titles. In response, EAI subsequently built its own subscription model and began offering bulk screening services for educational institutions, which could be as small as a fee per course or access to its entire catalogue for a year. Unlike with Ubu, in this way the students get full-length, high-resolution videos of verifiable provenance, along with the assurance that they are seeing the best, most authentic versions available. Echoing Donegan, Zippay told me that the field of moving-image distribution has now splintered into a Venn diagram of overlapping but distinct economies. What initially seemed like one big knot gradually became untangled, resulting in several distributive threads, each with its own history, philosophy, and economy. Whereas at the beginning there were accusation and recrimination, today we have acceptance and reconciliation. As Zippay puts it, “None of us are going to cease existing. We’re always evolving. We can’t afford to be stagnant because conditions—the art world, technology, and artists —are changing constantly. Each of the parallel ecosystems have their own demands—different contexts, different audiences, different venues, and different display modes—which are all part of the current reality of our moving image ecosystem.”8 In order to distinguish itself from, say, UbuWeb or the commercial galleries, over the past decade EAI has begun pitching itself as artisanal boutique shop catering specifically to the needs of institutions. It’s a booming business: in the face of lousy bootleg online video (UbuWeb being a prime example), institutions have distinguished themselves by showing or making available high- resolution, top-quality video. So when MoMA does historical re- creations of video installations that attempt to replicate the conditions and technologies as close as possible to those extant when the videos were first made, they go to EAI to get the tapes. Today it’s a given that most of the artists on EAI’s roster place their works in all three ecosystems, the way Ryan Trecartin—an EAI-affiliated artist— did more than a decade ago when he emailed UbuWeb asking if we would host his works. At the time, YouTube limited videos to ten minutes, and his works were much longer. Naturally, we said yes, which began a long relationship in which each time Ryan would make a new video—be it for a gallery installation or for open distribution via EAI—he would also toss us a copy of it to host. He was born in 1981, so, as for many artists of his generation, his aesthetic was informed by the web; it would be weird to him to show a video for sale in a gallery and not have it available online for free at the same time. When I first met Seth Price in the early 1990s, he was working at EAI dubbing and editing tapes. He had just gotten out of Brown and was doing what every artist does when he or she first comes to New York: working a day job. But it was a good day job. He met all sorts of amazing video artists. Price listened carefully to the conversations going on in the editing booths at the time, and when he embarked on his career as a visual artist, content and its relationship to various forms of distribution became a focus of his work. In a way, his artworks demonstrate and embody the sort of flexibility emblematic of the digital age. Price was inspired by the fluidity of Robert Smithson’s Spiral Jetty (1970), which takes several material forms: a film, a sculpture, and an essay. Price saw it as the prototype for a flexible artwork, one that was always in flux, appearing in various versions—like water, as Donegan says, flowing through various distributive channels. Price says: “You can read the essay, you can go to the sculpture, and you can also see a film. And they’re all called Spiral Jetty.”9 Price enacted Smithson’s ideas when he published his essay “Dispersion” (2002) in various forms—as a free PDF, as a self- published chapbook cum artwork that he sold for $10 a copy at museum shops, and as an artwork shown in a commercial gallery. Like a DJ, Price opened up his text to various remixes. The title of the webpage where those remixes are hosted, “This Version,” is a riff on the essay’s title, “Dispersion.”10 The webpage for the project boasts seven translations of the text—some of which have their own cover and layouts—as well as a series of chapbooks that Price made, each illustrated with handmade, spray-painted colors and each a unique object that sells for many times the price of the trade edition. There’s also a link to a funky “Ukrainian Art Student Bootleg” as well as images of his fine-art version, where the identical cheap chapbook is blown-up large, divided into eight spreads, and printed on Price’s signature vacuformed plastic sheets, with embossed ropes snaking through the texts. In contrast to Barney’s rigid hierarchical notions of property, value, and singularity, the various forms of “Dispersion”/Dispersion propose a different scenario: “Suppose an artist were to release the work directly into a system that depends on reproduction and distribution for its sustenance, a model that encourages contamination, borrowing, stealing, and horizontal blur.” Price is not a free-culture freak; he’s happily invested in both culture and capital, with one foot in the lucrative art world and the other in file sharing and remixing. He proposes a twenty-first-century response to Marian Goodman’s ideas of singularity: “New strategies are needed to keep up with commercial distribution, decentralization, and dispersion.” And he calls into question the effectiveness of uniqueness: “A popular album could be regarded as a more successful instance of public art than a monument tucked away in an urban plaza. The album is available everywhere, since it employs the mechanics of free market capitalism, history’s most sophisticated distribution system to date.” His is a digital solution: “With more and more media readily available through this unruly archive [the internet], the task becomes one of packaging, producing, reframing, and distributing; a mode of production analogous not to the creation of material goods, but to the production of social contexts, using existing material.” Yet his brand of democracy doesn’t work for all. Speaking of why his distributed ideals work, Price checks his privilege as a highly successful gallery artist, something afforded to a few: “Anyone can decide to sell an essay for thousands of dollars but you need to have a presence in all three of those economies in order to be able to demonstrate that they work together.”11 Price is interested in diversifying and cannibalizing his own videos to highlight his ideas of distribution, which manifest themselves as self-referential, self-reflexive, hall-of-mirrors artworks. For his work Digital Video Effects: “Editions” (2006), he took eight videos that had previously been sold as individual artworks to collectors and used them as raw material. He cut them up and made an abstract video out of them, which he then transferred to a singular 16mm film and showed it in a gallery. Then he made a video version of the film that was simultaneously given to EAI to distribute widely. The irony was that Price’s film was purchased by collectors who don’t own a 16mm projector, so they asked for the video version in order to be able to experience the work immediately. Price’s piece is a demonstration of Donegan’s idea that video is not a medium but a container, shapeshifting and conforming to whatever it encounters, even film. But it gets more complicated. Price is also a musician, who, like many musicians, has made music videos that he posts on YouTube. He wasn’t really thinking of them as art, but when an opportunity for a show came up in a gallery, and he didn’t have any work ready, he offered them his music videos. Because they were already available on YouTube, he insisted that they be an unlimited open edition and that if a collector wanted to buy them, he or she had to purchase them as a set. He set up individual viewing booths as sculptural elements and let the videos run. They went unsold. The earlier YouTube postings prevented the collectors from seeing this body of work as having any real future investment value (If everyone can have it, why should I buy it?). When the videos were shown a few years later in his film and video retrospective at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London, a reviewer wrote that the videos were appropriated—which they weren’t; Price lovingly crafted them, with original music and original footage, as sincere music videos. But the framing of works in a common format confounded the critics as well as the collectors, all of which Price had planned as a critique of format and distribution models in the digital age. Like Zippay, Price doesn’t see these overlapping economies as conflicting with one another. If an institution is aware of video art and its history, and it wants to show Price’s work, it would contact EAI. If a museum is doing a group show that involves installation, sculpture, and painting and wants a video by him, it might not even know about EAI and go straight to the gallery that represents him. Other times people will randomly contact his studio, which will burn or rip whatever is appropriate for the venue. Pirate venues will often grab bootlegs of his work off the web and show them without seeking permission. In Dispersion, Price writes that “an entire artistic program could be centered on the re-release of obsolete cultural artifacts, with or without modifications, regardless of intellectual property laws.”12 It’s here that distribution and archiving collapse into one practice. Price enacted this stance in his ongoing audio project Title Variable (2001–). Five editions have been released so far as CDs, LPs, cassettes, and MP3s. By rescuing obsolete music made by obsolete technologies, Price turns archiving into an artistic practice. For one CD compilation, for instance, he snagged MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) files of video-game soundtracks from old internet bulletin-board systems, where they were shared by video-game fanatics as pieces of fanboy culture. Price thought it was odd that no commercial CD compilation of these soundtracks was ever made, so he decided to make one. By merely moving the identical material from one format into another (the “transformative turn” enshrined both in copyright law and by Duchamp), the soundtracks, which at the time weren’t thought of as “music” or “art” became both when Price reformatted and reclaimed them. For other versions of Title Variable, he researched genres that had been overtaken by new technologies and thus rendered obsolete. He then reassembled these once-beloved but now defunct genres into CD compilations. They were so out of date that nobody would ever buy them if you tried to sell them in a record store but not out of date long enough to come back into fashion again. They were in an odd cultural limbo, which is exactly the point that Price wished to make. For example, in 2003 he downloaded all examples of New Jack Swing—a genre that hip-hop had blasted into obscurity—that he could find and compiled them as a CD/artwork, resulting in an unloved and unwanted compilation of artists already relegated to the trash bin of musical history. Although the compilation has no commercial value, as a gesture it hits Price’s sweet spot— transforming the unloved and forgotten into an artwork. Although it might not look like “art,” as we conventionally think of it, through it Price invokes a long history of recontextualization that stretches back to Duchamp’s urinal, where the simple act of moving an object from one context to another and calling it art is a valid artistic gesture. But instead of with objects, Price is doing this with preexisting cultural artifacts. After making several other compilations as artworks, he called his final project in this series 8–4 9–5 10–6 11–7, an eight-hour mix of cheesy, goodtime, light disco and chill music. Again, this compilation wasn’t so much about the music as it was about the fact that at that time an eight-hour mix was impossible to make with conventional audio equipment (in 2005, Price had to use video-editing software to create it), and even if you could, a CD then could hold only an hour or so of music at most. Price highlights the simple idea of duration as artistic practice. His mixtapes as artworks extend McLuhan’s idea of medium as message, this time with the emphasis on container as message. With Price, the problem is quantity—there’s too much to consume. When the digital can contain anything, the notion of format is an obsolete one. Price points to the fact that today everything is apparatus, a sea of citation—tweets, retweets, shares, and likes. The web archive is completely formatless and formless—infinitely expansive, predictably stable, and staggeringly boring. In the midst of it all is Price, moving content from one place to another, questioning the work of art’s status in the age of digital reproduction, pondering whether the death of the format might be the death of art. Price’s efforts resonate with Ubu. We, too, obsessively collect and archive materials in commercial or artistic limbo (too obscure to sell, too important to let vanish). Living somewhere between art histories and ephemeral media, we’re not really sure exactly who the audience for our collections is, but we certainly sense that such an audience is out there. And beyond audience, there is a kind of completist drive that compels us year in year out to keep accumulating, with the hope of completeness (impossible) or at least the illusion that there is so much of it that it feels complete. Like Price, we’re interested in the deep crevices or ruptures of culture, salvaging artifacts from the shadows to prevent them from disappearing in the darkness of noncommerciality. Inspired by Price, gathering and collecting for an unknown but certain future, we’d rather have these artifacts be included in the “memory of the world” rather than be forgotten forever. I 4 SHADOW LIBRARIES AND PRESERVING THE MEMORY OF THE WORLD n the fall of 2018, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette listed an electronic textbook for a class called “Accounting 202” for $999. When there was a public outcry, the university tweeted: “We’re sorry that the price for the Acct 202 online text has caused so much strife & are working with the publisher to lower it to match the hard copy cost. The $999 price was set w/ good intentions, though we realize now that we needed to explain the rationale behind it better.” Their rationale? “Acct202 requires students to have a hard copy of book pages in class to work with—so they would have to print large sections of the online copy. Our intention was to encourage students to get the hard copy so they would avoid having to print so much. We will do better next time.”1 With a ream of paper costing around $5, the $999 price tag would be the equivalent to printing 200 reams of paper, in other words 10,000 sheets. The price of the paperbound textbook that the college was trying to persuade students to buy was $313, approximately double the cost than the national per class average for textbooks, which is around $154.2 Is it any wonder that students prefer to pirate their textbooks? Over the past few years, the term shadow library has emerged to describe vast digital repositories of publically accessible intellectual materials. A mixture of legitimate and pirate venues, they have grown out of necessity, providing access to electronic copies of millions of copyrighted and uncopyrighted works to anyone around the globe free of charge. As library budgets have been slashed and materials have been deaccessioned, finding what you need in a public library isn’t as easy as it once was. Combined with the rise of Amazon and the fact that there are few physical bookstores anymore, people hungry for certain types of texts have been shut out. To make matters worse, commercial academic-publishing giants have gobbled up knowledge, selling it at a high price; by restricting access only to people with institutional affiliations, they leave many others out in the cold. Writing about academic publishing, the library scholar Jonathan Basile says, While individuals have always been priced out of this market, libraries are increasingly unable to afford these texts as well. The culprits in this story are not the university presses, but rather scientific journal aggregators like Elsevier, which owns thousands of academic journals and sells subscriptions to university libraries at prices that keep their profit margin close to 40 percent. Meanwhile, the budgets of these libraries have stagnated due to government spending cuts and questionable priorities at some universities.3 Enter the shadow librarians. A whole bunch of people are worried about the erasure of certain sectors of knowledge, and, like the book memorizers in Fahrenheit 451, they are rushing to preserve what one shadow-library group calls “the memory of the world.” Although many shadow libraries have been threatened by legal suits from both individuals and the publishing industry, they keep popping up in different forms, sometimes with different URLs, other times with multiple mirrored sites. It’s hard to eradicate what’s grown out of need. “As long as there is a substantial difference between what is legally available and what is in demand,” the media theorist Balázs Bodó writes, “cultural black markets will be here to compete with and outcompete the established and recognized cultural intermediaries.”4 Although UbuWeb isn’t exactly a shadow library, it shares many ideals with the shadow libraries. In fact, several shadow libraries are UbuWeb’s partners, which lend us technical, infrastructure, and moral support, and for the past five summers we and the shadow librarians have met in Zagreb for intellectual activities and conferences. The group is usually made up of assorted members of Memory of the World / Public Library, Monoskop, the Artists, Architects, and Activists Reading Group (AAARG), Pirate Cinema, 0xDB, textz.com, Custodians Online, Constant, MayDay Rooms, and UbuWeb as well as of an ever-changing cast of sympathetic academics, artists, architects, and writers. All of us share server space, artifacts, and philosophies throughout the year, but it’s during those summer meetings that we get to catch up and hash out issues in person, face-to-face in ways that are nearly impossible over the academic calendar year. Every summer I am reminded of the Custodians Online truth that you don’t need complicated protocols, digital currencies, or other proxies. You need people who care. These are the people who care. Part 1: The Pirates Memory of the World / Public Library Marcell Mars looks like a pirate. Tall and thin, he walks with a swagger and dresses in blue-striped Russian sailor shirts, baggy pants, and sandals. His impish face is engulfed by a cascade of dark hair that when swept to the side reveals ears studded with multiple rings and piercings. He’s got a great big black beard that would overwhelm his face if it weren’t counterbalanced by a pair of equally thick, arched, dark eyebrows. He pens manifestos in secondhand English, peppering them with slogans such as “Private property can and should be permanently questioned, challenged, and negotiated” and rambling utopianisms such as “There is a dream. Dream of universal access to knowledge for every member of society. Dreams rarely come true but this particular one: universal access to knowledge for every member of society got embodied into: public library! [sic].”5 He was raised in the former Yugoslavia, so the Communist ideals of shared culture come naturally to him, and he’s on a mission to bring them into the digital age.6 Along with Tomislav Medak, Dubravka Sekulic, and dozens of other amateur librarians, Mars runs a Zagreb-based organization called Memory of the World / Public Library. Reacting to funding cuts for public libraries, the group—consisting of hackers, architects, artists, and critical theorists—builds free, globally accessible shadow libraries. Patterning themselves on the thinking of hacktivist Aaron Swartz (1986–2013), they focus on academic publishing, in particular academic journals and repositories. Swartz’s “Guerilla Open Access Manifesto” (2008) provides the foundation for many of their activities: “Those with access to these resources—students, librarians, scientists you have been given a privilege. You get to feed at this banquet of knowledge while the rest of the world is locked out. But you need not—indeed, morally, you cannot—keep this privilege for yourselves. You have a duty to share it with the world. And you have: trading passwords with colleagues, filling download requests for friends.” The Public Librarians take Swartz’s manifesto as a challenge—if you have access, you have a responsibility to share with those who do not: “With enough of us, around the world, we’ll not just send a strong message opposing the privatization of knowledge—we’ll make it a thing of the past. Will you join us?”7 Memory of the World / Public Library emerged from the rubble of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Mars, a self-taught hacker who along with a few other people opened Zagreb’s first cybercafé in 1996, was part of an effort in 1999 to build a cultural center called Multimedia Institute/MaMa in a tumbledown former leather shop in a Zagreb alley. The center quickly became a meeting spot for minorities and dissenting political groups (ecological, LBGTQ, ethnic, feminist) that were being pushed to the fringes of society by the right-wing government. A vibrant place where political activists collided with cyber activists, MaMa was one of the only three independent cultural spaces in Zagreb, a city of more than a million, that provided a physical site for political resistance in the wake of the Yugoslavian civil war. As the tide of nationalism subsided in the 2000s, MaMa shifted its focus to address issues of capitalist globalization by creating independent media channels and staging public programs and workshops. MaMa continues to this day, presenting a vast array of cultural programs, including film festivals, lectures, hackathons, reading groups, concerts, exhibitions, literary salons, and digitizing workshops—all free of charge and open to the general public. The Public Library’s online wing is Memory of the World, a website founded in 2012 and dedicated to the dissemination of free books. It is a “public library” in the truest sense of the word. Its manifesto states: A public library is: - free access to books for every member of society - library catalog - librarian With books ready to be shared, meticulously cataloged, everyone is a librarian. When everyone is librarian, library is everywhere [sic].8 As of this writing, the Public Library hosts more than 150,000 EPUBs and PDFs, both in print and out. Each “librarian” acts as a curator and specializes in a specific field—art, critical theory, political science, history, feminism, and so forth. Mars claims that human filtering creates the best signal-to-noise ratio in ways that algorithms aren’t capable of: “It’s easy to build an archive of millions of books by scraping the web, but it’s the human intervention that creates value.” He fondly refers to the Memory of the World team of librarians as “amateurs,” who volunteer their time—no money exchanges hands— and work to enrich the digital ecosystem for the public good. “In our view, amateur librarians are complementary to professional librarians, and there is so much to learn and share between each other. Amateur librarians care about books which are not [yet] digitally curated with curiosity, passion and love; they dare to disobey in pursuit for the emancipatory vision of the world which is now under threat.”9 The Public Library began shortly after the Gigapedia (2007–2010) shadow e-book library was shut down, a painful reminder of the fragility of such archives. Inheriting a collection of thousands of digital books from a volunteer “librarian,” the Public Library was conceived of as a memory bank for cultural artifacts that without some sort of intervention might simply vanish into thin air. The library’s mission states: Libraries frequently don’t have the right to purchase E-books for lending and preservation. If they do, they are limited by how many times—26 in the case of one publisher—and under what conditions they can lend them before not only the license but the “object” itself is revoked. In the case of academic journals, it is even worse: as they move to predominantly digital models of distribution, libraries can provide access to and “preserve” them only for as long as they pay extortionate prices for ongoing subscriptions. By building tools for organizing and sharing electronic libraries, creating digitization work flows, and making books available online, the Public Library project is aimed at helping to fill the space that remains denied to real-world public libraries. It is obviously not alone in this effort. There are many other platforms, some more public, some more secretive, working to help people share books. And the practice of sharing is massive.10 Massive is right. Memory of the World’s underground network of rabid free-culture hackers collectively have access to nearly every physical and virtual library in the world. One of their “librarians,” who goes by the name “Slowrotation,” specializes in art and has contributed more than 50,000 books to the site. Living “somewhere in rural America”—it’s hard to get specifics for the shadowy underground—he works twelve hours a day, every day, procuring books exclusively for Memory of the World’s archive. Sometimes he gets his materials by trolling Instagram for students who haphazardly post their university IDs online. He then goes to their university libraries, makes fake library accounts under their names, and downloads everything that he deems worthwhile. He then removes the items’ copyright protection and posts them to Memory of the World. Positioned at the center of a vast array of shadow-library hackers, Slowrotation swaps materials with his pirate peers and uploads them to Memory; since everyone is working anonymously, nobody gets either rich or famous. Although Memory of the World uploads a lot of EPUBs, it also makes a huge effort to digitize books that haven’t been digitized yet. Sekulic is also a “librarian,” specializing in books on feminism, space, architecture, race, urban riots, and social justice. She digitizes most of the books she uploads by taking rare books out of the library or off her shelves and scanning them using a homemade scanner. Taking anywhere from two to four hours to make a neat and searchable digital file, she tries to digitize and upload at least one book a week. When she’s not doing that, she’s enriching the archive by uploading pirated digital editions that relate to her interests. Sekulic’s scanner is one of eight handmade book scanners built by MaMa that anyone can use. Beginning in 2013, Memory of the World embarked on a project called Katalog oslobođenih knjiga (Catalogue of Liberated Books), centered around digitizing books that were thrown away from Croatian public libraries during the ideological cleansing of the 1990s. The books were focused mostly on subjects such as socialism, communism, and antifascist literature that the newly formed government wanted eradicated. To date, more than 1,000 titles have been preserved. Without Memory’s intervention, most would likely have vanished. For Memory of the World, pirating, scanning, sharing, and archiving are defiantly political acts. Every so often the group brings these ideas into museums and galleries. In 2012, its members did a show at an art space in Ljubljana where they made more than a million electronic books available to everyone who walked in the door. The bulk of the files were grabbed from Library Genesis, which allows anyone to download its holdings en masse with a single click.11 Although nobody could take all of what Memory had to offer at the show—the files amounted to more than eleven terabytes—the exhibition was both a potlatch and a reminder of also how easy it is to mirror or build a shadow library. In 2014, Memory of the World staged a Public Library event in Stuttgart called “Herman’s Library,” a collection of books selected by the incarcerated Black Panther Herman Wallace as being influential to his political education. In 2003, Wallace was serving a life sentence in solitary confinement in the Louisiana State Penitentiary in Angola, accused of murdering a prison guard, when an art student named Jackie Summell struck up a correspondence with him. Acting on a prompt from a professor to ask an imaginary prospective architectural client to describe his or her dream house, Summell wrote Wallace out of the blue: “What kind of house do you dream about after all these years in a cell?” This initial query kicked off an eleven-year collaboration, consisting of more than three hundred letters and culminating in a coauthored book. Through their correspondence, they dreamed up his fantasy house, imagining what its layout would be, how it would be furnished, what the grounds would look like, and so forth. Later, as they got into the nitty-gritty details, Summell asked Wallace what books would be on his bookshelves, to which he responded with a list of 111 books that were responsible for his political awakening. He was released from jail in 2013, after his conviction was overturned, and died three days later. The next year Memory of the World digitized Wallace’s entire dream library in full-text versions, ranging from Roget’s Thesaurus to Albert Speer’s Inside the Third Reich to The Collected Works of Lenin, all of which anyone can download. Whereas MaMa is funded through a combination of international and Croatian grants, Memory of the World, a pirate site, is trickier. Financed with a few Bitcoins that Mars picked up cheaply in the early days, the project is supplemented by lectures, exhibitions, and workshops across Europe focusing on radical library practices. Takedown notices don’t bother Mars. He just ignores them or uses them to highlight the schizophrenia in the publishing industry—as when a few years ago he and Medak were asked to contribute a pro- piracy essay to a university press anthology about tactical media. They signed a contract and, as is often the case, were not paid for their contribution. A couple of weeks later Memory of the World got a takedown notice from the same press for another book Memory was hosting on that exact subject. It was an example of how, in Mars’s view, academic publishers use sharp swords to cut twice—the denial of wage and the denial of access—in order to enact a chilling effect on the free movement of ideas, which only further enrages Mars: “It’s worth the risk [to pirate copyrighted printed works] because of what I stand for,” he says. “If you want me in jail because I’m sharing books, then fuck this world. I want to be outside of that and challenge it with the best articulation. There are very few areas in which an individual can intervene in such a powerful way. And this is one of them.”12 Monoskop Dušan Barok is an accidental custodian. He stumbled into building Monoskop—which, along with UbuWeb, is one of the largest shadow libraries of free avant-garde materials on the web—as a way of keeping track of his reading and browsing as a student. If he was studying a topic such as Dada, he’d go around the web, collect everything he could about it—academic papers, films, MP3s, and so forth—and upload it all to a wiki for his reference, which he also kept open for the public. Over time, that wiki became Monoskop. Barok is one of those eternal students. At forty years old, he’s getting yet another degree—his fourth, allowing him the time he needs to build Monoskop. He spends most of his days in front of the computer, collecting, compiling, and curating avant-garde flotsam and jetsam that will appear on the site. As part of his research, he uses Monoskop as an intellectual diary of sorts, a by-product of his interests, obsessions, and digressions. Working without an agenda and going on intuition and whims, Barok isn’t trained as an art historian, nor does he profess that Monoskop is in any way comprehensive or “correct.” Like UbuWeb, it is full of omissions and personal biases, at once an idiosyncratic record of one person’s intellectual drifts—a subjective personal library—and a publically accessible warehouse for specific types of knowledge. Originally focused on central and eastern European media art and culture, Monoskop was founded in Slovakia in 2004 as a listings site for art and academic events across eastern Europe. In 2009, a friend showed Barok Gigapedia, which contained a number of books on media art and network culture, so he used it when doing research for a book on eastern European art. He downloaded everything he could from Gigapedia, sharing these materials on Monoskop in the event that Gigapedia should go down, which it did a year later. He began posting all his research for his book—notes, bibliographic entries, chapters, even full books—on Monoskop. He eventually gave up on the book, feeling as if the subject were too big to fit between two covers, swapping it instead for Monoskop, which could expand in all directions. From 2010 to 2012, he got his second master’s degree at the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam in the networked-media program. One of his tutors encouraged him to develop Monoskop— then still a hobby—into his thesis project. After he graduated, with his tuition paid by the Dutch government, Barok did nothing but work on Monoskop every day, from the moment he woke up until the moment he went to bed. There’s no real logic to the site; everything there is there because for whatever reason Barok found it interesting. If he gets curious about something and he wants to learn about it, he builds a page about it. For instance, a few years ago he got interested in neoism, an underground art movement influenced by futurism, situationism, Fluxus, and punk rock that began in the late 1970s. When researching on the web, he found bits and pieces about neoism strewn across different sites, but no comprehensive resource devoted to it, so he decided to build one by collecting as many statements, interviews, photographs, and documents from around the web as he could find and centralizing them on Monoskop. Instead of just providing links to them, he placed on Monoskop’s servers actual copies of the primary-source materials he grabbed, safely backing them up in case they should happen to vanish. When building a page on a certain subject, he turns the subjective histories that he finds into objective ones, almost building his own little Wikipedia. For Monoskop’s page on neoism, for instance, he took an essay off the site of one of neoism’s founders that was riddled with subjective bias and retuned it, cooling it down to make it sound more like an encyclopedia entry instead of a manifesto. By comparison to Wikipedia’s entry, Monoskop’s neoism page is richer —not to mention much better written, which is even more remarkable in light of the fact that English is not Barok’s first language. And unlike the Wikipedia entry, Barok’s has right on the page a ton of primary-source materials related to the movement—magazines, newsletters, books, anthologies, source books, statements, and literature—all in proper bibliographic format. Barok goes for stuff that falls between the cracks: movements either so obscure or so new that they’re unknown outside of a small coterie. Monoskop is full of pages on subjects such as sound art, which is neither concert-hall music nor visual art nor performance art; software art, which lives more in the margins of computer history than it does in the center of art history; conceptual literature, which falls somewhere in between mainstream modernism and conceptual art; and neural aesthetics, teetering on the cusp of art, design, neural networks, and machine learning but not recognized by any of these fields. As these movements gain credibility and recognition, Monoskop eventually will become the go-to place for information about them. Drawing his materials from many places across the internet, Barok often stitches together bits and pieces into single files. He haunts sites such as the University of Iowa’s Digital Dada Library, which contains complete runs of obscure avant-garde periodicals as well as books, pamphlets, and leaflets. It’s an incredible archive. The problem is that every page of every book is posted as an individual JPEG. In order to look at anything, you have to laboriously click through a series of heavy images, one by one. Barok, who is trained as a programmer, wrote a program that goes in, grabs each image, and assembles all the grabbed images into a single PDF, which he houses on Monoskop. Like a hound sniffing out truffles, Barok has a nose for great things buried in vast archives. He plunders stuff from unruly messes such as archive.org and the Open Library, fishing out gems, removing their digital-rights-management protections, and sharing clean, easy-to-read PDFs on his site. When I ask him how he curates his material, he shrugs and says that one thing leads to another. When he runs into dead ends, as he often does, he leaves a page as a stub, which awaits to be populated by future files when he stumbles across them or decides to hunt them down. Takedowns are rare. Once when the John Cage estate was blanketing the internet with cease-and-desist notices (it predictably got a whack of internet hate for ordering takedowns for his silent piece “4'33"”), Barok got a boilerplate notice requesting that he remove a copy of Cage’s “Songbooks” that Monoskop was hosting. He responded, “Dear Sir, these books were published a good half century ago and are long out of print. How shall we explain to the community that they cannot even be consulted online? I supposed that providing scanned copies is doing a fair service to the legacy of John Cage.”13 He never heard from the estate again. AAARG There’s not a day when I don’t visit the Artists, Architects, and Activists Reading Group, AAARG, a vast repository of critical theory. Hosting more than 70,000 books and periodicals, it’s better stocked than any bookstore, and in terms of its specific content it offers more than my university library does. The range is vast: uploads include Wittgenstein’s Cambridge Lectures, which he gave between 1930 and 1933; an Australian journal article called “The Vanishing Argument from Queerness” (2008); Koritha Mitchell’s piece “Black- Authored Lynching: Drama’s Challenge to Theater History” (2014); Kathy Acker’s experimental novel Blood and Guts in High School (1984); and a full PDF of Govind Chandra Pande’s Studies in the Origins of Buddhism (2006). And that’s just the tiniest tip of the iceberg. Every day there is more and more. Mind you, these works are not best sellers and are more noted for their historical or academic importance than for their market value. The texts are uploaded by the site’s tens of thousands of users, many of whom—like those students angry at being charged $999 for a single e-textbook—lob up course materials, textbooks, and articles they purchased in university. Other people seed the shadow library obsessively in order to enrich its offering. I know several authors, myself included, who upload their books there, knowing they will be received by their ideal readership. Like Memory of the World, AAARG had its roots in meatspace. The site was started in 2005 as a place to house teaching texts for a free open university run by Sean Dockery and called the Public School, a “school with no curriculum,” as a way of providing free education for a global network of folks who were not affiliated with academia. Since then, branches of the Public School have opened in cities around the world. But in time the online wing, AAARG, grew faster than the school ever could, and Dockery turned his attention to it. Until I became affiliated with a university more than a decade ago, I was shut out of libraries specializing in critical theory. Sure, I had access to the New York Public Library, but the books available there to an average user were limited to the most famous works by critical theorists and philosophers, whereas the more obscure stuff was locked away in offsite collections in New Jersey. Of course, I could have bought these books from a bookstore or Amazon, but doing so would be very expensive, particularly if I just needed a citation or quote. (But, you might ask, if I just needed a small chunk of text, why not go to Google Books? Because most of what I needed to cite wasn’t available—instead I would get a “no preview” or “snippet-text” notice.) So I turned to AAARG. In order to pay AAARG back for what I’ve gotten from it, I try to upload as much as I can. After this book has its commercial run, I’ll upload it. Yes, you could get it on Amazon, but for many the price is out of reach. So for those of us whose research is funded by our academic jobs, the urge to get our ideas out there outweighs the slim financial recompense we often see from our academic publishing. The circulation of ideas propel further opportunities—invitations to present papers at conferences, to lecture, and to teach—which is why many of us choose to upload our books to places such as AAARG. Yes, pirating books jeopardizes university presses, which provide a platform for the circulation of academics’ ideas, but I’ve found with my own books—published by academic presses, commercial presses, and small presses—that after their initial run they tend to fade. My royalty checks, which are small to begin with, quickly dwindle, eventually drying up altogether. At this point, my books have little economic value, either to me or to my publishers, so why not share them? Sharing them makes them alive again. They get quoted and read, which is an author’s dream. There’s nothing more depressing to an author than having a book worked on for many years lie dormant after its publication. Pirating and sharing give your books a second life. Echoing Seth Price, Marcus Boon, author of the blog and book by the same title, In Praise of Copying (2013), sees a digital publication as another version or iteration of a print book, one that adds to rather than subtracts from an intellectual ecosystem. He writes, “A PDF of a book is not an illegitimate copy of a legitimate original but participates in other kinds of circulation that have long flourished around the book-commodity: the library book; the photocopy or hand-written copy; the book browsed, borrowed or shared. We all know these modes of circulation exist, as they continue to do today with online text archives.”14 Over the years, AAARG has run into trouble with publishers, especially academic ones, because it hosts a lot of stuff that’s in print and so has been served with cease-and-desist letters. At some point, the site went private, for members only. Invitations, however, aren’t too difficult to get. If you have an account, then you can invite anyone to join. AAARG plays cat-and-mouse with legal authorities, often by changing part of its URL: AAARG.org gets an extra A on it once in a while, or the domain changes: today it’s AAARG.fail. Despite these dodges, Dockery and Mars have recently been sued by a Canadian author who found his translation of André Bazin’s What Is Cinema? (1967) had been scanned and uploaded to AAARG by an unknown user. The book was removed each time the plaintiff issued a takedown notice, but nonetheless Dockery and Mars are being sued for $500,000 Canadian dollars. As a result, AAARG has been blocked in certain countries.15 As of this writing, the case is still winding its way through courts. Initiated by an unaffiliated person, it is being pursued by a single individual with a gripe, about whom Mars says, “Big guys don’t go against us, but the small guy does. The AAARG court case is not about money. We have no money, and they’ll get no money from us. And in this way, he’s [the plaintiff] just like us. Amazon, Elsevier, and Google are ruining you; we are not your enemies.”16 Part II: The Institutions Mars is right: Amazon, Elsevier, and Google are ruining you. But not all institutions are out to ruin you. There are some that function like shadow libraries, using their funding to make cultural artifacts freely available to all. The web is full of places such as Cylinder Audio Archive at the University of California Santa Barbara, which offers more than 10,000 cylinder recordings held by the UCSB Library, both streaming and downloadable at no charge. These sites run by institutions are incredible, and in direct or indirect ways many have partnered with UbuWeb, lending us their server space and bandwidth, making themselves available to counsel us, and sharing a common philosophy that cultural artifacts should be made available to all. Eclipse / Electronic Poetry Center / PennSound Sometimes you have to build the library that you want to exist because if you don’t, nobody will. Charles Bernstein has constructed three shadow libraries over the past thirty years. Bernstein is an experimental poet and the cofounder of L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E, a journal cum literary movement that gained steam in the 1980s based on the Marxian premise that if an author deconstructs a text thoroughly enough, then readers can put it back together in any order they wish, thereby turning readers into writers. Needless to say, it can be obscure and difficult work—many language poems look like little more than a glut of text, with random words sprinkled across a page waiting to be activated. While there are plenty of precedents for this type of literature, they’re very difficult to find and are either self-published or released in tiny editions by independent presses. In 1987, Bernstein began photocopying these types of chapbooks and texts from his own collection, listing them in small, hand-typed catalogues, and selling them via the post. He also went to independent bookstores in New York City, which would take a few on consignment. He hardly sold any, but it was the only way to get these books and magazines into the stores. Charging five cents a page (the cost of a photocopy back then) plus postage, he’d provide interested readers with odd experimental poetry and relevant critical writings. Bernstein felt it was republish or perish: by keeping these works in circulation, he wanted to ensure they weren’t forgotten. Through his efforts, they ended up influencing a generation of poets and writers. But back then his audience was a bunch of poets scattered across the world and connected by a mail network. Bernstein wrote in 1978, “Even when published, writing we wish to read often goes out of print with dismaying rapidity—closing off a dialogue. Out-of-print and unpublished works may still circulate among a limited circle of friends. Here, we hope to sustain that dialogue, and expand that circle.”17 His distribution service kept running until those materials were digitized, migrating to the web. Much of his catalogue today is warehoused on a Salt Lake City–based digital archive, Eclipse, founded by poet and professor Craig Dworkin. Eclipse is a free online archive focusing on digital facsimiles of the radical small-press writing from the past half century, hosting more than three hundred books, journals, and manuscripts, and including sections of experimental literature by various authors categorized around themes such as “The Black Radical Tradition” and “Language Centered Tendencies.” In the 1990s, Dworkin was teaching at Berkeley and writing about the material that Bernstein had been photocopying. With his personal library, Berkeley’s university library, and bookstores around town, his research was robust and easy. But when he took a job at Princeton around the turn of the millennium, he found that although the school had a massive library, it was nearly bereft of contemporary avant-garde poetry. He says, “I realized if, in this fantastically privileged position of teaching at this elite university, you couldn’t teach the history of twentieth-century poetry, no one, virtually, was going to be able to do it.” As it turns out, he was the one hired to do it. But the paucity of materials in his local ecosystem made his job difficult. He also encountered other academics who wished to write about experimental poetry but had never even read the primary documents due to their original tiny press runs and subsequent lack of availability. “In any other field in literary history this would be unthinkable,” he says. “You’d never write a book about Renaissance poetry and say, ‘Well, yeah, I’ve never actually read John Donne, but let me tell you what I think about him.’ ”18 He decided to do something about it, creating Eclipse, his own shadow library. Like Bernstein a couple of decades before him, he began pulling obscure publications off his bookshelf, scanning each page at high resolution, and putting them online. The irony is that in order to scan a book, it had in a sense to be destroyed—unbound and taken apart; he’s demolished hundreds of rare small-press poetry books from his own collection so that they can be shared with a wider audience. He felt high resolution to be vital so that the reader could “physically feel” the book online, its paratextual qualities as essential to understanding the work as the content itself. The Eclipse site allows you to zoom in to see what kind of paper the book was printed on, how it was bound, and what impact the metal type from a letterpress made on the paper; even the creases in the pages and the holes that the staples left are of vital interest, making possible a web-based close reading in the absence of a paper copy. On Eclipse, you can either click through a series of big, single images or download a book in its entirety as a PDF. The other repository where the Bernstein photocopies ended up was the Electronic Poetry Center at the State University of New York at Buffalo, which Bernstein and fellow Buffalo professor Loss Pequeño Glazier founded in 1995. The center became the largest shadow library for experimental poetics on the web, with scads of downloadable materials on authors, manuscripts, digital books, critical essays, and detailed bibliographies. Two years earlier Bernstein and Glazier had started the Poetics List, a mailing list devoted to the discussion of contemporary North American innovative poetry and poetics, which helped spread the word about these then obscure practices. In 2005, when Bernstein took a job at the University of Pennsylvania, he and another professor, Al Filreis, founded PennSound, a massive audio shadow library devoted to experimental authors reading their own works. Although PennSound is fully funded, its inaugural press release sounds an awful lot like something that would come from Memory of the World, Monoskop, or UbuWeb: The recording industry may not want anyone downloading music without paying for it, but a new project at the University of Pennsylvania encourages downloading right to MP3 players and hard drives all the poetry a listener might want. And it’s all free for the asking.... By right-clicking a PennSound link, a user can save a single poem and listen to it as a high-quality MP3 file. We believe philosophically that, since there is no significant profit to be gained by the sale of recorded poetry—unlike music—many, many more poets will continue to grant us permission to use their work.19 Bernstein and Filreis turned out to be right. In 2017 alone, PennSound had more than three million downloads of avant-garde poetry. To date, it hosts more than 60,000 MP3s, totaling 6,500 hours of audio, making it by far the largest audio-poetry resource on the web. The depth of the resource is astonishing; for example, it hosts every known recording that John Ashbery ever made. “PennSound is as much about preservation as distribution,” says Bernstein. “Most poetry sound recordings are at risk of deteriorating if not converted or copied. The beauty of PennSound is that in the course of preserving these recordings, we are also making available a treasure trove of wonderful poetry performances that we believe will attract a whole new generation to poetry as a performance art.”20 Although there is little chance of exploitation of these difficult works by the for-profit sector—good luck trying to hawk a compilation of Ashbery reading his complete works—PennSound is partially about preventing these works from being sucked into the voracious commercial whirlpool. Bernstein comments: If we hadn’t preserved the Ashbery files, publishers would have claimed the commercial rights on them and locked them down, which is something that happens all the time. It’s groundless and pernicious but nonetheless intimidating. In France and Germany, they feel that the publisher has to give permission, going over the heads of artists. There’s no legal basis for it, but there’s an idea that you want to give authority and private property to some entity, so you decide it’s the publisher. And then the publisher decides that you have to withhold it [a work] to protect its rights. In Europe and Latin America there are no comparable archives to PennSound for many reasons, but the primary one having to do with copyright. An assumption that you don’t own your own work, and if that person doesn’t exist, you invent that person.21 It’s a story I hear at UbuWeb all the time: copyright claims being made by people who have no rights to them. Although on seemingly opposite ends of the spectrum—one a powerful institution and the other an individual outlaw enterprise—PennSound and UbuWeb have intertwining fates: PennSound hosts many of our files and publicly claims affiliation with us, and vice versa, and, most important, both of us are desperately trying to preserve cultural artifacts from obsolescence and erasure by using the tools we have at hand. Radio Web MACBA Confined within the walls of a major museum, the Museu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona, Ràdio Web MACBA (RWM) has managed to carve out a wildly experimental and independent niche. It was founded in 2006 as the brainchild of Anna Ramos, who has been producing a vast range of experimental audio documentaries, interviews, and performances. Her interests and UbuWeb’s interests overlap; oftentimes UbuWeb mirrors content developed by RWM. For instance, we cohost an RWM-produced, seven-part series history of appropriative collage in music called Variations, which was instigated by the composer Jon Leidecker (a.k.a. Wobbly), whose own compositions are hosted on UbuWeb. We also cohost a massive, in-depth, twelve-part series RWM produced called Avant, which is presented and edited by Barcelona-based musician Roc Jiménez de Cisneros and identifies key moments of Spain’s twentieth-century musical avant-garde, much of which has scarcely been documented—never mind known in Spain—up until this time. Each episode has two parts: one hour of interviews with and about a musician and another hour of the artist’s music. RWM produces slick and smart programs, but because our reach is broader, we can offer the programs distribution that RWM doesn’t have. In addition, Ubu provides a semistable backup for RWM’s materials—that is, stable at least in comparison to the capricious financial whims of the Spanish government—which are preserved and mirrored on our servers. Ramos dances a fine line between independence and employment by a powerful institution. She is often requested to produce audio guides for the museum’s programming but takes liberties with them, inspired by her love of the avant-garde. Ramos reflects on RWM’s complicated relationship to the institution: The relationship of the contents and our main lines of work is very rhizomatic; there’s always a thread that leads us from one place/subject to another and most of the times we end up in unexpected, unexplored sites. But in the end, you can always undo the way and relate that to the Museum’s programming or the radio programming. And that’s exactly what we are looking for: we don’t want to follow literally what goes on in the Museum, rather than expanding it. So you can listen to a mix of extremely obscure West-African percussion music curated by the power electronics legend William Bennett, and we got there by discussing and exploring the world of collecting records; the keyword here is collecting and it is applied to our main source of work at the radio, which is sound, so it is connected to one of the main lines of work at the Museum but at the same time what we are exploring is totally unexpected.22 RWM’s site—a trove of radio art, experimental music, and sound art—is closer to what happens on UbuWeb than what happens in the museum. But because the museum is such a powerful attraction, a parade of important artists, curators, theorists, and historians pass through to lecture, ending up in the RWM studios, where they are free to go off script when interviewed about their work and life, resulting is a series called Son[i]a. Consisting of nearly three hundred episodes, the series features artists and theorists such as Yvonne Rainer, Laura Mulvey, Andrea Fraser, and Alvin Lucier in candid conversation. Once upon a time, radio was ephemeral—if you didn’t hear it while it was broadcast, you’d miss it. Today, radio is archival, gradually accruing content similar to the way UbuWeb grows. Ramos agrees: “I like to think that an online radio is, by definition, an archive, or at least that it has the potential to archive its output on a long-term basis. Projects like Ubuweb, Resonance FM, WMFU, Sonosphere.org ... are excellent examples of online archives and/or radio projects that are much more than just files or music: they offer curation, non-mainstream content, access to knowledge.”23 WFMU Founded in 1958, WFMU, the long-running free-form radio station in New Jersey has, as I mentioned earlier, played an outsized role in the history of UbuWeb. The station is listener supported and does not dictate in any way what any on-air personality does during his or her time slot. As a result, you never know what you’re going to hear. As station manager Ken Freedman says, part of being a WFMU listener is the fact that many times during the week you will probably have to turn off your radio. When I was a DJ there, much of the ethos of the station permeated the evolution of UbuWeb, which I began a year after I started working at the station. I took the idea of free-form radio into UbuWeb—the art of segueing two songs of disparate styles into a single cohesive statement—which allowed me to reimagine the lineage of the traditional avant-garde as something less pure, more intuitive, and more playful. WFMU was a magnet for strange sounds from around the world, many of which found their way to UbuWeb. During the time I was on air as a DJ, while records were spinning, I would feed CDs from the library into my laptop, ripping them for Ubu. At the same time, because of the station’s fast Wi-Fi connection, I’d be uploading those rips to various file-sharing groups during my show, simultaneously enriching those ecosystems. WFMU’s sweet spot is the thin line between genius and lunatic; the library shelves are packed with visionary artists such as the Shaggs, Jandek, Harry Partch, Lucia Pamela, Wesley Willis, Captain Beefheart, Shooby Taylor, Wild Man Fischer, and Francis E. Dec, several of whom found their way to UbuWeb. Like Ubu, WFMU has embraced the clash of disparate genres; it was thrilling when Shooby Taylor’s (a.k.a. the Human Horn) wildly expressive scat singing was snuggled up against a tense and brittle, hyperattenuated Anton Webern dodecaphonic string quartet in a set. Sometimes the things I’d find in the WFMU library led to obsessive wormholes on Ubu, as in the time I discovered the avant-garde outsider Finnish musician M. A. Numminen. A true polymath, Numminen has recorded everything from folk music to acid rock to bluegrass to classical music, each bearing his own style. Among the vast section of his works in the WFMU library was a CD of him singing sections of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. Sometimes accompanied by a lush orchestra and other times by a rock band, he croaks out the philosopher’s words, completely out of tune. Not only did I take Numminen’s oeuvre from WFMU’s collection for Ubu, but Numminen’s performances were the start of a Wittgenstein archive on UbuWeb, which also includes a heartbreakingly beautiful thirty-minute composition by the Hungarian composer Tibor Szemző, Tractatus, that incorporates fragments of Wittgenstein’s text into a sparse, melodic soundscape. It was at WFMU that I was first introduced to the works of Vicki Bennett, a.k.a. People Like Us, who now houses more than one hundred albums and films on UbuWeb, and met Otis Fodder, a WFMU affiliate and the curator of The 365 Days Project, which was later donated to UbuWeb. For spiritual guidance about how the visionary artist might curiously collide with the avant-garde, I looked to my fellow DJ Irwin Chusid, who wrote the book on the subject, Songs in the Key of Z: The Curious Universe of Outsider Music, which we used as a guidebook to navigate this knotty turf. Beyond these few figures, WFMU is packed with artists, musicians, performers, and just plain weirdoes who have never made distinctions between genres; water-cooler conversation ranged from Hillbilly Hollywood to Nurse with Wound to Erik Satie to Kokomo Jr. the Renaissance Chimp without missing a beat. To say it was an inspiring and stimulating environment bristling with unconventional ideas and approaches would be an understatement. Over the years, as Ubu was kicked from server to server, WFMU always filled the gap, temporarily hosting us until we could find a new home. It built a twenty-four-hour audio stream for our sound archives and has provided redundancy and backup to our archive over the past several decades. And as I recounted a few chapters back, I learned much of what I know about folk law from Ken Freedman, the station manager, to whom I still go running for advice when something short-circuits on Ubu. In short, without WFMU, UbuWeb would never have been born. What shadow libraries do is so strange and perverse that we librarians could never go it alone. Our relationships are symbiotic, each representing another aspect of impossibility, each enacting another slice of idealism and utopia, each a bulwark against the circumscription of knowledge only for those who can afford it. Yet it’s an uphill battle. With each passing month, massive business entities vie for exclusive digital rights for cultural artifacts while pushing for tougher copyright restrictions on all types of content. And beyond that, all of the organizations mentioned here function on either no or very little money, unable to adequately protect themselves from the possibility of copyright-infringement lawsuits (in the case of AAARG, the mounting costs of the lawsuit against it has forced it to crowdsource funding). There’s also the issue of infrastructure, which costs money that is often paid out of the librarian’s pocket, and the more independent of these sites find themselves scrambling from one donated server to another, engaging in a continual cat-and- mouse game as they scramble to find affordable bandwidth and hard-drive space. Even a station as beloved as WFMU finds itself in a perpetual financial crisis, eking by each year by the skin of its teeth. And yet we all persevere. Taken individually, each of us is small; taken wholly, we’re substantial; taken locally, we barely exist; taken globally, we’re huge. Each of these shadow libraries provides something different from the others, representing one slice of our specific cultural pie. Together, we’re out to combat the ever-mounting stupidity, commercialism, and surveillance capitalism that the web has become, offering models of resistance that can hopefully inspire others to do the same. There are vast numbers of us out there preserving those works that are marginal, forgotten, yet crucial, each of us in our way toiling to preserve the “memory of the world.” PART III POETICS T 5 DIRTY CONCRETE he documentary film Helvetica (2007) is about the ideological battles surrounding the classic typeface. On one side are the hardcore modernists who regard its clean lines and no-frills style as the apex of design. On the other is a group of mostly younger designers who, coming of age during and after the 1960s, reject the face as embodying the evils of the industrial-military complex, both politically and aesthetically. To them, Helvetica represents the man in the gray- flannel suit in all his square, buttoned-down correctness. In order to counter the font’s power, they create typefaces that are the exact opposite: expressive, hand drawn, and funky. To them, fonts and the way they are used are a political battlefield; Helvetica’s monolith can be softened only by dousing it with raw emotion. For the fan of typography, it’s hard not to be sympathetic with both sides. Sure, Helvetica is pretty narrow in its worldview, but nothing is more beautiful, elegant, and clean, representing all that “good design” should aspire to. Self-assured, it knows what it stands for and where it stands in the world. Yet precisely for these reasons it doesn’t fit into our time. Helvetica is an artifact born of the Cold War, and although it’s a mid-twentieth-century font, it feels about as far away from the twenty-first century as the typographic ornaments, pen flourishes, and swirly curls of Victorian typography. And our relationship to it is equally romantic. When we encounter it today, it’s usually in scare quotes, found marching across the pages of catalogues selling midcentury replicas of modern furniture. Somehow, the one-dimensional simplicity and cleanliness of Helvetica doesn’t quite jibe with today’s messy world. The history of concrete poetry breaks down along similar lines, with the difference being that the same practitioners who advocated the strict use of Helvetica in the early 1950s were the same ones who broke with it in the 1970s for social, political, and technological reasons, challenged by political dictatorship and desktop publishing. Charting a path from the utopian to the dystopian, you could say that a secret history of the second half of the twentieth century is embedded in this little movement, one that parallels larger changes across culture. By the late 1970s, when concrete poetry collapsed into a smoldering heap, few could have foreseen that it would arise as a digital phoenix in the computer age, presciently predicting the ways we would interact with language in the twenty-first century. Sitting on my desk is a catalogue that was made to mark the half- century anniversary of the founding of the seminal Brazilian concrete poets known as the Noigandres Group, consisting of the brothers Haroldo and Augusto de Campos and a fellow student named Décio Pignatari. They set out to change literature by creating a universal picture language, a poetry that could be read by all regardless of what language they spoke. Letters would double as carriers of semantic content and as powerful visual elements in their own right. The poems—written in just about every language imaginable—often came with a key so that even if you didn’t know, for example, Japanese, you could get the gist of what a handful of kanji compellingly strewn across a page added up to. Delightful to the eye and political in its intent, their language was nothing short of revolutionary: a visual Esperanto that would ultimately dissolve linguistic—and thereby political—barriers between nations. The movement, drawing from Poundian imagism and Joycean wordplay, dovetailed with the twentieth century’s drive toward condensed languages expressed in advertising slogans, logos, and signage. By shedding all vestiges of historical connotation—including metaphor, lineation, spontaneous composition, and organic form— concrete poetry planted itself firmly within the grand flow of modernism. These poems, to paraphrase Ezra Pound (a main influence for the group through his use and theories of ideograms), sought to “make it new.” In the black-and-white photographs of the period, the Noigandres Group come off as “serious” intellectuals, never smiling, dressed in thin-lapelled dark suits, crisp white shirts, and skinny black ties. Their journal, which shared the group’s name, echoed European modernism, its design inspired by the look and feel of Éditions Gallimard. On the cover, crisp red typography, underscored by thick black rules, was surrounded by acres of creamy, off-white space. The journal was typeset entirely in the Futura font, and the poems— elegant chunks of black-and-white phonemes—danced across the mostly empty pages. When color did appear, it was often primary, declaring these poems to be the linguistic cognate of Mondrian’s paintings. The journal published classic modernist poems and manifestoes alongside the Noigandres Group’s concrete poetry. Any given issue would include poems by Stéphane Mallarmé, Pound, and E. E. Cummings alongside radical works by the Noigandres, Oswald de Andrade, and João Cabral de Melo Neto. Entire issues were devoted to the idea of the poster poem, meant to be pasted on city walls and exploring “renewed forms of sensibility in the urban-industrial environment of a new society,”1 an idea that grew in tandem with the utopian construction of Brasília. The poems were meant to invoke all the senses, bringing for the first time to poetry Anton Webern’s idea of Klangfarbenmelodie (sound-color-melody); Pound’s theory of phanopoeia, melopoeia, and logopoeia (the play of image, music, and meaning); and Joyce’s neologistic notion of the verbivocovisual. The Noigandres journal editors’ voluminous correspondence with concrete poets from around the world led to a bona fide international movement with adherents from the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Portugal, Spain, Hungary, Canada, the United States, and Japan, many of whom were published in the journal. By the 1960s, the concrete poets were honored with two special editions of the Times Literary Supplement, several influential anthologies appeared, and exhibitions of their works were mounted in galleries around the world. They were in sync with avant-garde ideas of their day, from Marshall McLuhan’s media theories to the aleatory music of John Cage. In Brazil, they allied themselves with the youthful Tropicália movement—Caetano Veloso went on to set several of Augusto de Campos’s poems to music—leading the poets to ride a global wave of pop. For a few short years, their revolution was a reality. But political troubles in Brazil were brewing, beginning with the coup that overthrew President João Goulart in 1964. By 1968, the military dictatorship had tightened the screws, which was followed by long years of authoritarianism. Writing about these dark years, Haroldo de Campos lamented: [It was] poetry in a time of suffocation. On the international level, the crises of ideologies went into overdrive, with imperial capitalism, savage and predatory, on the one hand and the bureaucratic state, repressive and uniforming, on the other, converting the revolutionaries of yesterday into the apparatchik of today and turning art into the squire of party political dogma. Poetry was drained of its utopian function despite, paradoxically, the advent of the new media created by electronic technology and the unprecedented possibilities they brought, as if putting flesh on the Benjaminian/Mallarméan prophecy of a universal picture language.2 De Campos referred to the next two decades of concrete poetic production not as “postmodern” but as “postutopian.” With ideology squashed, the poets swapped politics for visuality, using the “new media created by electronic technology and the unprecedented possibilities they brought” to expand the formal parameters of their artistic practice. What had up until this time been a strict adherence to the rigors of modernism—produced mostly with type and paper— exploded into various forms of multimedia, from video environments to massive architectural-based sculptures. The apogee of this trend was a collaboration in 1975 between Augusto de Campos and artist Julio Plaza called Caixa preta (Black Box), which included everything from lavish construct-it-yourself, die- cut paper sculptures to a Caetano Veloso 45-rpm disc wrapped in a gorgeous sleeve designed by de Campos. With the increased availability of wild typefaces, de Campos dug right in, swapping sans-serif fonts for funky lettering that resembled disco typography of the 1970s or the opening credits of a porn film. It’s a lot of fun and in a way feels like a relief. De Campos freed himself from the straightjacket of modernism in the same way that the younger designers featured in Helvetica did. Even the photographs of the poets from this period bespeak a loosening up: their hair is long and unkempt; they sport wrap-around aviator sunglasses, are draped in floor-length, black-leather coats, and are festooned with thick jewelry. Reflecting the changing style of their times, they’re more Rainer Werner Fassbinder than Arnold Schoenberg. 5.1. Bob Cobbing, Are Your Children Safe? In the Sea?, 1964. As Haroldo de Campos remarked, similar changes were felt worldwide, expressing themselves in a variety of ways. In Canada and England, a second wave of concrete poets moved away from pure modernism by steering their production toward “dirty concrete,” where the “noise” of the typewriter—misprints, ghost prints, overprints, doubling, and wobbly lines—was purposely courted as evidence of the machine’s presence during the writing of the poem. Whereas the earlier poetry required elaborate typesetting, there was something democratic about banging out poems on a typewriter: anyone could do it. The typewriter also changed the look of concrete poetry. The monospaced fonts and gridded movement of the carriage lent the poems a mechanized flavor, echoing the minimalism raging through the art world at the time; Carl Andre’s bricks and typings were but two sides of the same coin. And because there was only one font size available on the typewriter, the focus shifted from the individual letter to buzzy fields of hazy, swarming strokes. The typewriter’s democratization imbued the poems with increased political awareness. The media archaeologist Lori Emerson notes that the term dirty concrete is commonly used to describe a deliberate attempt to move away from the clean lines and graphically neutral appearance of the concrete poetry from the 1950s and 1960s by [Eugen] Gomringer in Switzerland, the Noigandres in Brazil and Ian Hamilton Finlay in England [sic]. Such cleanliness was thought to indicate a lack of political engagement broadly speaking and, more specifically, a lack of political engagement with language and representation. As renowned French poet Henri Chopin wrote in 1969, a year after the failed worker/student protests in France: “1968 was the year when man really appeared. Man who is the streets, HIS PROPERTY, for he alone makes it.... Yes, 1968 saw this. And for all these reasons, I was and am opposed to concrete poetry, which makes nothing concrete, because it is not active. It has never been in the streets, it has never known how to fight to save man’s conquests: the street which belongs to us, to carry the word elsewhere than the printing press. In fact, concrete poetry has remained an intellectual matter. A pity.”3 Legions of concrete poets heeded Henri Chopin’s clarion call for a less-bourgeois poetry by purposely scumbling the surfaces of their poems using the typewriter or, as in Bob Cobbing’s case, exploiting the dirty, smudgy quality of mimeo and photocopy machines to “court visual and linguistic nonlinearity and illegibility.”4 This antiaesthetic bled into punk zines and grunge culture in the following decades. These ideas can be traced to May 1968, when concrete poetry indeed migrated off the page and exploded onto the streets in Paris, where situationist-inspired graffiti doubled as poetry across the city’s walls. 5.2. Old concrete: Eugen Gomringer, untitled, 1954. Following trends in sixties counterculture, another strain of concrete poetry went pastoral—as exemplified by the “avant-garden” concretism of the Scottish poet Ian Hamilton Finlay—turning its back on the urban upheavals and looking instead for inspiration from the utopian possibilities in nature. UbuWeb hosts a series of poems by Mary Ellen Solt entitled Flowers in Concrete. A suite of nine visual poems, they were written from 1963 to 1965, published as a book in 1966, then issued as a portfolio of poster-size prints in 1969. Like the sixties communards who turned toward nature as a possible utopia, Solt’s images were intentionally detached from the political foment of the day. Each poem is an image of a flower composed entirely of typographical elements. In “White Rose,” for instance, twenty-nine random words bump up against one another, turning into sentences, each forming a petal of the flower. In another called “Lilacs,” singular letter forms twist in circles to create small clusters of lilacs. In Solt’s most famous poem, “Forsythia,” the word FORSYTHIA serves as a base or root or planter, with sentences sprouting from each letter, which then turn into branches. Having lost steam throughout the 1970s, the concrete-poetry movement had pretty much collapsed by the 1980s, subsumed by other trends, such as mail art, where one swapped concrete poems as readily as one swapped cheap cassettes, postage-stamp-size paintings, table-top sculptures, and folded-up posters. Concurrently, small-press culture arose with its networks of readers and writers and voluminous production. Concrete poetry became a mere trickle of the torrent it once was, rendered nearly invisible as a minor note in the greatly expanded field of experimental writing. Once concrete poetry had run its course as a print medium, it found a new and unexpected role in the digital world, which was emerging at the time of its demise. In fact, many of concrete poetry’s ideas about language’s materiality ended up being mirrored in computational systems and processes. When the cursor on a computer monitor interacts with language, it does so in a physical way. Take, for instance, the computer’s simple cut-and-paste function. When we highlight a word (note the word highlight) by moving our cursor over it and pressing down on the mouse, we are picking up that word and moving it elsewhere. When we click on a link, we press down on a word. When in the analog age did we ever press down on words? Similarly, we drag language from one place to another in our word-processing programs. When we hit “send” for an email, we are triggering a series of interactions that physically transfers language in the form of bytes from one computer to another, literally sending those words on a journey halfway around the world. In Photoshop, every time we work with text—stretching and sizing it—we are treating language materially. Whereas it used to take a typesetter to do this, the fact that anyone could now warp language from a desktop helped to give concrete poetry a renewed relevance. The great dreams of the democratization of concrete poetry by poets such as Henri Chopin have become embedded in our everyday activities. Haroldo de Campos’s idea of universally readable visual languages floods our screens in the form of icons, emoticons, and emojis. Concrete poems being written in the twenty-first century have been strained through the digital—and in some ways have reacted to it; call it postdigital concretism. Even in cases where the poems might look similar to what was done in the previous century, there’s something different about them that responds to the digital in the ways they’re produced, constructed, and distributed. Concrete poetry in the twenty-first century always winks at its twentieth-century precursors. After years of poems being laser-printed on vanilla A4 sheets or viewed as lo-res PDFs, we’re seeing a fresh surge of poems printed on obscenely thick handmade paper, often swaddled in deluxe slipcase boxes. Books are more beautiful than they were before the digital age. Just walk though any number of art-book fairs popping up in cities around the world: the number of exquisitely produced paperbound artifacts is overwhelming. Poets are migrating to print- on-demand systems as well, producing scads of lo-fi books more cheaply than ever, a return of the “dirty concrete,” punk, or grunge aesthetic enabled by the digital. In the twenty-first century, poets have also rediscovered the sensuality of the typewriter and the expressive graphism of the handwritten word, resulting in new forms of asemic poetry, so unique that they can’t be made by a computer. And even our cities are suffused with words. The walls of Paris 68 have evolved into the dynamic fields of graffiti and street art, marking the landscape with large, expressive hieroglyphs. The content of postdigital concrete poetry seems to be influenced by the network as well. There’s a lot of appropriated and remixed language, reflecting the cut-and-paste culture of the web, as well as a gravitation toward erasure, perhaps a comment on the fragility of cultural artifacts in the digital age. Although concrete poetry has always been a fast poetry—purposely resistant to close reading—in the information age it seems intentionally designed for short attention spans. Influenced by 4chan image macros and the compressed language of Twitter, much of the new concrete poetry takes the form of snappy one-liners, such as Tom Jenks’s poem “I Love Irony” (2011) (fig. 5.3). 5.3. New concrete: Tom Jenks, “I Love Irony,” 2011. Although visual artists such as Lawrence Weiner, Joseph Kosuth, Jenny Holzer, and Barbara Kruger have worked with words for decades, a large number of young gallery-based artists are self- identifying not as “text artists” but as “visual poets.” Concrete poetry’s great gift was to demonstrate the multidimensionality of language, showing us that words are more than just words. What seemed like a marginal and boutique pursuit in the twentieth century has turned out to be prophetic in the twenty-first. Language is exploding around us in ways that the founders of the movement could never have predicted. I’ll never forget seeing the graphical web for the first time in January 1996. It was astonishing to watch an interlaced GIF slowly fill in, one alternating line with another. The way it loaded reminded me of the way venetian blinds open and close or of how a painting by the Israeli kinetic/optical artist Yaacov Agam changes when you look at it from one angle and then another. It struck me that this new technology, echoing earlier display technologies such as rotoscopes and lenticulars, wasn’t new at all; it had historical roots that ran deep, from flipbooks to graphic novels to celluloid-film frames. 5.4. Interlaced GIF loading. It just so happened that on my desk at that time was a yellowed paperback book of concrete poems called Anthology of Concretism from 1967. Inside was a sequential poem by Décio Pignatari that stretched over twelve pages and was arranged like a flipbook: “LIFE,” a play on the Life magazine logo. First, the logo was split up into individual letters on sequential pages; next, they were combined into morphemes (IF, LIE); and, finally, they were jammed together to make hybrid letter forms (the E plus the I were joined to form an 8). Pignatari’s piece is a sly disassembling of an icon (LIFE becomes LIE) and a demonstration of how by simply rearranging a few letters, concretism could challenge something as huge as the Life logo, one of the best-known symbols in the world. In the introduction to her anthology of concrete poetry, Concrete Poetry: A World View (1968), Solt identifies three modes that the concrete poem could adopt: “visual (or optic), phonetic (or sound) and kinetic (moving in a visual succession).” She discusses how concrete poetry was multimedia before it was called “multimedia”: “When we are confronted with the particular text or poem, we often find that it is both visual and phonetic, or that it is expressionistic as well as constructivist. It is easier to classify the kinetic poem because it incorporates movement, usually a succession of pages; but it is essentially a visual poem, and its words are, of course, made up of sounds.”5 5.5. Eugen Gomringer, “avenidas,” 1951. 5.6. Eugen Gomringer, “avenidas,” installed on site at Alice Salomon University, Berlin. Included in Solt’s anthology is a poem written in 1951 by the Bolivian-born, German concrete poet Eugen Gomringer called “avenidas” (fig. 5.5). It’s a classic concrete poem composed of reduced sans-serif language that produces images that are highly evocative but not necessarily specific. When the words are read aloud, their rhythms flow like water running down a staircase. And even though the poem was penned by a German-speaking poet in Spanish, there are few people who can’t understand it because it was intentionally written in simple language resembling Esperanto, a reminder of the universality that concrete poetry aimed to achieve.6 “avenidas” perfectly fits Solt’s three-pronged criteria for concrete poetry—it is visual, phonetic, and kinetic. In 2011, Alice Salomon University in Berlin awarded Gomringer its Alice Salomon Poetry Prize. Later that year, as a tribute to him, “avenidas” was emblazoned across a wall of one of the school’s buildings, where it quietly remained until 2016, when students signed a petition demanding its removal. In an open letter, the students derided the work for its sexism, seeing it as objectifying women by condoning their harassment in the streets of Berlin: “A man who looks out into the streets and admires flowers and women,” the students wrote. “This poem not only reproduces a classic patriarchal art tradition in which women are exclusively the beautiful muses that inspire masculine artists to creative acts, it is also reminiscent of sexual harassment, which women are exposed to every day.”7 In response, in 2018 the poet Christian Bök translated “avenidas” into a set of Apple emojis (iOS 11.3) (fig. 5.7). Bök proposes a new requirement to Solt’s criteria for concrete poetry—the ability to seamlessly integrate with the digital age. Still working with imagistic language (or linguistic imagism), Bök restores the ambiguity of Gomringer’s original while making it impervious to singularly reductive interpretations. By employing a set of images intentionally designed to be universal and nonspecific, Bök at once alludes to the utopian possibilities of universally understood languages and updates this idea for our time, when images increasingly are words, a new twist on classic concrete poetry where words are images. Pignatari, Solt, Gomringer, and Bök are reminders of how enmeshed concrete poetry is with technology and electronic media. Although in the beginning concrete poetry was glued to the page, the poems always seemed to want to move off of it, begging to be liberated into the digital space and course through networks in the forms of animated GIFs or streaming video or emojis. Just moving the poems to the digital space made them new. Similarly, on the early internet, twentieth-century Russian avant-garde design began regularly appearing on websites as motifs. Like concrete poetry, its clean lines, grid-based compositions, and minimalist color schemes seamlessly transferred to the web. 5.7. Christian Bök, “avenidas,” 2018. The intertwined histories of the avant-garde and technology, culminating in concrete poetry, fueled the creation of UbuWeb. But I realized that for all my talk about visual poetry and its influence on the site, we actually had never built a section dedicated to it. So in 2011 I reached out to Derek Beaulieu, a poet and a collector and publisher of visual poetry, and asked him to scan rare books, historical manuscripts, little journals, and publications he had on his bookshelves to beef up our offerings. He also scoured his global connections, asking contemporary visual poets from around the world to send him their works. The dedicated visual-poetry section we finally launched added nearly three hundred full-length publications to the site, many of which are dozens of pages long. Suddenly we found ourselves with a diverse range of visual poetry, such as Max Ernst’s collage novel La femme 100 tetes (1929); the complete run of Ed Sanders’s revolutionary Fuck You: A Magazine of the Arts (1962–1965), cranked out on a mimeograph machine in a “secret location on the Lower East Side”; d.a. levy’s Cleveland-based protopunk zine Buddhist Third Class Junkmail Oracle (1967–1969); Marcel Broodthaers’s graphical interpretation of Charles Baudelaire, ironically entitled Je hais le mouvement qui deplace les lignes (I hate the movement that displaces lines) (1973); Luigi Serafini’s asemic encyclopedia of an alien world, Codex Seraphinianus (1978); and Cecilie Bjørgås Jordheim’s The Poetry of Repetitive Vertical Movement (at Sea) (2011), a book of automatic writing derived from making graphical notations of YouTube videos that document ships’ voyages in rough seas. Beaulieu’s collection was the long-delayed result of a serendipitous visit I made back in the late 1980s to the Ruth and Marvin Sackner Archive for Visual and Concrete Poetry, which held more than 75,000 examples of visual poetry, concrete poetry, and text art. Schooled in the linguistic art of Lawrence Weiner, Barbara Kruger, and Jenny Holzer, among others, I was stunned to discover an entire history that was little discussed in the mainstream art circles in which I was running. Although the collection (which the University of Iowa Libraries Special Collections acquired in 2019) was stored in an endless parade of flat folder files at the Sackners’ home, much of it hung on the walls in the form of text-based paintings and splayed across the floor as word-art sculptures. The Sackners began collecting visual poetry when they purchased paintings and ephemera from the Russian avant-garde and increasingly fell in love with the way typography was used. From there, they collected newspapers, broadsheets, magazines, and journals of the Russian constructivist period, where text was used as image. This path finally led them to the historical concrete-poetry canon and from there to contemporary text art and digital forms of visual poetry. On any given wall of the Sackners’ house you could find rare first-edition proofs of Mallarmé’s Un coup de dés jamais n’abolira le hasard (1897) next to cheaply photocopied pages from Jenny Holzer’s Truisms (1978–1987). The personal vision that drove the collection—a rich jumble of styles, mediums, and periods, all centered around the avant-garde— became another blueprint for UbuWeb. The Sackners intuitively found their way, discovering for themselves what constituted an “avant-garde,” one that followed no textbook or previously written history. It proceeded instead on serendipity, intuition, and passion. Somehow it worked—at least to them—but they always came back to visual and concrete poetry. In building UbuWeb—my version of the Sackner Archive—my touchstones are identical. Every time I have a question of whether something—be it a film or a piece of music—can fit into the scheme of UbuWeb, I look to the history of concrete poetry and find the answer. Time and again, concrete poetry has turned out to be dead right. K 6 FROM URSONATE TO RE-SONATE urt Schwitters’s catalogue raisonné is an imposing object. Consisting of three fire-engine-red hardbound volumes, it totals 2,018 pages. As you skim through the pages, it’s astonishing to see the variety of works that Schwitters made, beginning with his academic work in 1905 and continuing until his death in 1948. Although committed to the avant- garde, Schwitters never stopped painting traditional portraits and bold landscapes, all of which display an astonishing talent. The works are arranged chronologically, and so it seems as if one day he would create a radical Dadaist merz collage of found bits of tattered newspaper clippings and spent tram tickets, and then the next he would paint a drop-dead beautiful, creamy Norwegian landscape of the fjords en plein air. Schwitters’s practice is a reminder that many artists are not easily pigeonholed as being only one thing; usually, they are many things simultaneously. As you leaf through those pages, letters and words jump out at you. They’re everywhere—in his collages and paintings, splayed across the walls of his merzbaus, and strewn about the pages of his visual poetry. Taken from matchbooks, postage stamps, newspaper headlines, and ad copy, chunks of everyday language litter his oeuvre, reframing the mundane as poetic. At other times, words slide off the canvases and onto the page, forming the basis of his radically baroque Dada sound poems, the most famous of which is the Ursonate, a forty-five-minute tour de force consisting of globs of odd phonemes and invented words. Many consider it to be the most influential sound poem ever written. Yet amid the thousands of works listed in his catalog raisonné, there’s no entry for the Ursonate. In fact, in the book’s exhaustive chronology there’s only one mention of it (where it is referred to as the “Primal Sonata”): 5 May 1932 Recording of the Scherzo from the “Primal Sonata” and the poem “To Anna Blossom” for the broadcaster Süddeutscher Rundfunk Stuttgart. It’s a glaring omission for a document that pretends to be complete. The editors state: “The catalogue raisonné, in three volumes, contains the entire artistic oeuvre of Kurt Schwitters in chronological order, beginning with the oil paintings and drawings of 1905 and ending with the last work, a landscape sketch which was drawn shortly before his death in January 1948.”1 When I wrote the editors asking why the Ursonate was not included, they simply responded that “literary works are not included in our Kurt Schwitters. Catalogue raisonné.”2 It’s hard to rationalize such divisions when Schwitters’s practice was set upon demolishing them. The term merz was a fragment of language, a truncation of the bank name “Commerz und Privatbank,” an act of naming that signified shattering, questioning the possibility of unity in the wake of World War I: “In the war, things were in terrible turmoil. What I had learned at the academy was of no use to me and the useful new ideas were still unready.... Everything had broken down and new things had to be made out of the fragments; and this is Merz. It was like a revolution within me, not as it was, but as it should have been.”3 Merz destroys singularity, collapsing painting into poetry and performance into architecture. A catalogue pamphlet from 1944 written by Herbert Read on the occasion of Schwitters’s solo exhibition at the Modern Art Gallery in London gives a more accurate account of the artist than the catalogue raisonné of 2006 does: Schwitters is a complete artist. Here we only see his sculpture and painting, his plastic arts. But he is also a poet, and parallel to James Joyce, has been developing the abstract vocal rhythm. His poems must be heard rather than read, and the poet is their best interpreter (again, one might say the same of Joyce, for it is only after hearing the record of his reading from Finnegans Wake that his purpose becomes wholly clear). One is naturally skeptical of any form of abstract literature, and perhaps literature is not the name for an art of abstract incantation: but to hear Schwitters recite his poems is to be convinced that he has invented still another art form.4 Composed over the course of a decade beginning in the mid- 1920s, the Ursonate (also known as Sonata in Primeval Sounds or Primitive Sonata) is a classical sonata in four movements, each in a related key, but with unique musical characteristics. The inception of the piece began with a poem by fellow Dadist Raoul Hausmann, “f m s b w t ö z ä u” (1918), which was, as Schwitters recalls, originally nothing more than a type sample for a selection of fonts, which Hausmann called a “literary readymade.” Hausmann simply made it into a sound poem by freely interpreting the letters. (There is a recording of Hausmann performing it as a part of a suite of Dada sound poems—it takes a mere four seconds to recite.) After hearing Hausmann read it in Prague, Schwitters began on occasion to perform it, calling it “Portrait of Raoul Hausmann.” Because Hausmann was originally from Vienna, Schwitters transcribed the inflection of his accent as fümms bö wö tää zää uu pögiff mü 6.1. Raoul Hausmann, excerpt from in-text plate (folio 13) from Poésie de mots inconnus, 1949. By dropping the “mü,” he composed the first two lines of the Ursonate, at once appropriating Hausmann’s words and making them his own through an act of sound-based transcription. From there he began to compose the Ursonate in ways not dissimilar to how Joyce composed Finnegans Wake, abstractly eliding common nouns into muscular neologisms. “Dresden” becomes “DDSSNN R”; “rakete,”—repeated extensively throughout the poem—is German for “rocket”; and “p r a” is the backward spelling of the name “arp,” as in fellow Dadist Hans/Jean Arp. At other times, he transcribed letters of the alphabet backward, then sprinkled in “shortened inscriptions on company plaques or printed matter, [and] the interesting inscriptions on railroad switch towers which always sound so interesting because no one has no way of understanding them.”5 In this way, the Ursonate can been thought of as an autobiographical record of words and sounds captured from Schwitters’s daily life, forming a sort of travelogue, not dissimilar to Blaise Cendrars’s “La prose du Transsibérien” (1913) or Ted Berrigan’s book-length, travel-based erotic poem Train Ride (1971). The repetitive rhythms of “rakete rinnzekete / rakete rinnzekete / rakete rinnzekete” could easily be a transcription of the sounds of the iron rails. The piece was precisely composed, consisting of four movements: a first movement, a largo passage, a scherzo and trio, and a finale and cadenza. Each section has its own tempo and emotional tenor; Schwitters calls the first “explosive,” the second “metallic and incorruptible,” the third “military and masculine,” and the fourth “trembling, sheepishly tender.” Like a sonata, sections echo one another, with motifs repeating and transforming over time: [In the second movement] the “rrmpf ” and “rrnnff ” recall the “rrmmpff tillff too” of the first movement, though the sound is now no longer sheepishly tender, but short and commanding, very manly. Nor does “Rrumpfftillftoo” in the third movement sound as tender any longer. The sound of “ziuu lenn trll” and “lümpff tümpff trill” derives from the main theses “lanke trr gll.” The “ziiuu iiuu” in the trio strongly recalls “ziiuu ennze” from movement 1, except that here it is solemn and ceremonial. The scherzo is essentially different from the other three movements in which the long “bee” is extremely important. No “bee” occurs in the scherzo.6 Schwitters says that the entire piece should be pronounced as it would be in German, which has led some critics to claim that the piece cannot be properly performed by nonnative German speakers, a suggestion that has happily been disregarded. Schwitters goes on at length to give precise instructions; for instance, the “bbb” is pronounced like three single b’s; that the consonants “f h l j m n r s w sch” are not pronounced separately but elongated; and that “rrr” is a longer rolling sound than “r.” And then, contradicting himself, he gives permission for the performer to improvise and interpret: “Of course the use of ordinary script with the letters of the old Roman alphabet can only give a very partial suggestion of the performed sonata. As is the case with any notation system, many interpretations are possible. As with any reading act, imagination is required to read correctly.” But he then disavows his own instructions: “To explain in detail the variations and compositions of the themes would be tiresome in the end and detrimental to the pleasure of reading and listening, and after all I’m not a professor.”7 As is typical of some artists, it’s neither one nor the other, but both: the Ursonate is a score to be followed precisely and an invitation to expand on it in ways unique to each performer. Although Jan Tschichold designed a beautiful setting of the score in 1932, Schwitters said, “It is better to hear the sonata than to read it. That’s why I myself like to and often do perform my sonata publicly and will accept all invitations to organize a sonata evening.”8 Accounts of Schwitters performing his sound poems make them seem like they were incredible to experience live. Hans Richter was eyewitness to one that Schwitters gave in Potsdam in 1924 or 1925 in a private home to a group of retired generals: Schwitters stood on the podium, drew himself up to his full six feet plus, and began to perform the Ursonate, complete with hisses, roars, and crowings, before an audience who had no experience whatever of anything modern. At first they were completely baffled, but after a couple of minutes the shock began to wear off.... I watched delightedly as two generals in front of me pursed their lips as hard as they could to stop themselves laughing ... and then they lost control. They burst out laughing, and the whole audience, freed from the pressure that had been building up inside them, exploded in an orgy of laughter. The dignified old ladies, the stiff generals, shrieked with laughter, gasped for breath, slapped their thighs, choked themselves. [Kurt] was not in the least put out by this. He turned up the volume of his enormous voice to Force Ten and simply swamped the storm of laughter in the audience, so that the latter almost seemed to be an accompaniment to the Ursonate. The din raged around him.... Schwitters spoke the rest of the Ursonate without interruption. The result was fantastic. The same generals, the same rich ladies, who had previously laughed until they cried, now came to Schwitters, again with tears in their eyes, almost stuttering with admiration and gratitude. Something had opened up within them, something they had never expected to feel: a great joy.9 Later, in England, where he ended his career after being hounded by the Nazis from Germany to Norway to the United Kingdom, Schwitters performing his poems was still something to behold. In 1947, the jazz singer George Melly, who drifted in and out of the British surrealist scene, was working at a gallery that mounted a Schwitters show, which included a series of performances by Schwitters. In his autobiography, Melly recalled how nobody was interested in Schwitters’s work, so out of pity the dealer bought out the entire show of collages for five pounds apiece. Melly writes how sad it was when Schwitters appeared at the gallery one rainy Saturday afternoon to recite the Ursonate to an audience of three half-drunken people, Melly and the gallery proprietor being two of them: He stood in the corner of the main gallery ... and began to intone: Fumms bö wö taä zaä Uhm, pögiff Kwii Eee Oooooooooooooooooooooooooooo His white hair stuck out wildly. His eyes were bright blue and staring beyond us. His mackintosh was open. He was over six foot tall anyway but seemed to have grown taller.10 Stories like these made people want to hear recordings of Schwitters performing the Ursonate, but to little avail. The only recording Schwitters ever made in his lifetime was a six-minute excerpt that he recorded for South German Radio in 1932, which was issued as a 78-rpm disc accompanying Merz number 24 (in the same issue was Tschichold’s graphical rendering of the poem). For the next six decades, the only document of those legendary performances appeared to be that one disc. Then in 1993 a CD was released on Wergo, the formidable German record label, claiming to be a full- length performance of the Ursonate by Kurt Schwitters himself. The release came about when a visual artist named Jack Ox wanted to hear the Ursonate but couldn’t locate a copy. Ox writes that a friend “said quite casually that he had Kurt Schwitters’s own performance once copied by his friend Dick Raaijmakers.”11 That tape ended up being released on the Wergo disc, accompanied by a statement from the artist’s son, Ernst Schwitters: “By now, the almost incredible, the miracle has happened. Today I collected the tape of the Ursonate at the post office. And indeed, it is an original recording —probably the only—by my father himself in exactly the same way as I still know it.”12 But the moment it was released, there began to be doubts whether the person performing was really Kurt Schwitters; many suspected that it was Ernst’s voice on the recording. The Dutch sound poet and Schwitters expert Jaap Blonk sensed that something was off. Intimate with Schwitters’s energetic and expressive voice performing the Ursonate from the recording made in 1932, he found the Wergo disc dull, slow, and expressionless; others felt the same. So in 2006 the Kurt and Ernst Schwitters Foundation hired an expert to compare several recordings and determined that in fact the voice was Ernst’s and not his father’s. The tape that Raaijmakers had was evidently from a rare LP of various people performing Schwitters’s sound poems (including Schwitters reciting his poem “An Anna Blume,” which was also recorded during the session in 1932) and of Ernst performing the Ursonate in its entirely. Recorded in 1951 and released by a gallery in London in an edition of one hundred, the LP was so rare that Blonk had neither seen nor heard it. Happily today, it can be heard on UbuWeb. In the liner notes at the site, Ernst declaims: “Under pressure from all sides I have finally agreed to try to recite it. Though I am aware my recital can, in no way, be compared with my father’s, I have one advantage over all other people, I drank it, so to speak, at the same time as my mother’s milk. I heard it at least two or three hundred times. I followed closely its development. I admired it immensely, as I admired my father. I believe I shall never forget the intonation and pronunciation of it. Anyhow, it is the best I can do.”13 Today, the Ursonate has become the ur–sound poem, the closest thing to a masterpiece in the genre. But it wasn’t always this way. Blonk recounts the resistance he encountered when first performing it in the 1980s, provoking a similarly hostile response as Schwitters’s Potsdam appearance forty years earlier: The culminating point ... was a performance of the Ursonate, opening for a concert of The Stranglers at Vredenburg Music Center in Utrecht in 1986, for an audience of about 2,000 fans. When it was announced, even before I had opened my mouth, people started calling out: “Rot op!” (“Fuck off!”), and when I started, the atmosphere became very much that of a football match, but clearly an away game for me. With massive roaring they tried to drown out my voice, but of course the P.A. made me louder. Six stage guards were working hard to keep people from climbing the stage and hitting me, and hundreds of half-full plastic beer glasses flew about me. But in the course of the performance I managed to win over at least a few hundred people, who were roaring in my favor. The next morning one newspaper had the headline “Jaap Blonk Shocks Punk Audience With Dada Poetry,” which for me was a nice testimony to the fact that Schwitters’s piece was still very much alive, in spite of its age.14 That same year Blonk had trouble when he tried to release a recording of the Ursonate, which Ernst blocked, insisting that this recording was illegal and that all copies be destroyed. Blonk speculates that Ernst was convinced that the only genuine version of the Ursonate was the six-minute fragment made by his father and that any other interpretation was to be suppressed (all the more ironic for the fact that Ernst mistook his own voice for his father’s on the Wergo release). While Blonk’s discs weren’t actually destroyed, they were prohibited from being distributed or sold in shops. Another version by Eberhard Blum on a Swiss record label was similarly censored. The label, hat ART, was taken to court, and selling the recording in Germany was illegal until 2002, when after Ernst’s death the Schwitters estate was taken over by his grandson and the ban finally lifted. Today UbuWeb happily hosts all of the previously suppressed versions as well as many others. Blonk writes, “Nowadays one can hear many different versions of the Ursonate, both in live performances and on recordings, and almost all of them testify that the piece is strong enough to shine in whatever garment it is dressed: the true mark of the masterpiece.”15 The dozen versions of the Ursonate hosted on Ubu couldn’t be more different from Schwitters’s—or from one another. Christian Bök performs the piece at double speed, clocking in at eighteen minutes, as opposed to Ernst’s thirty-six. He takes great liberties with the score, including overly expressive heavy-metal-like growls, yelps, and screams. The Canadian composer André Cormier, who leads a group called Ensemble Ordinature, strains Schwitters’s text through Macintosh computer voices, and the Finnish group Linnunlaulupuu—a group of actual humans—turns the Ursonate into something resembling a rowdy football chant. The Japanese sound poet Tomomi Adachi subjects the first page of Schwitters’s score to various manipulations, including systematic repetitions, spontaneous improvisations, removal of consonants and vowels, and the running of parts of it backwards, so that it at times sounds like a glitching CD. The Israeli experimental vocalist Anat Pick, accompanied by a double bassist, employs extended vocal techniques, electronic processing, overdubs, and feedback loops, using Schwitters’s score as the basis for an abstract soundscape. The American sound poet Tracie Morris takes another tack by drawing upon African American musical traditions and using Ernst Schwitters’s recording of the Ursonate as the basis for a call-and- response improvisation entitled Re-Sonate (2016). Using her extensive experience as an improviser, Morris decided to perform along with the recording. Over the years, when she encountered the Ursonate, she’d find herself humming along with it, singing along with it, and riffing on it. She eventually decided to collaborate with it, a duet across the decades between Ernst Schwitters and Tracie Morris, reminiscent of the way that, say, Natalie Cole electronically collaborated with her father, Nat, after his death or how holograms of dead musicians go on tour backed by live bands. But unlike the Coles’ recording, where the two are made to seem as if they’re in the same room with one another, Morris wants to emphasize that she is collaborating with a recording rather than with a person. Leaving the dry sound of the LP and its scratches intact, she went into a digital state-of-the-art recording studio, which captured her full-bodied, throaty poetics. It’s a wonderful and uncanny pairing of a dead white European male and a living African American woman. Morris went into the studio without a score and spontaneously improvised to Schwitters’s every utterance, tenuously and delicately at first, then confidently and aggressively as the piece unfolds. Treating Schwitters’s nonsensical expressions as musical words, she responds accordingly, sliding into a jazzy duet reminiscent of Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie encircling one another, trading riffs, point–counterpoint. Drawing out the inherent musicality in the piece, Morris reflects, repeats, imitates, and parodies Schwitters’s melodic passages. Morris lovingly attempts to translate Schwitters’s merz vocabulary, repeating back what she thinks he is saying, sometimes as a declarative response and other times as a question. When Schwitters says, “Ziiuu,” Morris answers, “See you!”; “pögiff “ becomes “forgive” or “fuck it”; “kwiiEe” becomes “please?” or “really?” or “plié”; “tillff” becomes “fifth”; “bee bee” becomes “baby”; “böwö” is answered with two laughs—“ha ha”; and “böwörötääzää” becomes “da-dada-da,” intoned by Morris with a scat-inflected voice. Vocal collaboration comes naturally to Morris. She heard a lot of it growing up in the public-housing projects of East New York around the time hip-hop was beginning. There she was exposed to collaborations such as Nikki Giovanni with the New York Community Choir. Morris was drawn to the thick, complex music of Lou Rawls, Isaac Hayes, and, in particular, Eric B. & Rakim. “As hip-hop emerged, I just knew, as part of my cultural history, that the internal rhyme, interacting with dissonant, distracting electronic sounds, had community value, meaning. It wasn’t just some ‘talent’ or some ‘noise.’ ”16 In the mid-1980s, Morris began connecting with the New York rock scene, joining the Black Rock Coalition, a group that formed to combat racial discrimination in the music industry. At the time, she considered herself more of an activist than a poet but accidentally ended up performing at a coalition event at the CBGB Canteen in 1991, when, helping to organize a festival of poetry and music, she discovered to her dismay that no women were slated to perform. So she signed up for a slot, shyly climbing onstage to nervously mumble a few poems. To her astonishment, the poems were well received; the community encouraged her to perform her poems more often, which she did. Over time, as her confidence and performing style grew, she found herself in demand as the rare poet-improviser who was able to work with musicians, culminating in her first effort at “sitting in with a band,” performing with saxophonist Steve Coleman’s band the Five Elements at the Knitting Factory in 1992. Listening carefully to Coleman’s sound, she decided not to perform her poems on top of the music, but to perform within it in order to get “deep inside the music, poetically,” which is exactly what she did a quarter of a century later with Schwitters. “If I could sit in with Coleman—known for his complex time signatures—I could sit in with anybody. That one performance changed everything for me.”17 During that period, she also fell into the slam scene, which she excelled at, but missed the dynamics she had while improvising with complex sound-based work. So she decided to present poetry that was more of a challenge for her to write when she participated in the Grand Slam spoken-word tournament at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe on the Lower East Side in 1992 but lost after performing dense, difficult writing.18 This freed her to chart her own course. “Had I won that slam, I would’ve been just another slam poet for too long in my career, rather than moving on to the new work I needed to do.” Straddling the worlds of slam and improvisation, she had a minor hit with a poem called “Project Princess,” a deconstructed spoken-word piece that breaks up narrative lines, soaked in washes of echoes and stutters. Scholar Tammie Jenkins writes that it’s the disjunction that drives the poem: “Project Princess emerged as non- chronological storytelling, language and accepted meanings, signification (signifying), and created counter-narratives that opened discursive spaces as sites of resistance.”19 As in the Ursonate duet, words become sounds, and sounds become words. It’s as much about how she says it as what she says, although what she says—a catalog of what it’s like to be and look like a young, black female in the projects—comes through loud and clear. But a funny thing happened. She was on her way to the Apollo Theater in Harlem to perform “Project Princess” in a show staged for teenagers. As she was getting ready to go to perform a work she had performed many times before as a hip-hop poem, she started hearing additional dissonant sounds in her head interjecting themselves into the poem. On the subway, she tried to practice the poem in her usual way, but those dissonant sounds kept imposing themselves. As she went farther and farther uptown, the sounds became more cacophonous and strange. It was as if the echoes and repetitions in the original poem were engulfing the narrative lyrics to the point where it all became a jumble of pure sound. As she walked to the theater, she told herself, “This poem is going to be some kind of other poem. It has drowned out the other version, squeezed it out of my head.” She went onstage and performed the new version. When she finished, a stunned silence fell over the theater. Then she got a screaming standing ovation. Morris intuited that the audience would naturally embrace her artistic choice: “My definition of the avant-garde is black. The avant-garde starts with black culture and that audience of kids reinforced that idea. We understood hip-hop and innovation as a culture. It’s about density.”20 After that experience, she no longer bothered to make distinctions between music and poetry, sound and abstraction, slam and experimental; it was a single practice that fluidly moved across scenes. One night she’d be performing with slam poets at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, the next with a jazz band at the Knitting Factory, and the following with language poets at the Ear Inn. She belonged to many communities, all of which felt natural and nonconflicted. Discussing her relationship to the avant-garde, Morris also sees it as organic and fluid: “I never felt what I was doing as an experimental poet was against my core as a black poet or writer. I felt like it was all part of my way of being a black writer and performer. Innovation in sound and language didn’t originate with ‘experimental poetry’; I grew up with those kinds of innovations; I just didn’t grow up with them in school.” She also refuses to make distinctions between her influences: “I’m equally indebted to Schwitters, Fluxus, and Sonia Sanchez, as I am to Rakim, Sarah Vaughan, and Cecil Taylor. They’re all innovators. I was never in communities that required I separate those things out in order to be black or in the black tradition.”21 Although Cecil Taylor is most famous as a musician, Morris thinks of him primarily as a poet: “My first experience was with his poetry and the dense, rich, heavy language that he used. It’s thick.”22 That thickness and complexity— reaching back to Giovanni and Eric B. & Rakim—is the key to Morris’s aesthetic: the thicker and denser, the better. UbuWeb hosts a disc of Cecil Taylor’s sound poetry called Chinampas (1987–1989), which is just his voice—sometimes solo, other times overdubbed—accompanied by him playing tympani, bells, and small percussion. Like Morris’s work, Chinampas blurs the line between sounds and words. Single words, phrases, and sentences form a dense soundscape, which also includes him growling, singing, whispering, shouting, yelping, and humming. As in Schwitters’s Ursonate, his words are repetitive and nonlinear, weaving in and out of language and music. Trying to notate them without his vocal inflection doesn’t do them any justice. The Gertrude Stein scholar Ulla Dydo, who turned her attention to Taylor’s poetry later in her career, writes, “Cecil’s poetry is not like any other poetry that can be reproduced, printed, and read with the eyes or performed out loud. It is a different form, a hybrid. Printing it reduces it down to something else, and in that sense destroys it. Though you can call it a score, it is not music. It is not painting, decorative art, or photography and cannot be a visual stand-alone. To print it, even in facsimile, is to violate and falsify what it is.”23 The literary critic David Grundy has tried to decipher the textual method of Taylor’s scoring, finding it equally resistant to clear interpretation: As I’ve found in attempting to make transcriptions of Taylor’s recitations here and in live performance, it’s virtually impossible to capture on the page the distinctive tempo and timbre of Taylor’s phrasing. Sometimes, indeed, Taylor appears to use found texts, chopped up and played with in recitation: it’s the “delivery” and the ritualized context of performance as much as the text itself that makes it a poem. Above all, it’s the time and the timing of reading, the way breath and tongue and teeth spin out the phrase or line, that “notation” or transcription can’t capture.24 Taylor would often begin his musical performances with a poetry reading, and on occasion he’d do readings in poetry venues. I recall seeing him once at St. Mark’s Poetry Project, where, instead of standing at the podium and reading like other poets, Taylor was a blur of motion, pacing, squatting, ducking, and weaving. Grundy describes Taylor exactly as I remember him: “holding a sheaf of musical and poetic notation on sheets of loose paper, reciting the names of voodoo or Egyptian gods, lines emerging in repetition and a kind of Sprechstimme—squawking, scratching, rasping, sometimes in strange tones of parody, verging on the edge of hilarity.”25 Grundy could almost be describing Schwitters performing in Potsdam more than half a century earlier. The word chinampas, “floating gardens,” refers to a type of Mesoamerican agriculture where sticks and soil are woven into a fertile planting ground that sits above shallow bodies of water. In Taylor’s case, it might be a metaphor for the way words, sounds, and music interweave with one another in order to sustain and grow an ecosystem of poetry. As in the agricultural metaphor, each element is codependent with the others, through growth, decomposition, ultimate collapse indistinguishable from one another, reminding us that the organic elements of nature and the organic elements of the poetic are inseparable, renewable, and eternally fruitful. Along with improvisation and jazz, a sort of hybrid modernism was one of the key elements in Taylor’s practice, one in which boundaries were permeable: “The thing that allows me to enter into what [Charles Olson and Bob Kaufman] do is the feeling that I get. It’s the way they use words. It’s the phraseology that they use, much the way the defining characteristic of men like Charlie Parker or Johnny Hodges is the phraseology.... [I]n other words, the harmony and the melodic. Well, I also see that in word structures.”26 Word structures and music structures become melded and interchangeable, but in the end poetry was the way Taylor primarily chose to define himself: “I’ve always tried to be a poet more than anything else, I mean, professional musicians die.”27 The legacy of Schwitters’s sound poetry courses through various aspects of what has come to be called “sound art,” a field that takes into its purview everything from electronic music to ambient noise to microsound (the loud amplification of barely audible sounds). Often overlapping in gallery and museum spaces, it also finds its métier in various recordings that mingle with other boundary-blurring categories, such as new music and body art. In particular, one strain of sound art is directly related to Schwitters in that it’s produced exclusively by artists who use the body as the primary source for their audio works.28 Some use words, some simply use their bodies —or others’ bodies—as a compositional tool. Although much twentieth-century classical music employed extensive use of Sprechstimme—for instance, Schoenberg’s “Pierrot Lunaire” (1912) and Cathy Berberian’s “Stripsody” (1966)—sound art and sound poetry brought the voice and the body to the foreground as the site of composition. Beginning in the first decades of the twentieth century, while the futurists explored poetry based on nonverbal and nonlinguistic mouth sounds, it wasn’t until after World War II with the advent of the tape recorder and musique concrète that compositions based on altered and amplified microsounds derived from the human body were possible. The French sound poet Henri Chopin in particular applied musique concrète’s principles of amplification to his own body. In the 1960s, he coined a description for this practice, “les corps est une usine a sons [the body is a sound factory].” Chopin took his directive literally, using his own body as the site of sound. He wrote, “I’m fond of my noises and of my sounds, I admire the immense complex factory of a body, I’m fond of my glances that touch, of my ears that see, of my eyes that receive.”29 To that end, he did things such as roll contact microphones around inside his mouth. By doing so, he turned the studio inside out: where once the performer entered the studio to make a recording, after Chopin it was possible for the studio to enter the performer. Instead of manipulating pre-recorded voices to make compositions as the musique concrète composers did, Chopin made live recordings of his body and voice, which became compositions in and of themselves. When you are listening to his music, it’s hard to tell that it’s body derived. It often sounds instead like much electronic music of its time, awash in ethereal swishes, punctuated by deep booms. It’s only after reading the liner notes that you learn that the source of a certain composition was, say, Chopin banging his head against the side of an amplifier or chopping at his larynx repeatedly with the blade of his hand while humming. The result was the human body as site of sound. In 1951, John Cage famously told of his visit to a “soundless” chamber at Harvard in 1951: It was after I got to Boston that I went into the anechoic chamber at Harvard University. Anybody who knows me knows this story. I am constantly telling it. Anyway, in that silent room, I heard two sounds, one high and one low. Afterward I asked the engineer in charge why, if the room was so silent, I had heard two sounds. He said, “Describe them.” I did. He said, “The high one was your nervous system in operation. The low one was your blood in circulation.”30 This experience allowed Cage to refute the idea of silence. After visiting the anechoic chamber, he realized that no matter where we are, there is noise. And no matter what type, all noises contain the formal properties of music: pitch, timbre, and duration. Therefore, he was able to claim that music is all around us, if only we have the ears to hear it. But let’s imagine another scenario, where Cage went into the chamber and came up with the identical conclusion, but rather than perceiving music all around us produced by agents outside of ourselves, he seized upon the idea that the body is a sound factory, working twenty-four/seven. So instead of listening to music around us, we are constantly creating music from within. T 7 PEOPLE LIKE US o say that Vicki Bennett, who performs under the name “People Like Us,” is prodigious is an understatement; every few months I get another email from her asking UbuWeb to host her latest. Everything Vicki does is posted on Ubu and given away for free. By maximizing a combination of free and paid economies, she makes a living entirely from her art, working on commissions, giving lectures, doing radio shows, performing in festivals, and constantly touring. Bennett works entirely with preexisting materials, cutting up and reassembling old movies and LPs, then collaging them into something entirely new. She’s a wonderful live performer, mixing the soundtrack live in the theater to accompany her films. Humor plays a big role in her work—something rare in the world of avant-garde. Her sources are decidedly lowbrow, everything from goofy B-grade horror films to obscure sci-fi movies, which she then pairs with frenetic, chopped-up soundtracks of cheesy AM pop-radio hits from the same genres and periods. Her work is often about utopias gone bad; for this reason, she favors wide-eyed, optimistic, and innocent musical and visual content as her source material, which always seems to end in catastrophe. She is a pop-culture addict, transforming junk into profound statements that, in spite of her avowed lack of interest in political interpretations of her work, are rife with cultural and political urgency. As much as she belongs to an avant-garde alchemical tradition—think of the collaged works of Joseph Cornell or the pop films of Kenneth Anger and Bruce Conner —she is also part of a long line of women working in electronic music and turntablism, such as Daphne Oram, Maria Chavez, Ikue Mori, Pamela Z, and Marina Rosenfeld. UbuWeb hosts many artists who work primarily with found materials, including Craig Baldwin, Christian Marclay, John Oswald, DJ Food, Wobbly, and Negativland. Yet each artist’s work bears a unique authorial stamp. Sometimes that stamp is apparent in the choice of source material (in Bennett’s case low-end pop) or in the way the source material is assembled (Bennett usually retains the pop structure of her source material, whereas others shatter that structure into abstract shards) or the way it is presented (many sample-based musicians are studio-only artists, whereas the performative component is just as essential to Bennett). Bennett’s oeuvre is proof that choice is, indeed, a form of authorship; by stitching secondhand sounds and images together, she creates something entirely new. Her works often feel like MTV music videos gone terribly wrong. What begins innocently and cheerfully quickly darkens, growing increasingly chaotic as the film unfurls. By the time it’s over, it’s thoroughly turned itself inside out, becoming so fragmented and dizzy that it topples over and collapses. Take her film The Sound of the End of Music (2010), a three-and-a-half minute mashup of the opening scenes of The Sound of Music and Apocalypse Now. As Julie Andrews spins around on the tops of Austrian peaks, teams of menacing Vietnam-era helicopters appear over a nearby ridge, ready to drop their payloads. Bilious white clouds clinging to snowy mountaintops turn gray when mingled with smoke from the napalm fires burning in the flower-strewn fields behind her. Under leaden skies, Andrews singing “The Sound of Music” is mashed up with Jim Morrison crooning “The End.” Like a classic Andrews and Gene Kelly duet, Andrews and Morrison swap lines: “The hills are alive with the sound of music / this is the end / with songs they have sung for a thousand years / of everything that stands, the end.” Working intuitively, Bennett sensed that “both wanted to sing together, they were in the same key already but one was a slightly different length, so I helped them.”1 With Bennett’s editing, instead of triumphantly dashing through the fields, Andrews is running for her life, dodging the walls of flames that scorch the once-verdant alpine landscape. Much of the original Sound of Music’s opening scene was shot from a helicopter, with crew members hiding in bushes yelling directions to Andrews with megaphones because she couldn’t hear them over the roar of the hovering choppers. In addition, she was barely able to stand up due to the downdrafts from the helicopters. As you watch Bennett’s film, it’s also hard to ignore the fact that The Sound of Music was released in 1965, the same year that the United States was escalating its military forces in South Vietnam, culminating with that year’s carpet-bombings during Operation Rolling Thunder. But Bennett refutes specific political interpretations of her work, instead preferring the surreal juxtapositions to speak for themselves: “You can elevate people into a more fluid mental state where they are willing to perceive things differently, in a non- straightforward way, particularly with collaged audio composition or radio. The incongruous nature of humor, and also collage, leaves space for various levels of interpretation.”2 She also refuses singular artistic categorization: “I don’t fit in the film world, I don’t fit with the music world, I don’t fit in with the fine-art world. I like all of them, but if you ask me to commit to any one of them, I won’t. I consider myself an UbuWeb artist, if anything.”3 As one of the few women working in the field of sound and film appropriation, she dismisses the label feminist as rapidly as she does any other. Although she participates in festivals such as City of Women and Ladyfest, she sees them as just another outlet, claiming, “I don’t want to be chosen because of my biological makeup; I want to be chosen because of my output. And if that is true—that I’m one of the few women working in this field—wouldn’t I be doing better than I am now? I’m not doing badly, but I could be doing a lot better.”4 As a child growing up in rural Suffolk, England in the 1970s, she was a voracious home taper, recording all the audio she could off TV and radio. From early on, the idea of singularity—just one of something—never made sense to her. When she was fourteen, she put ads in underground zines with her address, asking to be in touch with other isolated kids. She soon became a part of postal network, in which kids would send each other homemade tapes and weird video cassettes. The mail network turned into real-world friends, whom she would visit: “I did the analog internet, which meant the post, trains, and buses.”5 Those networks provided her with ever-increasing exposure to alternative culture. She soon became a fan of the films of Kenneth Anger, whose use of pop culture and found footage resonated with her. She also responded to the religious and occult aspects of his works, which would prove to be foundational to her future aesthetic. When she was fifteen, she taped Scorpio Rising (1963) off U.K. Channel 4 TV late one night: I knew of Anger as an occult film maker, which intrigued me. I also loved it that the chance element entered Scorpio Rising in terms of the Christian film being delivered to him by accident. Also his innocent use of sampling—in the true folk way—that you just take it and use it. That’s what pop music is for: to use. In terms of permission, the film seemed like a cross between a sort of fan flick and also an appropriation or collage film. I loved the playfulness and humor but also the underlining sinister edge, the menace.6 Bennett’s reference to “the Christian film” concerns an incident that occurred while Anger was editing Scorpio Rising at his home in the Los Angeles Silverlake neighborhood. One day a 16mm-film package was left on his doorstep. Since it was a film, he assumed it was for him and opened it. To his surprise, it turned out to be a Sunday school film that had been ordered from a local branch of the Lutheran Church. Puzzled, he looked at the package more carefully, whereupon he realized that it was addressed to the identical house number, but on a different street; through a postal service error, it had arrived on his doorstep. He kept the film, taking it as a sign and thinking, “Well, I’m just going to keep this and cut it into my film. And that’s how I got Last Journey to Jerusalem (1948). I thought of it as the gods acting up, doing a little prank, doing me a favor. The film was perfect for my purposes.”7 This story inspired Bennett to embrace serendipity and magic. “As an artist my relationship to the occult is that the ‘occult’ means hidden, or perhaps buried, and the purpose of magic (by different definitions of the word) is to reveal, uncover.” She does this through collage as a way to disorient the viewer-listener and let the unconscious guide the construction and reception of her works. “We can only break free from the cycle of repetition and mundane by breaking things,” she says, “by breaking through, turning things upside down.”8 She attended art school briefly in 1987, studying “alternative practice,” one of the few media courses being offered at the time at Brighton Polytechnic. She found her professors to be bitter, insisting on tearing down vulnerable students rather than offering constructive criticism. They accused Bennett of being there only to use the edit suite (which was in part true). In response, she decided to dedicate her life to making art that elevated rather than criticized. Dropping out in 1989 and finding herself without the expensive college editing suite, she relied on what was readily available, remixing her own audio on a double cassette deck and a secondhand Amiga 500 computer with an 8-bit (£26) cartridge sampler, and two VHS video recorders, which she would use to make experimental artworks that combined rental-store videos with live-TV feeds. From 1990 to 1993, she did a radio show in Brighton based on these tapes, which eventually became the basis for her early LPs. Her infatuation with radio never ended. Since 2003, she has been doing a radio show on WFMU that blurs the boundaries between radio host and artist; the show, which she mixes live, sounds an awful lot like her albums. In 2012, she organized Radio Boredcast, a 744-hour experimental online radio project that included everything from BBC maritime shipping forecasts to punk-rock cover versions of Balinese kecak chants. She self-released her first LP, Another Kind of Humor, in 1992, a twenty-minute collage of found sounds comprising James Brown– like organ riffs, snatches of recorded television speech, blasts of Moroccan horns, drones of Gregorian chants, sound bites of Frank Sinatra, and overly familiar Beatles riffs—all floated atop waves of radio static and bursts of random noise. Although the album was formative, its relentlessness and flow signified the direction her mature works would later take. Bennett’s influences include the collaged sequences in the Mothers of Invention’s albums Absolutely Free (1967) and We’re Only in It for the Money (1968) as well as early Residents albums such as Baby Sex (1971). But Bennett owes her aesthetic mostly to Nurse with Wound’s Sylvie and Babs Hi-Fi Companion (1985), composed of sampled easy-listening records, which Stephen Stapleton described as “a record that was stolen from other people’s records.”9 With John Oswald’s notorious album Plunderphonic (1989)—which used unpermissioned samples of everybody from the Beatles to Beethoven—Bennett found a genre that felt like home. Oswald figured that if he gave the record away instead of selling it, he’d be able to sidestep the thorny copyright issues. Even so, when the Canadian Recording Industry Association caught wind of the recording, they ordered it destroyed, which only made it more famous. Today, it’s all over the internet, including on UbuWeb. From 1994 to 1999, Bennett released a string of CDs on Staalplaat, an independent label dedicated to sound art. With each successive release, she honed her aesthetic. Moving away from the anything-goes nature of Another Kind of Humor, she began to focus more specifically on surgically constructing pop-oriented pieces based on older found material. The works became more nostalgic, more emotional, and more autobiographical, drawing heavily from the media sources available to her in the rural upbringing of her youth in the 1970s—soundtracks from the variety shows and old movies that she taped off TV, dusty LPs she found in charity shops, the sound of easy-listening and pop music streaming from AM radio. She also reached farther back to media sources of the 1940s, imbuing her audio works with a gauzy sense of requiem for an empire in decline. Combining the sounds of high-toned BBC radio narrators and dry ballroom orchestras with throwaways from Paul McCartney and Wings, she traces an audio arc that stretches from the glories of Winston Churchill to the austerities of Margaret Thatcher. By doing so, she offers an alternative narrative of postempire Britain, one different than the more familiar mix of unemployment, punk rock, and urban decay. In these works, youthful rage is swapped for wistful interiority, suggesting more Gavin Bryars (“The Sinking of the Titanic”) than Johnny Rotten (“God Save the Queen”), resulting in an intimate and personal music. Bennett creates a sample-based music that is warm and rich, a rarity in a field that tends toward the cold, clinical, and cynical. In the late 1990s, Bennett began incorporating found footage from the Prelinger Archives into her work. The archives are a vast online repository of more than 60,000 ephemeral films that Rick Prelinger had been collecting since 1983, when he began fishing decaying 16mm reels out of dumpsters from libraries that were looking to lighten their load. Many of the films were educational or industrial films from the 1950s; there were also a lot of home movies. Orphaned, unloved, and unclaimed, they became his property. Over the years, Prelinger has made nearly 7,000 of them available for free on archive.org, encouraging their creative reuse and remixing. At the same time, he licenses the identical footage to commercial entities who are required to pay in order to clear copyrights. So if you’ve ever seen a Hollywood film that uses a clip of the famous Cold War propaganda film Duck and Cover (1951), Rick is getting a paycheck from that. But if, like Vicki Bennett, you want to use Duck and Cover in an artistic project, then it’s yours for free. Prelinger figured out how one cultural artifact can flow through two different economies—at the same time—without interfering with each other. Access to the Prelinger Archives made Bennett’s practice much easier; instead of laboriously ripping scenes from VHSs and DVDs, she was now able to procure previously digitized films, which could easily be tagged, edited, and repurposed. Bennett’s earliest films are a series of shorts made as music videos for her CD Thermos Explorer (2000). Yet unlike most music videos, Bennett used a reverse process. In the late 1990s, she received a bunch of VHS footage of old educational and industrial films from a friend in her mail network. She loved the dated sound of these films—stiff, white, authoritative, male narration over easy- listening music. She ripped the soundtracks from them, remixed them slightly, and released them as stand-alone audio pieces. A year or two later, when the Prelinger Archives went online, Bennett found these same films there, downloaded them in digital form, and soon forged a friendship with Rick Prelinger, who would digitize films upon her special request, which she would remix to correspond with the audio works as sort of reverse ready-made music videos. She soon began downloading films en masse from Prelinger, stitching together found footage from the 1950s similar to Duck and Cover to create works such as The Remote Controller (2003). Clocking in at a mere nine minutes, the film disassembles masculinity through the metaphors of the Cold War and its machinery. One scene shows two boys and their toys, remote controls in their hands, gazing up at the night sky as a deadpan narrator intones, “This work doesn’t even require separate motors, while the driver contains just enough of the control to be the real boss at all times.” In another, we see a man furiously twisting a bank of knobs as the same narrator says, “In no other application does the use of remote control benefit us so much. Ours is merely the life task of remote control. Remote control is a big factor in modern living.” Circling back to reference Bennett’s own practice, remote control is also a large factor in the way she constructs her works—composing and filmmaking, sampling, and digital editing. Beginning in 1998, she began giving away MP3s of her work at no cost, reasoning that “the more you give away, the more people find out about your stuff.” Since the collapse of the CD industry, the common wisdom is that you’ll never make any money from the sales of physical media, and the only way artists can make a living is from incessant touring, an idea that Bennett refutes. Instead, she insists, a combination of various free and paid artifacts and performances works. She gives her work away for free on UbuWeb, while at the same time selling it on Bandcamp. Explaining this discrepancy, Bennett posits: “I think that people who are buying it are people who can’t be bothered to look for it online elsewhere, they’re coming from a different network. The people who buy my stuff on Bandcamp are people that I’ve never heard of. But I always know who the people are that buy my physical product. They’re fans who tend to buy everything I produce.”10 In a quarter of a century of remixing other people’s works without permission, she has had copyright troubles only once, when she mashed up Andrei Tarkovsky’s Stalker (1979) with The Wizard of Oz (1939). Surprisingly, the cease and desist came from the Tarkovsky end rather than the lucrative Oz franchise. While sitting through a screening of the notoriously languid Stalker, Bennett had an epiphany: the only other film that turned from black-and-white to color that she could recall was The Wizard of Oz. Making a mental note of this, she went back to her studio and downloaded both films. Viewing them side by side, she realized that beyond the color transformation, both are shamanic journeys in which the protagonist is forced to go through a traumatic experience. Loading both films into a video-editing program, she began running one film forward and the other backward from the point at which both go from black- and-white to color. She called the resultant film The Zone, which she describes as “revealing delightful harmonies and synchronicities both in images and narrative occurring far more than either pure chance would dictate or the imagination construct.... Most of all I wanted to see if something magical happened, like making a spell. And for me, that magic did happen.”11 She completed the film in two weeks, and it was written up in the London-based music magazine The Wire, whereupon the British Film Institute offered to screen it. The notice of the screening caught the eye of a Tarkovsky scholar, however, who was so outraged that Bennett would dare edit or alter the director’s work that he got in touch with Stalker’s Russian distributors, Mosfilm, who sent Bennett a cease and desist days before The Zone was going to be shown at the opening night of the Transmediale festival in Berlin. The British Film Institute cancelled the screening, as did Transmediale, which instead of showing the film projected a slide image onto the large empty screen: “Tonight you were supposed to see the video work The Zone by People Like Us. This work of appropriation art refers to two historic films: The Wizard of Oz (1939) by Victor Fleming is screened on the left, on the right Stalker by Andrei Tarkovsky (1979). ... But unfortunately the legal department of one of the copyright holders, Mosfilm, insisted on stopping the distribution of The Zone, which is why it has been withdrawn from circulation. Therefore we are not able to show the work right now.”12 The film was buried and never shown again, so Bennett was surprised when a few years later Curzon—the big U.K. cinema chain —got in touch with her and invited her to show The Zone as part of a Tarkovsky festival in their theaters. She wrote back, telling them of the cease and desist, whereupon she received a reply informing her that in fact Mosfilm had never owned the rights but were simply trolling, sending cease-and-desist notices to everyone (including the British Film Institute), who believed them without question. Upon further inquiry, Bennett learned that the true owner of the film was now Curzon, which was why it was doing the Tarkovsky festival and inviting her to be in it. For logistical reasons, things never worked out with Curzon, but Bennett is now free to show the film as she pleases. Bennett’s works can take decades of collecting, assembling, and editing. She’s constantly gathering material—scanning through thousands of films and editing out bits that attract her attention. She then tags them and files them away for future use. Certain motifs eventually tug at her, and she goes into her archives and begins to cull material related around a certain subject. Once she decides on a theme, she digs deeper, using every available resource—from social media to the web—where she harvests more focused material. Finally, when she feels she’s collected enough, she prints out the file lists and descriptions, cuts them into small strips, lays them out on the floor, and begins intuitively arranging them into complex navigational maps. Through that largely unconscious process, a film emerges. When it finally begins to take shape, she moves the storyboard back into the computer and begins constructing the film. A recent film is called The Mirror (2018). As the title suggests, it is organized around the theme of mirrors and reflectivity, samples of which she had been collecting for years. Where she used just two films for The Sound of the End of Music, here she mashes up scenes from the span of cinema history—from Metropolis (1927) to The Matrix (1999)—into a relentlessly dense and dizzying thirty-four- minute dream state. The amount of source material she used is staggering, comprising more than 300 films and nearly 6,000 audio samples. The film is a montage of footage of mirrors, reflections, surfaces, doors, water, escalators, revolving doors, windows, circles of Busby Berkley dancers, flashing lights, disco balls, and so forth. As the film progresses, these images ultimately break down—escalators start running backward, revolving doors jam, water overflows and floods, dancers spin faster and faster, and windows blow out. The mirrors eventually crack, then break, unleashing chaos and destruction as fires erupt and earthquakes devour entire buildings. As in a cubist painting, there are no solid surfaces in the entire film; rather, the images form a whirr of motion, with one scene sliding into another. Although there’s a vague narrative arc—from birth to chaos to death and back to birth—instead of telling a story Bennett displays the various—mostly paranoid—psychological states that occur when one views oneself in a mirror. The history of psychology and the mirror is well known, so Bennett sidesteps direct references to, say, Lacan, choosing instead to illustrate those psychological states with preexisting film footage. The soundtrack comprises sounds with metallic and repetitious tones: clocks, harpsichords, and looped samples of tinny pop songs. Sometimes the songs used refer to mirrors, as in the case of “Both Sides Now.” Other times the music illustrates on-screen content, as when she creates a mashup of the Velvet Underground’s “I’ll Be Your Mirror” and Don McLean’s “Vincent (Starry, Starry Night)” to accompany reflective nighttime footage of UFOs swiped from Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977) overlaid with scenes from The Ten Commandments (1956). The film is chock full of familiar movies, ripped out of context, run backward, and spliced together with other films. Bennett cuts Tippi Hedren from The Birds (1963) fighting off swarms of birds that enter a house through the fireplace with armies of chimney sweepers tumbling down fireplaces from Mary Poppins (1964). In one moment we see Cinderella gazing into a mirror, and in the next piles of dishes tumbling off shelves as passengers scramble up the deck of the sinking Titanic. Reminiscent of Scorpio Rising, The Mirror includes lots of campy religious content, such as Charlton Heston parting the Red Sea in The Ten Commandments and Linda Blair’s fitful possession in The Exorcist (1973). The last ten minutes get even more religious, with whirling parades of demons, columns of circling nuns, toppled altar candles that set crosses and churches ablaze, possessed priests, and frightened parishioners. The film’s final scene is a Blue Meanie from Yellow Submarine (1968) sucking the world and all its impending chaos right up into its nose, whereupon it disappears, sucked into a white void. Her hard drives stuffed with untold numbers of film and music, Bennett very well might go on recycling previously existing material forever. But that’s exactly the point. Remixing preexisting materials is a portal to new and unexpected connections, sensations, thoughts, and consciousness. Reflecting on her process, she gets to the heart of what is so transformative—artistically and spiritually—about her practice of remixing the world that surrounds her: We’re forever experiencing all sorts of things that we’re missing out on because we’ve only got two eyes and two ears; but our nervous system makes it necessary that we have to limit our appreciation through that. I try and make my art to be like the experience we get with our senses, but you know, collage is a very deep thing in that it’s many, many layers of things, and I like it that people bring their own experience to it, but obviously I’m in there too, because I’m obviously manipulating and affecting their experience as well, but hopefully in an elevating, positive way.13 I 8 ASPEN A “Multimedia Magazine in a Box” n 2002, UbuWeb received an email alerting us to a site called Understanding Duchamp, a lovely primer about the life and work of Marcel Duchamp. I wrote back thanking the sender for sharing the site with us, along with a compliment about how thoroughly researched and well designed the site was. A San Francisco book dealer named Andrew Stafford replied to thank me for my comments and then told me his story. Around the turn of the millennium, he had become infatuated with the potential to translate what was sitting on his shelves onto the web. He taught himself Flash and built understandingduchamp.com. “Fair enough,” I replied, “but why are you reaching out to UbuWeb about this?” He responded that if I liked his work on Duchamp, I should see his next project, which he had under lock and key, password protected. I responded that I’d be interested and was sent a URL. When I saw what was there, I couldn’t believe my eyes. Stafford had meticulously digitized the entire run of a legendary multimedia avant-garde magazine called Aspen, subtitled The Multimedia Magazine in a Box. Published between 1965 and 1971, each issue came in a box—resembling a thin typewriter-paper or multidisc LP box—crammed with booklets, phonograph recordings, posters, postcards, and spools of Super 8 movie film. Each box had an editor, and every box had a different theme. For instance, “The Pop Art Issue” (1966), designed by Andy Warhol, included items such as Lou Reed’s writing about rock ’n’ roll (“The only decent poetry of this century was that recorded on rock-and-roll records”); a forty-five-second lock-groove flexi disc of a feedback-drenched guitar solo by the Velvet Underground’s John Cale; a set of a dozen postcard-size reproductions of paintings by artists such as Jasper Johns, Bridget Riley, James Rosenquist, and Willem de Kooning; underground movie flip books containing snippets of Jack Smith and Warhol films; a collection of papers given at the Berkeley Conference on LSD; and a copy of The Plastic Exploding Inevitable, a Warhol Factory-produced one-shot underground newspaper. The next several issues were just as rich, focusing on topics such as Marshall McLuhan, minimalism, swinging London, performance art, Fluxus, and psychedelia. In all, there were 235 contributors, many of whom, such as Roland Barthes and Susan Sontag, were cultural giants of the 1960s (both Barthes’s seminal essay “The Death of the Author” and Sontag’s essay “The Aesthetics of Silence” found their first English-language publication in Aspen numbers 5– 6). Issues, sold by subscription ($4 an issue, $20 a year), were quickly snapped up by collectors and libraries. In its day, the magazine’s circulation was 15,000 to 20,000. Today, a copy of the “Pop Art” issue signed by Andy Warhol goes for nearly $23,000, while a complete unsigned run costs around $13,000. Aside from in private collections and dealers, today the physical Aspen issues can be found in museums and libraries, with limited access to the now- fragile materials. Stafford, who honed his web-building skills on understandingduchamp.com, turned his attention to digitizing a set of Aspen issues he acquired during the 1990s. Working a few hours each evening, he digitized the full run in about a year. He converted flexi discs into MP3s and, using a film projector, Super 8 reels into QuickTime files. He even adapted a seven-foot-tall Tony Smith metal sculpture into both a 360-degree QuickTime model that you could rotate and a cardboard model that you could print, cut out, and assemble in miniature. He re-created a piece by Mel Bochner— originally a series of seven transparent plastic sheets—into a web interface, whereby running your mouse over each one and clicking would bring the lower layers to the fore. Even in 2018, Stafford’s meticulous conversion is still an outstanding example of how materially based documents can be elegantly transferred to the web so that anyone interested can have access to them. No appointments made in libraries or museums: it’s all right there on your screen. But why did Stafford go through all this effort? Citizen-based activism promoting access to cultural artifacts. Stafford wrote me, “I was in the rare-book trade and was a big fan of Aspen, and it bugged me to see them vanishing into art museum collections where nobody would ever get to see them or read them. I thought getting the content in front of people would be a worthwhile project.”1 But back in 2001, when he created understandingduchamp.com, he was hit with a cease and desist from the Duchamp estate over his use of images. The estate demanded $3,125 at first; after Stafford pushed back, the fee demanded was lowered to $2,000. Stafford stood his ground, claiming that his use was a case of fair use. The estate finally went away, but the incident left Stafford rattled. “Arguing with one artist’s estate was headache enough for me,” he wrote. “I felt sure that posting Aspen on the net would bring 250+ more complaints. Who needs it? UbuWeb had earned a place as one of my desert island websites, Aspen seemed like a good fit, and you appeared unintimidated.”2 In December 2002, a month after UbuWeb launched Aspen, the New York Times wrote it up. When the reporter contacted me, I repeated the same thing I’ve been saying for decades: “Over the years I’ve found that people only come after you for rights when you’re making money. Since UbuWeb is completely free, nobody has ever really bothered us about rights.” The article continued: “[Goldsmith] said he removes entries when living artists complain, but that rarely happens. ‘Most artists who find their stuff on UbuWeb are thrilled,’ he said. ‘Avant-garde artists rarely expect royalties. They want an audience.’ ”3 The Times asked some of the original contributors how they felt about having their work online without their permission. Jon Hendricks, who edited “The Performance Art Issue,” said, “The idea was to get the information out rather than to think of it as property.” And the executive director of the Cunningham Dance Foundation had no objection to the audio of Merce Cunningham’s voice on UbuWeb without the foundation’s permission, stating, “The educational value of having Merce’s thoughts out there on the Web outweighs our motives of ownership.”4 Stafford remained concerned that his work would eventually be eroded by lots of tiny copyright claims—death by a thousand cuts, so to speak. “Losing just 10 percent of the contributors would reduce its [the Aspen collection’s] usefulness by at least half,” he told the Times.5 But his fears turned out to be a mirage; like so much copyright of avant-garde materials, few bothered to enforce them. Yet years later, in 2011, I received an email from a lawyer representing Yoko Ono, requesting the removal of all of Ono’s and Lennon’s films on Ubu. Not wanting to tussle with a multimillion- dollar estate with unlimited resources, I quickly apologized and removed the films in question. A few days later I received another request from the same lawyer saying that he had discovered Ono and Lennon’s Aspen materials (Lennon’s diaries and Lennon/Ono experimental audio works) and requested that they be removed as well. Keeping Stafford’s wishes in mind, I responded that I would remove the files if he wished, but I just wanted to ask you whether, in this one case, you might make an exception. The files you cite are from Aspen magazine, a multimedia arts magazine from the 1960s, and Ono’s works are very important to its history. About a decade ago, someone digitized the entire edition and we’ve been hosting it ever since. It was deemed so historically important that the New York Times wrote up the fact that Aspen was digitized on Ubu. The Ono and Lennon works are a part of this history and it would be really great if you’d permit them to stay. Would you consider giving us permission to host these few MP3s?6 Surprisingly, I received this affirmative response: “Provided you will take the referenced files down in the event we request so in the future, you may retain them on UbuWeb for now.”7 Nearly a decade later they’re still there. But not all stories end as peacefully. Eight years after the Cunningham Foundation said that having Merce’s words on Aspen was invaluable, we received a takedown notice in 2010 from the Cunningham Foundation on those exact materials. I politely referred the newer employee to the Times article and pled for clemency, to no avail. He insisted that the file—one MP3—be removed. But the claim turned out to be fraudulent: Stafford provided scans of the flexi disc, and there printed in bold letters were the words “Copyright: Section 12, Aspen Magazine, No. 5 +6.” Back when those recordings were made, Merce Cunningham didn’t bother to copyright them under his name, unlike the more business-savvy Ono and Lennon, who did. I sent the scans to the Cunningham Foundation, and to this day Merce’s recordings remain on the site, and Aspen as a whole remains completely intact. Aspen is as direct a precursor to UbuWeb as there can be. There’s a generosity in Aspen that I found inspiring. In the spirit of its time, Aspen proposed an alternative distribution system to the commercial galleries and auction houses. Aspen was utopian: What if elitist and unique artworks could be transformed into multiples that anyone could possess? While Aspen’s gesture was radical at the time, today the reformatting of physical artifacts is the way we often experience artworks. Instead of an emulsion-based photo, we have a representation of a photo on Instagram; instead of celluloid projected on a huge screen, we have a representation of cinema on YouTube; instead of a lusciously bound book, we have a representation of a book as an EPUB. And what of authenticity and uniqueness? Judging by the hundreds of artists who contributed to Aspen, they were delighted to do so (Aspen was done in collaboration with these artists). Politically and aesthetically, they were happy to make their work available to more than just a select few. More than half a century ago, Aspen proposed a more flexible understanding of an art object: that an artifact might have more value if distributed democratically than if squirrelled away, silently accruing value in a free-port warehouse halfway around the globe. One glimpse at the number of art-book fairs around the globe, where you can pick up editions and multiples cheaply, coupled with the abundant treasures of the web, and Aspen appears absolutely prescient. The magazine showcased artists adapting their meatspace practices to a portable mass medium. Several prominent artists such as Marcel Duchamp, Richard Hulsenbeck, John Cage, and Morton Feldman, for example, permitted their voices and music to be recorded on cheap plastic flexi discs, which at the time were mostly found glued to the back of breakfast-cereal boxes or bound into the pages of popular magazines. But between 1963 and 1969, the Beatles recorded an annual Christmas flexi disc for their fan club, which sometimes included experimental or noncommercial material, making Lennon and Ono’s Aspen flexi discs a natural fit. Included with Aspen number 7 was a flexi disc by John Lennon called “Radio Play,” where he twiddles with a radio dial for nearly eight minutes; it was published in the spring and summer of 1970 right as the Beatles were breaking up. In the same issue, Lennon published a miniature facsimile of his diary for 1969, which, at two inches by three inches, contained 132 pages. Each page is rendered in large—and largely illegible—script. Most daily entries are variations on the theme “got up. went to work. came home. watched telly. went to bed. fucked wife.”8 8.1. John Lennon, “The Lennon Diary,” 1969. Lennon’s sexist rejoinder was answered loudly on the pages of Aspen. More than 10 percent of the contributors in Aspen were women—not great numbers, but for its day better than average—and many of the works were explicitly political and feminist. In particular, Aspen number 6A, “The Performance Art Issue,” published in the winter of 1968–1969, featured several women whose works were focused on dismantling patriarchy and protesting the Vietnam War. Their contributions were taken from a festival at Judson Church in October 1967 called “Twelve Evenings of Manipulation,” which was curated by the issue’s editor, John Hendricks, a painter who, frustrated by traditional visual art’s inability to have a direct impact on the Vietnam War, became an activist and turned to performance art and happenings. Given the chance to edit an issue of Aspen, he reprinted documentary materials by artists that were a part of his festival. In an editorial note in the issue, Hendricks advocated the role of the artist as social activist: “This is a unique communiqué to you from artists who are concerned with the corruption of culture by profit. We believe the function of the artist is to subvert culture, since our culture is trivial. We are intent on giving a voice to the artist who shouts fire when there is a fire; robbery when there is a robbery; murder when there is a murder; rape when there is a rape.”9 Remaining consistent to Hendricks’s antiprofit motives, Aspen number 6A was the only issue distributed free of charge.10 An accompanying poem by Hendricks printed at the bottom of his editorial note made his feminist intentions explicit: our culture is not essential. our culture is a decadent play thing of the rich. our culture is a manipulator of the poor and oppressed. there is no “Black Culture” there is no “Poor Culture.” there is only a culture of the big prick.11 8.2. Kate Millett, No, 1967. Aspen number 6A features the second-wave feminist Kate Millett’s eight-page documentation of her performance at Judson on October 21, 1967, called No. She describes a large, closed wooden cage with dowels as bars that she built in the middle of a gallery for visitors to observe as a beautiful minimalist sculpture. After a short while, the viewers were led out of the gallery and made to wait. During this time, a few dowels were removed from the front of the structure, creating an opening. With the lights darkened, the audience was brought back into the gallery and led inside the structure. The missing dowels were then quickly replaced, and when the lights went on again, the audience unexpectedly found themselves imprisoned. Millett describes the piece and the process in detail, including the prisoners’ reactions, which swung from euphoria to severe paranoia. After an unspecified time, the prisoners literally broke the bars, opening up a path of egress, out of which everyone quickly flowed and fled the gallery, many quite traumatized. A mix of Stanley Milgram’s electric-shock experiments and minimalist art, Millett’s work was slyly critiquing power structures as they applied to the art world and addressing the larger political landscape of the time. The timing of the piece was intentional. She wrote, “The Judson series had been named ‘Destruction and Manipulation.’ This event was given on the day of the march on Washington and the Pentagon. Claustrophobia is appropriate on many occasions.” Although she expressed misgivings about the act of caging others, she felt the action was necessary to frame, in the most literal way, her ongoing battle against patriarchy: “Cages are not new to me: I have known them for a long time.”12 On October 20, 1967, the day before Millett staged her piece, Lil Picard, a sixty-eight-year-old artist and refugee from Nazi Germany, did a performance in the same series called Construction- Deconstruction-Construction, which was realized in Aspen as a four- page booklet consisting of notes and collages entitled “Peace Object.” Picard, who began performing in Berlin’s Weimar cabarets, brought that era’s song and pantomime into her protest pieces of the 1960s, which consisted of her performing exorcisms on symbols of power such as flags or media images of Vietnam War atrocities. For one performance, she washed an American flag, while the Warhol superstar Julian Burroughs spoke unscripted for half an hour about what was wrong with America. At Judson, she burned images of global violence in front of the audience. She then put the ashes in plastic bags and shone various powerful colored lights on them— white for purity, red and green for war and peace. She also hung a quilt from the ceiling and projected war imagery upon it, after which she washed it with clear water, turning traditional women’s labor activities of washing and cleansing into an antiwar, feminist statement.13 On October 19, 1967, as part of the same series, Carolee Schneemann performed DIVISIONS AND RUBBLE, which appeared in Aspen as two legal-size sheets of paper printed on both sides. Like Millett, Schneemann constructed a cage in the gallery—this time out of wire—to which she attached photos of atrocities committed during the Vietnam War. When visitors entered the cage, strong fans were turned on, blowing the photographs so that they slapped the visitors as they moved through the space. Schneemann wanted to create “an environment which people will have to destroy to enter it, to move in it: means of action altering action/means of perception altering perception. An exposed process.”14 To this end, the cage was packed with detritus from consumer culture—old clothes, food containers, discarded toys, dirty papers—that she found on the streets and through which visitors had to kick or climb over. The intention was to create an environment that was “grim, dark, and dirty.” The assaultive nature of the work, like Millett’s piece, was meant to physically engage the viewers in uncomfortable ways, making manifest the uneasiness and pain of the current political situation. Schneemann’s contribution to Aspen is at once a documentation of a performance as well as a prose poem. Sandwiched between descriptions of the performance are paragraphs of disjunctive word bursts (“STAR LUST ROCKET SHIP remember star lust lust lust to be star to be shaking sky ward lust”) and political musings (“those north americans hard stiff cold repressed brutality sentimentality wouldn’t hurt a dog might just kick a dog moving into icy psychic technological ‘cool’ have to turn them all on and on falling in love they are full of hope and fearful emotion”).15 Her intentional “destruction” of her text mirrors the intention of her installation and performance.16 Aspen number 8, edited by conceptual artist Dan Graham and designed by Fluxus founder George Maciunas, focuses on information-based art. In his editorial statement, Graham proposes that his issue of Aspen could be more than just an avant-garde artwork cum magazine. Perhaps it could be a critique of a magazine, one that “redefine[d] the magazine’s place in (and as) art in (and as participant in), the larger world.”17 He also saw how, as he explained in the mid-1980s, in the age of mechanical reproduction the image of an artifact would outlive the artifact itself, perhaps becoming an entirely new artifact: Through the actual experience of running a gallery, I learned that if a work of art wasn’t written about and reproduced in a magazine it would have difficulty attaining the status of “art.” It seemed that in order to be defined as having value, that is as “art,” a work had only to be exhibited in a gallery and then to be written about and reproduced as a photograph in an art magazine. Then this record of the no longer extant installation, along with more accretions of information after the fact, became the basis for its fame, and to a large extent, its economic value.18 “In the case of pop art,” he stated in an interview in 1994, “instead of taking things out of media, I decided to put them back into media. Instead of having a show that had a photograph and a critical piece of writing about the show to validate its meaning, the idea was to stage the entire thing directly in a magazine.”19 Like the art done by many others in the period when Aspen was published, Graham’s own work questioned the institutional structures of the artwork as well as its place in the traditional market system. By the mid-1960s, he rejected galleries as his primary art practice, instead turning toward media interventions. In 1968, he bought ad space in Harper’s Bazaar and placed a work of conceptual art in it. The piece, entitled Figurative (1965), is a photograph of a paper adding-machine tape that displayed columns of numbers. Taken on its own when it was created a few years earlier, the photograph was a sly play on the word figure, which means “number” and is defined as “especially one that forms part of official statistics or relates to the financial performance of a company” as well as “a person’s bodily shape, especially that of a woman and when considered to be attractive” (Oxford Dictionary of English). Graham was proposing that numerical systems were interchangeable with the systems by which we measure out bodies, or what today we refer to as the “quantified self.” Yet when this identical piece was published in a fashion magazine and wedged between two ads—one for Tampax and the other for a bra—it became a critique of capitalism’s intertwinement with, investment in, and exploitation of the female form (economic figure/female figure).20 8.3. Dan Graham, “Figurative,” 1965. In his loopy editorial introduction to Aspen number 8, Graham expounded on these ideas, proposing that all the works he selected for this issue could find another life as collaborations with advertising agencies, which would distribute these works in glossy magazines, as he had done with his Harper’s intervention. Because so many of these artists trucked in information and photography, the distribution through the mass media would replicate their artworks on an industrial scale, while the ad agencies would stand to gain in reputation by their affiliation with these artists. He also proposed that the revenue from these ventures should not only go to the artists but also fund exhibitions of their collaborative ventures that the public could attend for free (the corporations would naturally pick up the admission fees). Graham called this form of art not “information” but “in-formation,” claiming that the form and distribution of information and ideas are restless and ever changing. What appears in a magazine at one moment can reemerge as a museum exhibition elsewhere. And beyond that, the nonlinear nature of his editorial introduction had a purpose; he wanted to keep readers off balance so that their idea of what he was saying would constantly be “in-formation” rather than complacently settled and received as “information.” “In-formation” strikes me as a good way to describe the way cultural artifacts flow across our networks. When Word documents can become PDFs with a click, which can then be spammed to a listserv, which can then be printed out, the materiality of that artifact is constantly and restlessly “in-formation” while at the same time remaining “information.” Editorial/art and advertising have dovetailed in ways that Graham anticipated. What museum show today is not underwritten by a corporation? And, likewise, what corporation does not gain from an affiliation with prestigious artists, particularly ones with strong markets and the cache of “genius”?21 Graham’s Aspen editorial ends with a postscript, a visual poem entitled “Exclusion Principle” (1966), which is a cosmological schema —from the nearest to the farthest—rendered in eleven short lines: In addition to reconfiguring the universe as both “information” and “in-formation,” Graham displays a relativist map for what would become land art, encompassing everything from anthills to volcanoes. If media were one way of moving outside of the gallery and commodity system, then land art was another. Aspen number 8 featured a number of works by land artists, including a dense textual work by Robert Smithson. Beginning his career as a painter, Smithson gradually expanded his practice to include conceptual art, video, poetry, and critical theory, eventually exploring the nexus between the gallery and the wilds. Smithson never really stopped showing in galleries, but he found a way to bring nature into the gallery in symbolic form. 8.4. Robert Smithson, “Strata, a Geophotographic Fiction,” Aspen, no. 8 (Winter 1970– 1971). Smithson’s contribution to Aspen number 8 is entitled “Strata, a Geophotographic Fiction.” It’s a dense, all-caps text interspersed by photographic bands of rocks and fossils, structured around a progressive geologic timeline. Like Graham’s distances in “Exclusion Principle,” its timeline is vast, stretching from the formative Precambrian period 4.5 billion years ago to the Cretaceous period, the end of which signified the extinction of the dinosaurs. Crammed between bands of photos is a rambling text that feels like a transcribed notebook, containing citations from geological textbooks; lines of poetry; notes from museum visits; descriptions of rock formations, mud, fossils, and so forth. Part diary, part narrative, part fantasy, “Strata” accumulates lines of poetic text the way sedimentary rock forms in layers, one atop of another. Smithson’s piece is thought processes as geological metaphor, a visualization of the way one’s mind works.23 If a notebook could be seen as a geological timeline of knowledge and thought, could we begin to view other geologies of knowledge similarly? In The Archaeology of Knowledge, Michel Foucault proposes that the archive is similar to geological strata, formed through disruption (metaphorically earthquakes and volcanoes) and in a constant state of disruption by similar effects. He proposes that all archives are unreliable and always, as Dan Graham would put it, “in-formation”: “What appears ... [is] a series full of gaps, intertwined with one another, interplays of differences, distances, substitutions, transformations, a sort of great interrupted text ... describing systems of dispersion.”24 Smithson’s geological strata, interrupted by photographic bands, serve as a good illustration for Foucault’s theories. Both Foucault’s ideas and Smithson’s piece extend into the digital age, where sedimentary archaeologies of knowledge take the form of the database or computer directory. As in Graham’s “Exclusion Principle,” the ability to draw a line from prehistoric geological formations to computer-directory structures requires the leap of imagination that Smithson’s works inspire. When I open a folder on my laptop in a list form, I see a stratified visualization of knowledge resembling Smithson’s geologic timeline. There, folders and files are nestled atop one another, sorted by date. My UbuWeb folder, for instance, which contains the entire history of the site going back some twenty-five years, is legible to me in a quick glance. Like stratified rock, my most recently modified file sits at the top of the directory, while the oldest, last modified on October 1, 1996—a month before the site launched—is at the very bottom. Like surfaces of rocks etched by steady drips over time, my file ecosystem is in a perpetual state of decomposition. Occurrences such as viruses, crashes, and hackings alter directory structures the way earthquakes and tsunamis reconfigure geological formations. System updates render certain programs obsolete, petrifying their associated files. Smithson’s piece in the magazine is both a site and what he calls a “Non-site,” a materially based translation of an actual event, thing, or place into another—often symbolic—form. In this case, Smithson is taking a geological strata rock form and creating a textual nonsite, one that is mimetic and imitative; Smithson has transformed rock sediment forming in nature into a poem on a page. Smithson describes his nonsites this way: “Instead of putting something on the landscape, I decided it would be interesting to transfer the land indoors, to the Non-site, which is an abstract container.”25 He likens the nonsite to a map, which is a nonsite for geography, an abstract representation. In Smithsonian terms, the web is not composed of sites (websites), but of nonsites. UbuWeb is built on site—on my computer—then “displaced” to a server, where it creates a representation of itself, a nonsite (which we refer to as a “website”). But things become more complicated when on our websites we draw material from other websites, RSS feeds, and databases in order to create a page. In the early days of the web, site maps were often provided as ways of navigating a site; today, the map—Google—has truly become the territory. What we have ended up with is a chain of nonsites that stretch back over half a century. When the Aspen editors, for instance, took a 16mm or 35mm film and converted it to Super 8 so that it could be included in a box, they created a nonsite. When Andrew Stafford took that Super 8 film and made a MOV file of it, he displaced in into a second nonsite. When UbuWeb transferred Stafford’s MOV into an MP4 so it could be streamed on the web, then situated it within a vast archive of the avant-garde, it created a third and perhaps fourth nonsite. When a UbuWeb viewer streams that MP4 on her own computer, she displaces the film one more time into a fifth nonsite. Thousands of people watching that film and simultaneously sharing it far and wide create a vast network of nonsites, reminding us that the web itself is a giant Smithsonian displacement machine of infinite scale, as Graham put it, from “the cornea” to “the edge of known universe.” O 9 STREET POETS AND VISIONARIES ne day in the mail I received a wonderful book of visual poems. They were similar to Apollinaire’s Calligrammes but more detailed, dense, and intricate, resulting in hallucinogenic visionary images of stars, planets, and figures. As if that weren’t enough, the poems doubled as autobiography, recounting bizarre stories from the author’s life. One critic described them as “a cross of George Herbert’s poems in the forms of angels and altars, with Burroughs, Blake and the harmonies and fractures of jazz.”1 But perhaps the most incredible thing was that they all were made with a primitive version of Microsoft Word. I corresponded with the poet, a man named David Daniels (1933– 2008), and was later lucky enough to meet him a few years before he died—by then an old man with a long, white beard—and to hear his life story.2 In the 1950s, he was an up-and-coming New York School abstract expressionist painter. Bound for stardom, he said the wrong thing to a prominent member of the art world one night at a party—he wouldn’t tell me anymore details—and was expelled from the group. Shattered, he dutifully obeyed, and after kicking around New York for several years working odd jobs, he landed in Boston, where he drifted through the streets of Cambridge, looking for a direction. Unable to find one, he decided to cast his life to the wind by simply saying “yes” to anything that anyone asked him. At that moment as he was walking through Harvard Square, a young panhandler asked him, “Can you spare a dime?” David answered “yes” and gave him the money. The panhandler looked at him again and asked, “Can you spare a quarter?,” to which David responded in kind. This was followed by a request for a dollar and then five—all which David handed over—whereupon the fellow asked him if he could spend the night at David’s house. David acquiesced. Before long, David had a roommate. Word soon got out among the young panhandlers, acid heads, political revolutionaries, and hippies. In time, David’s house became a commune, which remained one of the largest in Cambridge throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Whoever needed a place to crash asked David, who always, true to his promise, responded “yes.” The house became a hub of activity, much of it illicit. When a prostitute asked him if she could turn tricks there, David said “yes.” Later, when one of the many prostitutes who became fond of David asked her to marry him, he said “yes.” He also said “yes” when she asked if she could have children with him. Over the years, David found himself in the position of a counselor to these young people, many of whom were MIT and Harvard dropouts. At the commune, he would hold group-therapy sessions, giving sage advice. In time, he became a sort of guru. And over the years, he simply forgot about his art. By the late 1970s, the commune was breaking up. Drugs had taken their toll, and at the dawn of the 1980s, with the appearance of AIDS, there was further devastation. One day David got a call from one of the earliest members of the commune, who at this time was residing on the West Coast and was involved in computers. He suggested that David relocate to the Bay Area. It turned out that many of the communards, shaking off their sixties and seventies bohemianism, had migrated West and were evolving into Silicon Valley moguls. To express their gratitude to David for saying “yes,” they purchased him a modest house in Oakland and gave him a life- long stipend. The only thing they asked in return was that David restart his legendary group-therapy sessions in the Bay Area, which he did. For nearly twenty years, he held weekly sessions in an East Bay warehouse for some of the most successful entrepreneurs in America. But the silver lining was that they gave David a PC loaded with Microsoft Word. Although he had never touched a computer, he began intuitively experimenting with Word as way to write visual poetry. It was in this way that, decades later, he reconnected with being an artist. Ultimately, he mastered Word, turning it into a way to create visual poems. Over the years, they evolved into baroque bodies of word art that he worked on every day until his death in 2008. David Daniels is a visionary artist. Like many outsiders, he was a refugee who dropped out from a more established field—the New York School—and began marching to his own beat. The works he produced bore the mark and sophistication of the New York art world but swerved far from its orthodoxies. I like to think that David, unlike more traditional outsider artists, is emblematic of the sort of visionary with one foot inside and the other out, straddling the world of “official” art and the world of imagination. David was white and male, and to have the luxury to drop out, you needed to have been invited in in the first place, a privilege less available to women, artists of color, and artists working in non-Western traditions. But the categories of insider and outsider often elide, and it can be difficult to tell who is who. Careers and canons are constantly being reevaluated; some outside artists are brought inside (Jack Smith, for example), and some inside artists are positioned more like outsiders when they work outside of the field for which they’re primarily known—as in the case of painter Jean Dubuffet and his electronic music. It’s this flickering, this both and neither at the same time, that hits UbuWeb’s sweet spot. I don’t think that anyone sets out to become an outsider artist. Most outsiders are simply artists doing their work, paying little attention to the mainstream art world. When they are “discovered” by the art world—as in the case of Rev. Howard Finster—they then are labeled “outsider,” a market term that enables them to be brought inside while still keeping them out. In spite of some attention, many working outside the mainstream remain there, while those who drop out of more inside scenes, like Daniels, don’t do so by choice but by necessity. Some of the artists I profile here—David Daniels, Bern Porter, and Nicolas Slonimsky—dreamed of being insiders, but in each case something went very wrong, forcing them to go it alone. Christopher Knowles, an autistic artist, was born outside but was brought inside by Robert Wilson. Jean Dubuffet, the consummate insider when it came to visual art, remained an outsider for his entire life when it came to his music. And what of their legacies? In these artists’ cases, not much. Unlike William S. Burroughs, the proverbial outlaw and self-appointed outsider who inspired dozens of widespread alternative practices, these artists have had a negligible legacy and influence at best. In the years after getting his computer, David Daniels was insanely prolific. He self-published two thick books, The Gates of Paradise (2000) and Years (2002), each in a limited edition of ten. The Gates of Paradise, written between 1988 and 2000, is 400 pages long and contains 350 visual poems composed entirely of alphanumeric text and printers’ characters. Each poem is a shape— human figures, animals, geometrical forms, cosmic bodies, body parts, and typographical abstractions. Although made with Word, they have the feeling of being woven, reminding us that the words text and textile derive from the Latin term texere, “to weave.”3 In some sense, Daniels feels like a folk artist. Gates attempts to cram the memories of a lifetime between the covers of a book. A fractured narrative of random events that took place over the course of Daniels’s life, the poems are as diverse as experience itself, recounting the pain of childrearing, telling harrowing tales of rape, and offering quiet meditations on death. The texts are a mashup of light verse, doggerel, list poems, snippets of dialogue, stories, and diary entries, written in long, unpunctuated, run-on sentences. Describing these “gates” elsewhere, Daniels writes that they “are paradisiacals of people, and animals, and objects, from dancing body parts in Las Vegas lounge singers, from Brooklyn Dodger fans to cyborg Babbits, from nerve wracked saints to L.A. bottom feeder rabbits, from lovely air heads to heads of state to heads of lettuce, from black holes to pear shaped planets, with one often transforming into another as the poems proceed.”4 Years, consisting of seventy-eight poems, is visually similar to the Gates, with several poems running on for dozens of pages. It’s a chronological autobiography, each poem narrating a year in his life. As an autobiography, Years is a bit choppy and doesn’t really correspond to the version of his life that Daniels told me, swerving in and out of fantasy. Sometimes the narratives veer off into arcane code names and self-invented mythological casts of characters. Other times Daniels falls into deep wormholes about mystical Jewish visions, lending a Talmudic flavor to the book (the Talmud also relies on the interplay of text as image). And there are long passages describing detailed sexual fantasies and encounters with various women. Language is often subservient to image; sometimes stories end midsentence because they have to be crammed into, say, a part of an animal or a genie emerging from a lantern. Printed in miniscule letters with variable spacing, these stories are nearly impossible to read. Yet making the effort to read them can be rewarding. For instance, the poem “1983” (fig. 9.1) takes the form of a squirrel. It recounts a lunch that Daniels had with a female friend at a hotel overlooking a spectacular view of nature, when all of a sudden their meal is interrupted by the appearance of a feral squirrel, who proceeds to wreak havoc on the patrons. The poem begins with description of the dramatic landscape in normative English but soon veers off into a Lewis Carrollesque erotic rhyming fantasy: “Yet someway humble in its grand / eur: Feelinq: Laying back on / cheap French park chair / like the antelope skin rust just un / der Cleopatra’s papyrus truss: The / brillo puff stuff under / dark Lady Mac Beth’s rough: The gentle p / uff under Gertrude’s rude puff: The / Huff hot fluff under / sweet Tatiana’s gossam muff: [sic].” The line breaks are determined by the image, running through the center of the squirrel’s body, from its paws to its serpentine tail, shattering Daniels’s doggerel into shards of linguistic disjunction. 9.1. David Daniels, “1983,” undated. As the book progresses, his skill with the Word program increases; the poems become more visually sophisticated, employing a battalion of fonts and printers’ characters, resulting in riotous colorful visual poems. It’s hard to believe that they all were done in Microsoft Word. Most people use Word to hammer out conventional prose, but Daniels reimagined the program as a poetry machine or tool to create images from words. Because of the labor involved, his “hand” is all over his work, lending it a warmth and humanness that much digital work lacks. Although other programs could have accomplished what he was trying to do in a much easier way—Adobe Illustrator, for instance—Daniels stuck with a basic word-processing program, out of which he wrought maximal complexity and beauty. Drafted into the Army Corps of Engineers in 1940 as an assistant physicist, the poet Bern Porter (1911–2004) was assigned to the Manhattan Project in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, an endeavor so stealth that its mission was unknown even to those working on it. He remained there until 1943 and then continued to work on the project at the University of California at Berkeley until 1945. After the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, he was horrified and as a result became a lifelong pacifist and devotee of the arts. From then on, he was involved with a parade of major American figures of twentieth-century art, literature, and science. He began a small press called Bern Porter Books that published avant-garde writers such as Antonin Artaud, Robert Duncan, Philip Lamantia, Kenneth Patchen, and Henry Miller. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, he ran a gallery showing then unknown Bay Area painters such as Richard Diebenkorn and Sam Francis. He bounced around the country, picking up teaching and scientific jobs, but was finally fired from an electric company after “it was clear that he could no longer fit into a team of scientists,”5 resulting in a stay in a psychiatric hospital for several weeks in 1967. Finally, landing back at his ancestral home in Belfast, Maine, Porter worked as a publisher, poet, and performer, putting out scores of self-published pamphlets, broadsheets, cassettes, chapbook, drawings, and books. Joel Lipman of the Maine State Library writes, “Though Porter worked on the development of television’s cathode ray, he never owned a TV. He had no phone. He neither owned a car nor drove. The Founds of 486B:Thy Future are indicative of his proximity to 1960-era mainframe computers, but he never used a personal computer.”6 By the time Porter died at the age of ninety- three in 2004, he was a cult figure: influential to a few but little known to the larger world. His archives, donated to the Ohio State University Avant-Garde Literature Collection, eerily resembled Warhol’s Time Capsules. Amid rare broadsides, chapbooks, editions, and artworks from some of the most important midcentury American artists were boxes filled with hunks of Styrofoam, unfinished scraps of pine, plastic soda bottles crammed with garbage, among other things, which to the untrained eye looked like boxes of trash but were in fact full of Porter’s “found sculptures.” Porter’s great passion was the found poem, the literary equivalent of a Duchamp readymade. Over the course of his lifetime, he made thousands of them by clipping chunks of text from magazines and newspapers and isolating them on the page. Running the gamut from advertising copy to recipe ingredients, these chunks became surreal and funny poems when taken out of context. In 1972, a big book of these poems, entitled Found Poems, was published but quickly fell out of print. Then in 2011 the book was reissued with a foreword by David Byrne. After tracing some of the precedents for Porter’s works—Renaissance pattern poems, Dada poetry, the books of Quentin Fiore and Marshall McLuhan, the lyrics of John Lennon—Byrne discusses how Porter’s found poems were the inspiration for Talking Heads songs. In the early 1970s, after encountering Porter’s work, Byrne was inspired to transcribe an entire broadcast of the game show The Price Is Right—commercials and all. Byrne writes, “The idea that holding this stuff up for examination might yield something was in the air. Somehow leaving it raw and unfiltered seemed the way to go ... it was simply meant to say ‘this is here.’ I continued making lists and questionnaires around the same time I was beginning to write songs. Obviously I was ready to receive this stuff.”7 9.2. Bern Porter, untitled found poem, 1972. In 2010, Mark Melnicove, the executor of Porter’s estate, got in touch with me, offering UbuWeb the PDFs of a series of five rare books collectively known as Wisdom of the Questioning Eye. In his introduction to the works, he wrote: “Bern Porter was [a] contemporary and mentor to many of the artists on UbuWeb. In acknowledgement, and gratitude, I am publishing five of Porter’s books from the 1960s here on UbuWeb, three of them for the first time anywhere.”8 For this series, instead of clipping individual elements from newspapers and magazines and presenting them as found poems, Porter presented entire newspapers as found novels. 9.3. Bern Porter, detail from Aphasia, 1961. He made them by taking stacks of newspapers, trimming the pages, and binding them directly into one-of-a-kind books. At nearly 500 pages, Aphasia (1961) is composed entirely of pages from the October 29, 1961, edition of the Boston Sunday Herald. Flipping through the book, you see snippets of stock tables, underwear ads, letters to the editor, and comics strips. Several images repeat over the course of the book, leading one to conclude that Porter simply went to the newsstand, purchased the entire stack of papers, and bound them as is. Another book in the series, 468B Thy Future (1966), is made entirely from computer printouts Porter stole when he was working as a low-level technician on the Saturn moon project at Huntsville, Alabama. Melnicove writes, The book is written entirely in computer code. These are instructions for the construction of the rocket to send the first men to the moon. Others at the time were trying to write computer poetry that made machines sound human. Porter turned his attention to poetry as unintentionally written by machines, in machine meter. This, Porter told us, is the poetry of the future: a poetry of numbers, repetition, function, gravity, and trajectory, redefining the standards of human emotion and tone.9 9.4. Bern Porter, detail from 468B Thy Future, 1966. Similarly, the book Dieresis (1969) is composed entirely of found black-and-white images from newspapers and magazines. The images range from the cropped legs of a swimmer to a shot of the latest modern kitchen to fashion spreads. Inspired by pop art, it echoed the paintings of James Rosenquist while anticipating the media-based work of artists such as John Baldessari, Barbara Kruger, and Cindy Sherman. With its randomly juxtaposed, seemingly endless images, the book also predicted image platforms such as Flickr and Instagram. 9.5. Bern Porter, detail from Dieresis, 1969. Porter was also a wonderful performer of his own works. UbuWeb hosts several recordings of him, including “Found Sounds” (1978), which features him reading from the phone book accompanied by ambient sounds made by improvisational musicians, rendering the banal names and numbers from the White Pages transcendentally Whitmanic. We also host an incendiary incantation of his poem “The Last Acts of Saint Fuck You” (1988), a monologue of an angry, old man on his deathbed, reciting a litany of revenge for all who have wronged him during his lifetime. In performing this list poem written in an abecedary form, Porter makes his dire pronouncements in a shaky, gravelly voice: “I, I, now the great Saint, I will get even ... all of those who have betrayed me, all of those who have lied to me ... I will get even. And I herewith pronounce my will, which has now been called, The Last Acts of Saint Fuck You. Fuck you, guys, I’m gonna get even.”10 From there, Porter growls and spits bile for nearly ten minutes. The poem begins with A: The abnegating of treaties The acidifying of alkalis The affiliating of bastards The aligning of booby-traps The ambulating of cripples The annulling of Covenants The assessing of polls And it ends with Z: The zeroing of gains The zesting of misery The zinging of drums The zipping of stays The zooming of dirigibles The zoning of beaches The zounding of oaths11 The piece very well might be autobiographical. At the end of his life, Porter was neglected, living in poverty in rural Maine, sometimes subsisting on the food and drink he secured during openings at local art galleries and university museums. His biographer James Schevill writes, “Porter lives mainly on social security. He seldom cooks at home, where his refrigerator and oven are full of completed Founds [found poems] and found material instead of food.”12Although so many around him had gone on to success in the worlds of art and science, Porter followed the path of the outsider. A decade and a half after his death, although Ben Porter is still largely unrecognized in the art world, in the UbuWeb world he is a hero. Porter’s works spanned many media—books, posters, sound art, performances; his role as a curator was inseparable from his practice as an artist. In this way, he predicted a multimedia sensibility that many artists have adopted today, refusing to distinguish between curator, publisher, and practitioner. From the perspective of a time when most artists fluidly move from one medium to another—think of how on a laptop we edit videos, download images for our paintings, write novels, and make music—Porter’s practice feels ahead of its time. In his introduction to Porter’s Found Poems, David Byrne mentions that he was also inspired by the typings of Christopher Knowles (b. 1959), the obsessively beautiful series of works Knowles made on the typewriter in the 1970s. Like Porter and Daniels, Knowles had one foot in the world of high culture and another outside of it. In Knowles’s case, his status was marked by his autism. Hilton Als, the cocurator of a survey show of Knowles’s works at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia in 2015, writes about how his autism affected his artistic production: As a child he learned to speak through repeating and memory, such as recalling what the Beatles intoned, what songs were popular, and how his little sister, Emily, felt when she watched the TV. Recording his responses, Knowles’s early work was a startling combination of words and performance —the voice looking for an “I.” Knowles measures himself, as he becomes an “I” in his sharing and documenting of the regulating routines of life—work, eat, watch, play, listen, sleep. Knowles’s art ... places him squarely in the tradition of twentieth-century artists who opened a large window on performance production, interiority, and the shifting registers by which an individual’s voice enunciates against relative social settings and pressures.13 When Knowles was eleven years old, his mother gave him a reel- to-reel tape recorder, which he used to document the sounds around him. Like Vicki Bennett, he started taping things off the TV and radio, using those sounds as the basis for sound poems and performing verbal improvisations along with them, which he also taped. When a family friend passed one of these tapes to Robert Wilson, the avant- garde theater director was intrigued by what he heard, feeling he had found a modern incarnation of Gertrude Stein. “I knew it was clear in his mind, but I couldn’t follow it, so I transcribed the text, and it was visually stunning,” Wilson said. “If you looked at the piece of paper from far away, you could see the use of language was mathematical. There were patterns vertically, horizontally, diagonally.”14 Wilson invited the very young Knowles to perform some of his works live, which ultimately led to a collaboration between them, with Knowles commissioned to write the libretto for Einstein on the Beach. Many of Knowles’s texts and tapes came from songs and DJ announcements he heard on top-ten radio, which he’d then type out as long, repetitive poems (fig. 9.6). When he worked with a pop song, his text came close to the actual lyrics but would be slightly off, skewed, and lovingly warped. It’s not hard to see what attracted Wilson to Knowles’s work; like Wilson’s theater and his collaborator Philip Glass’s music, it’s at once pop and avant-garde, seductive and edgy. Here’s an excerpt of a Knowles poem based on Carole King’s pop hit from 1971, “I Feel the Earth Move,” which he used for the Einstein on the Beach libretto: I feel the earth move under my feet. I feel tumbling down tumble a. I feel the thing moving a lot. It could be it to start of a sound. This one. I feel everything now. It could be some movements of tribes. It is. It could get some interment like that. It could see your heart for. It could be the real thing, it could get us free, it could be shown up. It could be to know the shop well. It could get some leaks of looks. It could get some of those men to do.15 9.6. Christopher Knowles, “I FEEL THE EARTH MOVE,” 1974–1977. It’s a remix of Carole King’s song strained through Gertrude Stein. Although there’s no evidence that Knowles knew Stein’s work, the connections are clear. On Ubu, there’s a recording of Gertrude Stein reading her poem “If I Told Him: A Completed Portrait of Picasso” (1923): If I told him would he like it. Would he like it if I told him. Would he like it would Napoleon would Napoleon would would he like it. If Napoleon if I told him if I told him if Napoleon. Would he like it if I told him if I told him if Napoleon. Would he like it if Napoleon if Napoleon if I told him. If I told him if Napoleon if Napoleon if I told him. If I told him would he like it would he like it if I told him.16 For Wilson, collaborating with Knowles was like discovering a lost link between modernism and top-ten radio. In 1974, Knowles wrote the libretto for Wilson’s opera A Letter for Queen Victoria, which we host in its entirety on UbuWeb. Like the libretto for Einstein, it’s full of grammatical swerves, creative misspellings, and hypnotic repetitions. The libretto begins with a fictitious letter from Queen Victoria that the then fifteen-year-old Knowles dreamed up on the spot one day when, while hanging around with Wilson, he blurted out of the blue: “Dear Madam, most gracious of Ladies, albeit in no way possessed of the honor of an introduction and indeed infinitely removed of the deserving of it....” Astonished, Wilson asked him what that was, and Knowles answered: “A letter to Queen Victoria.”17 An opera was born. The opera begins with Knowles’s letter and then proceeds into a nonnarrative verbal chaos so extreme that a Time reviewer claimed that “in the realm of language [Wilson] makes Gertrude Stein at her murkiest sound like a paragon of pellucid clarity,”18 which was exactly Wilson’s point. The libretto is set in all capital letters, and all the voices in the piece speak simultaneously, echoing the Dada sound poetry of Richard Huelsenbeck, Marcel Janco, and Tristan Tzara, who in 1916 delivered a text, “L’amiral cherche une maison à louer,” to be performed simultaneously in three different languages in order to purposely confound linear comprehension. A section of the A Letter for Queen Victoria libretto reads: YEAH YEAH THE SUNDANCE WAS BEAUTIFUL THE SUNDANCE KID WAS BEAUTIFUL BECAUSE HE WAS BEAUTIFUL VERY BEAUTIFUL THE BEAUTIFUL SUNDANCE KID THE SUNDANCE KID WAS BEAUTIFUL THE SUNDANCE KID COULD DANCE AROUND THE SUNDANCE KID COULD DANCE AROUND THE ROOM THE SUNDANCE KID WAS BEAUTIFUL BECAUSE THE SUNDANCE KID COULD DANCE AROUND A LOT YEAH THE SUNDANCE KID WAS BEAUTIFUL YEAH BEAUTIFUL SO BEAUTIFUL SO VERY BEAUTIFUL19 It continues in this manner for five pages. UbuWeb hosts a recording of Wilson and Knowles reciting this section as a duet during the New Year’s Day poetry marathon at St. Mark’s Church in New York in 1975 (the recording was later released on John Giorno’s Dial-A- Poem Poets LP Big Ego in 1978). The recitation is just Wilson and Knowles trading lines—they make a great duo, Wilson clear and precise, Knowles muddier, slurring and stumbling over his words. The piece runs for a full eight minutes. At first, the audience seems amused—in the background you can hear nervous titters—but around the five-minute mark the audience begins applauding, attempting to end the performance. By six minutes, the room is filled with ambient conversation. For the remainder of the performance, the duo are met with catcalls and whistles. Even for a downtown audience accustomed to avant-garde performance, Wilson and Knowles proved to be too much. Coming from such disparate places, Wilson and Knowles meet in the murky middle ground of experimental art. Blurring the lines of inside and outside, they challenge traditional notions of the canon, and in the end it’s hard to determine who is inside and who is outside —which appears to have been their goal. Over the years, Knowles slid in and out of sight, often disappearing from public view for long stretches of time to pursue a rich studio practice of painting, sculpture, installation, and performance, occasionally reemerging to perform with Wilson in art venues. Although he has continued to garner attention—in addition to his aforementioned retrospective, a top-tier New York gallery represents his work—he remains mostly unknown, at least in comparison to his well-known collaborator Robert Wilson. Housed in UbuWeb’s Sound section is of one my favorite records. It’s an obscure LP that contains world-premiere recordings of modernist music from the 1930s by a fearless conductor named Nicolas Slonimsky (1894–1995). They are the premiere recordings by composers Edgard Varèse, Charles Ives, and Carl Ruggles. Everything about the record is forbidding. On the recording of Varèse’s composition “Ionisation”—written for percussion instruments and sirens—Varèse himself manned two sirens that he borrowed from the New York City Fire Department and is accompanied by Henry Cowell playing percussion.20 The rest of the musicians were recruited from the New York Philharmonic. Also included is the debut recording of Charles Ives’s “Barn Dance” from the “Washington’s Birthday” section of A Symphony: New England Holidays, a recording whose bill Ives footed (since nobody would publish or record his music, Ives always paid; his day job was as an insurance executive). It’s a lovely LP, full of dry, scratchy, mono sounds transferred from old 78-rpm recordings; hearing it, you feel as if you’re listening to the real thing, which, in truth, you are. Slonimsky was as radical a modernist as could be. Born in Russia, he was a child musical prodigy who went on to become a pianist and arranger for Serge Koussevitzky in Boston. After falling out with Koussevitzky, he decided to go out on his own to conduct pieces that no one else would play. He founded a small orchestra in Boston devoted to playing the work of difficult modern American music, becoming so adept at conducting these pieces that he forgot how to conduct the regular repertory, eventually forsaking it altogether. In 1931, he convinced Ives to sponsor a tour of these works in Paris and Berlin, which were met with great success. Confident that he was on the cusp of a revolution—German reviewers called his conducting “astonishing”—he was invited to conduct the Hollywood Bowl Symphony, where he directed five concerts in 1933. As Slonimsky later described the concerts, “There were all these old dowagers there who gave money and suddenly they were confronted by something called ‘Ionisation.’ They didn’t know what it meant. Finally they decided they didn’t want any of my performances, so that was that.... The bad reviews and the flight of indignant audience members resulted in an inglorious end to my conducting career. The word spread that I was a dangerous revolutionary who inflicted hideous noise on concertgoers expecting to hear beautiful music.”21 His radical approach, coupled with the changing political climate—the Depression and the rise of European fascism—made audiences impatient with formal invention and hungry for music that directly addressed the social needs of the day. However, one audience member, John Cage, who attended every one of Slonimsky’s concerts, later said, “Those concerts he conducted at the Hollywood Bowl were a great experience for me. They gave such a wide and rich view of twentieth century music and the twentieth century was quite young then. Those concerts were not popular, they were statements of belief.... Those concerts in the Hollywood Bowl were instrumental in changing my life.”22 For his contributions to the avant-garde alone, Slonimsky would have a prominent place in the UbuWeb pantheon. But a strange thing happened. By chance, he was also included in a collection of outsider music that we acquired called The 365 Days Project. The project’s description reads: “365 days of cool and strange and often obscure audio selections. Some words to describe the material featured would be ... Celebrity, Children, Demonstration, Indigenous, Industrial, Outsider, Song-Poem, Spoken, Ventriloquism, and on and on and on. The best thing to do is to simply listen.”23 Although nowhere in this collection is a hint of the avant-garde, it does include three songs Nicolas Slonimsky made late in his life that sound nothing like the rigorous compositions of Varèse and Ives. He sounds instead like a European-inflected Bern Porter—a cranky old man playing ditties on the piano, croaking out-of-tune songs. What’s going on here? Exactly the same thing that happened to David Daniels and Bern Porter: Slonimsky made the transition from insider to outsider. Just as Daniels was excommunicated from the abstract expressionists and Porter from the Manhattan Project, Slonimsky after his Hollywood Bowl fiasco was excommunicated from the world of conducting. After casting about for a few years, he began writing music criticism for the Christian Science Monitor, gradually finding his voice as a musicologist. He went on to write two epic tomes, Music Since 1900 and Baker’s Biographical Dictionary of Music and Musicians, along with many other erudite works of musicology. And like David Daniels after his decades-long absence from art, Slonimsky in time returned to playing his own music. But it wasn’t the same as before. He became a sort of cabaret act, interspersing his virtuosic piano playing and odd singing with stories from his life. He was charming beyond belief. The 365 Days Project recordings were part of a suite of songs he wrote in 1925 called Five Advertising Songs, which literally transformed texts found in ads from the Saturday Evening Post into lyrics, not too different from Porter’s fascination with the language of media. Slonimsky recalled: I was fascinated by the type of American language which found its reflection in the advertising section of newspapers, but particularly the Saturday Evening Post, which I read voraciously. I thought that those advertisements were extremely revealing of the Homo Americanus, or perhaps of our society in general. I was particularly fascinated by the advertising (incidentally not so much different from advertising that goes on in TV commercials now, but this was my first acquaintance with this type of advertising) where all you had to do was to use a certain type of toothpaste and then you had immediately acquired happiness and success in society and so forth. And then all kinds of ailments that could be remedied by pills. And such fascinating advertisements as “Children Cry for Castoria.”24 The five songs are “Children Cry for Castoria,” “Pillsbury Bran Muffins,” “Make This a Day of Plurodent,” “Utica Sheets and Pillowcases,” and “Vauv Nose Powder.” The ad copy for Castoria, a children’s laxative, supplied the lyrics for Slonimsky’s song: Children cry for Castoria! Yes, they cry for Castoria. Mother! Relieve your constipated child! Hurry, mother ... Even a fretful, bilious, feverish child Loves the pleasant taste of Castoria. Castoria, Castoria. O, gentle harmless laxative which never fails to sweeten the stomach and open the bowels! It never cramps or overacts. Ask your druggist for genuine Castoria. All the instructions are printed on the bottle. Children cry for Castoria!25 Although the songs were written in 1925, they weren’t published until the late 1980s. “Eventually, I decided to publish them,” Slonimsky wrote. “To my surprise, the Pepsodent Company refused to let me use their brand name, so I changed it to Plurodent, and revised the text accordingly. The nose powder went out of existence, so I did not have to bother about the copyright. Amazingly, the Castoria people gave me unqualified permission to use their name.”26 There’s a great video online of a one-hundred-year-old Slonimsky in a flannel shirt and suspenders belting out “Children Cry for Castoria” as he plays an out-of-tune upright piano in his Los Angeles living room, where he gives an extra yelp as his voice cracks “open the BOW-ELS!” But by that time, 1994, the tables had turned once again, and Slonimsky was a star, hanging out with the likes of Frank Zappa, who was taken by his tremendous aura. Zappa noted that “he had that look, a look of a real guy from that era; his shoes, his crinkled tweed sport coat, trousers that were too short, he was wonderful—a fully developed character.”27 Zappa had that album of Slonimsky’s conducting of Varèse, Ives, and Ruggles, a disc that was a huge influence on him. When in 1981 Zappa found out that Slonimsky was living in Los Angeles, he invited the eighty-seven-year-old former conductor to his house to play a few piano pieces. The next night Slonimsky appeared onstage with Zappa, accompanying the band on an older song, “A Pound for a Brown,” improvising on electric piano and taking an abstract solo, while the Mothers of Invention wailed behind him. From then on, Slonimsky made occasional appearances with the Mothers. The Washington Post reported: “In the spring of 1981 Frank Zappa of the Mothers of Invention filled Santa Monica’s Coliseum for one of his wild, high-decibel extravaganzas. The high point came when Zappa introduced ‘our national treasure,’ Nicolas Slonimsky, who performed a section of his avant-garde Minitudes on electric piano to deafening applause.”28 And so it swings—from insider to outsider and back again.29 There’s another wonderful composer on UbuWeb whose works fall somewhere between cacophonous modern classical music and free jazz. They are full of warped layered tapes, scratchy out-of-tune violins, various exotic instruments, prepared guitars, and batteries of percussion; on occasion, multitracked voices weave in and out of the din. It’s one of the more popular pages on Ubu. The composer’s name is Jean Dubuffet (1901–1985). Many of UbuWeb’s fans discover later that he also happened to be a famous painter. When these works were recorded in the early 1960s, Dubuffet had little knowledge of contemporary music, nor was he familiar with serialism, dodecaphony, electronic music, or musique concrète; in fact, it wasn’t until 1973 that he first heard those terms. His music instead grew out of jam sessions in the studio of his friend, the Danish COBRA painter Asger Jorn. Both were barely trained musicians—Dubuffet played a bit of piano, and Jorn a little trumpet and violin. They brought an old piano into the studio, turned on the tape recorder, and began playing. Over time, they added a battery of exotic instruments, including Saharan flutes, hurdy-gurdys, zithers, xylophones, and French folk instruments such as cabrettes and bombardes. They never learned how to play any of the instruments “correctly,” instead simply improvising. They also had no experience of recording technology, so their sessions were caught on amateur equipment and were full of dropouts, flaws, and ambient street noises, which Dubuffet found essential, believing those ruptures essential to break down the borders between art and everyday life. Like his art brut (raw art), he sought a dirtiness in both the playing and the production of his music; he’d often walk around Paris with his tape recorder, grabbing sounds off the streets and throwing them into his mixes. As time passed, he became more devoted to his music, transforming the better part of his house into a music studio. In between his sessions with Jorn, he’d become a one-man band, playing his fifty-odd instruments by himself, overdubbing the tracks. He’d then chop up the tapes with scissors and reassemble them in a process that echoed his thick, layered paintings. Dubuffet’s recordings, which were put out on tiny private labels as ten-inch EPs in editions of fifty copies each, were unknown until 1973, when the prominent Turkish electronic-music composer İlhan Mimaroğlu released a collection of them on his avant-garde label Finnadar. Mimaroğlu recalled that although Dubuffet was world famous as a painter at the time, only a handful of people knew of his music. Mimaroğlu became aware of it only after he composed a piece based on one of Dubuffet’s drawings, and the painter casually mentioned that he, too, was a musician. After hearing his music, Mimaroğlu claimed Dubuffet to be “the most original and revolutionary composer since Varèse.”30 Even though Dubuffet was totally inside the art establishment, his invention art brut romanticized outsiders, folk artists, visionaries, untrained artists, and prisoners who made art. Feeling that painting had become too insular and intellectual, Dubuffet wanted to disassemble all strains of professional art and destroy the complicity of insiders. Although it was impossible for him to claim to be an outsider painter because of his canonical position in the art world, he was able to actualize these attitudes in his music, making him the most inside of outsiders: In my music I wanted to place myself in the position of a man of fifty thousand years ago, a man who ignores everything about western music and invents a music for himself without any reference, without any discipline, without anything that would prevent him to express himself freely and for his own good pleasure. This is what I wanted to do in my painting too, only with this difference that painting, I know it ... and wanted to deliberately forget all about it.... But I do not know music, and this gave me a certain advantage in my musical experiences. I did not have to make an effort to forget whatever I had to forget.31 Dubuffet’s outsider attitude toward music preceded by almost a decade some of the more radical political strains of the avant-garde —namely, the effort to end artistic elitism by admitting untrained musicians into the ranks of the professional orchestra. In 1969, Cornelius Cardew, Michael Parsons, and Howard Skempton created the Scratch Orchestra, which was open for anyone to join who wished to do so; Gavin Bryars’s founded Portsmouth Sinfonia in 1971, which incorporated people without musical training into its ranks. Dubuffet also anticipated the idea of forcing professional musicians to deskill their practice in order to critique structures embedded in the musical world. For instance, Maurice Kagel, for his composition Exotica (1972), required his ensemble of highly skilled European musicians to play a battery of non-Western instruments as a way of critiquing colonialism and the dominance of Western music within the classical field. Similar to the moves made by Daniels, Porter, Knowles, Slonimsky, and Dubuffet, only by intentionally moving those musicians outside, Kagel felt, could they properly reclaim their status as insiders. I 10 AN ANTHOLOGY OF ANTHOLOGIES ’m stranded at an airport. To pass the time, I decide to listen to some sound poetry by Henri Chopin. I can’t grab my discs by him, nor can I access my MP3 collection, so instinctively I go to Apple Music. Taking a chance and plunking his name into the search box, I’m not surprised when I mostly get results for the singer-songwriter Harry Chapin. And though I like Harry Chapin (I grew up when “Cat’s in the Cradle” was an AM radio hit), he’s not exactly what I was looking for. But if I were, Apple Music offers me a seemingly infinite amount of his albums, compilations, and playlists, the most curious being “Dad Rock Essentials,” which in all honesty I’m tempted to click on. Apple Music is a pretty easy target—although, in fairness, it has lots of difficult music, such as Stockhausen, Cage, Feldman, and Xenakis, not to mention tons of great pop music—but UbuWeb’s Sound section fills gaps by collecting things that you’re not going to find anywhere else —or at least with as much context and depth. So whereas you won’t find much Henri Chopin on Apple Music, Ubu hosts almost everything he ever released, including sixteen full-length albums, interviews, and a collection of thirty-plus tracks culled from compilations. If I wanted to, I could listen to Henri Chopin on Ubu for a day or two straight. Chopin’s page on Ubu began when we digitized an anthology called Futura Poesia Sonora (1978), a sweeping seven-LP, sixty-track survey spanning a century, beginning with futurism and ending with a survey of sound poetry from the late 1970s, laying the foundation for our Sound section. The two Chopin tracks from Futura Poesia Sonora were the first MP3s on our Henri Chopin page. In fact, our entire Sound section began by absorbing that entire anthology onto the site. UbuWeb’s anthologizing of anthologies was a way for us to quickly build a collection based on what others before us considered to be important. We figured if someone went through all the trouble of sorting out obscure and esoteric types of culture and building an anthology, then it was probably worth absorbing that anthology into UbuWeb’s collection. Besides, anthologies are breadcrumbs leading us to artists and visions we wouldn’t have known about otherwise. It was also a way of easily expanding the site; by hosting a few anthologies focused on a specific type of music or literature on the site—say, for example, concrete poetry—in a short time we could have a fairly substantial section on it. UbuWeb began by taking two seminal anthologies of concrete poetry from the 1960s—one edited by Emmett Williams and the other by Mary Ellen Solt—scanning every poem in them, and making web pages for them. In a sense, those older anthologies acted as a framework or scaffolding upon which we were able to build our archive. What is the responsibility of the anthologizer? It’s hard to give a single answer. People anthologize for various reasons. We tend to want to give the anthology the benefit of the doubt when it comes to expertise on a certain subject, but as this book has shown, such acts are often riddled with problematic subjectivities. Perhaps, then, the best way to view an anthology is through the lens of error. Rather than seeing an anthology as totemic, maybe it’s better to see it as a tenuous and unstable attempt to try to make sense of a field. At their best and most honest, anthologies mark the beginnings of future conversations. My focus here is primarily sound anthologies. Although Ubu also hosts film anthologies and literary anthologies, its Sound section has more compilations than any other wing, some consisting of hundreds of tracks from hundreds of artists. What follows is a rundown of some of the key anthologies on the site. While by no means an exhaustive list—we host more anthologies that can possibly be written about here—the anthologies discussed here are some of the ones that helped make the site what it is today. I like to think of the list as a Baedeker of UbuWeb, an anthology of the anthologies that compose our anthology. The Tellus Cassettes and Giorno Poetry Systems Perhaps no collection of audio inspired UbuWeb more than the Tellus cassettes, a series of twenty-seven compilations released between 1983 and 1993. By smartly assembling compilations based on wildly diverse themes, the series respected few boundaries. The titles alone speak of their variety: All Guitars!, The Sound of Radio, Dance, Power Electronics, Tango, Video Art Music, New Music China, to name a few. Thrillingly eclectic, the cassettes were never academic; instead, their choices felt smart and intuitive, encouraging UbuWeb to follow suit. The artist Joseph Nechvatal and the curator Claudia Gould founded Tellus in 1983 as a subscription-only bimonthly publication and focused their distribution efforts on powerful institutions such as museums, galleries, libraries, and universities, where the compilations were absorbed into curriculums and written about by critics and scholars. In this way, many strains of sound art found their way into various canons. Although the entire series is inspiring, one cassette, Audio by Visual Artists, was particularly vital to UbuWeb. After we absorbed the Futura Poesia Sonora box, the Audio cassette broadened our scope to include audio work by visual artists. From futurist noise music to sample-based electronics, the cassette traced the arc of artists’ sound works in the twentieth century. It was here that for the first time I heard a recording of Marcel Duchamp reading texts in English from “A l’infinitif,” written between 1912 and 1920 and recorded for Aspen magazine in 1967 shortly before his death. Today, UbuWeb’s extensive Duchamp audio archive contains interviews, readings, documentaries, and recordings of his own chance-inspired musical compositions. It was also the first time I discovered that Martin Kippenberger fronted a punk band; and although I knew about Joseph Beuys’s felt and fat sculptures, I never knew that his prodigious audio output includes everything from sound poetry to orchestral works to new wave rock ’n’ roll. Through this cassette, I also encountered powerful sounds by women, including Joan Jonas’s reading of a Canadian maritime narrative accompanied by the sounds of foghorns and a piece by Polish sculptor Magdalena Abakanowicz that consists of nothing more than thirty-five seconds of her rough, hacking cough, a sonic equivalent of her rough-hewn figurative sculptures. Artists often treat sound as material—more like stone or wood or oil paint. And there is freedom that comes from not knowing what you are doing. After Tellus was produced, it was hard to make the claim that artists’ sound works were some sort of a sideline to their “real” work in painting or sculpture. What was once considered marginal or tangential now had to be considered central. The other major collection that served as a blueprint for the UbuWeb Sound section was a series of twenty-four LPs released by Giorno Poetry Systems from 1972 to 1989. Most of the tracks came from the poet John Giorno’s Dial-A-Poem service, through which, beginning in 1969, you could call a New York City–based phone number and hear a different poem each day. As in the Tellus cassettes, the material presented in this phone service was eclectic, ranging from an ethereal Frank O’Hara reciting “Having a Coke with You” to White Panther leader John Sinclair giving a political rant. When asked how Giorno Poetry Systems came about, John Giorno (1936–2019) said: The use of modern mass media and technologies by these artists made me realize that poetry was 75 years behind painting and sculpture, dance and music. And I thought, if they can do it, why can’t I do it for poetry? Why not try to connect with an audience using all the entertainments of ordinary life: television, the telephone, record albums, etc.? It was the poet’s job to invent new venues and make fresh contact with the audience. This inspiration gave rise to Giorno Poetry Systems.1 The phone company eventually pulled the plug on Dial-A-Poem due to legal threats from parents who became alarmed when their kids dialed in and heard poems about radical politics, sex, and drugs. In the aftermath, though, Giorno was left with a huge audio archive. Deciding to start his own record label, he began releasing these recordings as dense, beautifully designed LP compilations. The early discs focused on the adventurous poetry scene around St. Mark’s Church in New York, but the later ones became more eclectic, documenting the vast range of downtown Manhattan performers such as Meredith Monk, Laurie Anderson, and Philip Glass. By the 1980s, they expanded into pop and rock music, including tracks by Hüsker Dü, Sonic Youth, Cabaret Voltaire, and Giorno’s own new- wave-infused John Giorno Band. The recordings include Warhol superstar Jackie Curtis singing a heartbreaking rendition of “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas”; an epic, rambling poem by Patti Smith called “The Histories of the Universe” (recorded six months before the release of Horses); a recording of the Fugs singing their bawdy song “Saran Wrap”; a performance poem read by Claes Oldenburg; and John Cage incanting his interpretation of Thoreau’s journals. History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001) and Women in Electronic Music (1938–1990) For many years, there was a collection of sixty-two CDs called History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001) floating around torrent sites. But because of its size—in the early days of the web, even downloading a single CD could be arduous—the collection was nearly impossible to download, and before long it ran out of seeders, becoming unavailable. The set was shrouded in mystery: there was scant information about it other than that it was compiled by an anonymous Brazilian student. Over the years, as its mythic reputation grew, I wanted to track it down, which I finally did when it appeared on a private file-sharing group. I downloaded it and posted it on Ubu, where it remains today in its entirety. The collection consists of 476 tracks arranged roughly in chronological order, beginning with Olivier Messiaen’s composition “Oraison” (1937) for ondes martenot and ending with François Bayle’s revision in 2001 of his piece “Camera oscura” (1976). Some tracks are lengthy: Iannis Xenakis’s “La légende d’eer” (1977–1978) is a single track running forty-five minutes. Along the way are all the big names of twentieth-century electronic music—John Cage, Pierre Henry, Pierre Schaeffer, Luciano Berio, Luigi Nono, Luc Ferrari, and Bernard Parmegiani, to name a few—and many of their most important pieces, such as Karlheinz Stockhausen’s “Gesang der Jünglinge” (1955–1956), Pierre Boulez’s electroacoustic “Répons” (1981–1984), and Edgard Varèse’s “Poème electronique” (1958). As I recounted earlier, UbuWeb began as a site for sound poetry that grew into a clearinghouse for the “avant-garde.” Yet when we incorporated this anthology into the Sound section in 2011, it changed the site’s nature. Prior to this point, we had hosted very few modernist electronic and electroacoustic works, feeling that they were somehow too academic to fit in. But when we integrated these tracks into the collection, we found that they participated in a larger conversation about the avant-garde that had already been set into motion, be it regarding the electroacoustic elements that were part and parcel of sound poetry or the noisy industrial sounds that were the hallmark of much early-twentieth-century experimental music. Still, there were some problems. No women composers and few composers working outside the Western tradition had been included in History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music. We felt it necessary to post a disclaimer: This is from a 62 CD set called History of Electronic / Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001) that was floating around as a torrent, reputedly curated by a Brazilian student. It’s sketchy. The torrent vanished and the collection has long been unavailable. It’s a clearly flawed selection: there’s few women and almost no one working outside of the Western tradition.... However, as an effort, it’s admirable and contains a ton of great stuff. Take it with a grain of salt, or perhaps use it as a provocation to curate a more intelligent, inclusive, and comprehensive selection.2 A few months after I downloaded the compilation onto UbuWeb, I received an email from the mysterious Brazilian university student, who identified himself as Caio Barros and explained that when he began uploading the collection in 2009, he was studying electroacoustic music at a university. His professor burned sixty-two CDs from his own library and left them for his students to listen to. Barros popped the discs into his laptop, ripped them to MP3s, and threw them onto a file-sharing site. As for the blind spots, Barros requested that I post this note on the site: So I’m very proud and happy to see this here. I just want to clarify two things since it seems that my initiative became some sort of legend, which is very funny. First, my college is a kind of a center of the most traditional, western avant-garde electronic music, so I certainly agree that it leaves a lot of people outside, but leaving outside people working at the bounds of this tradition, and the area of Europe-America, was expected. I’m not saying that it’s fair! Second and last, although women are certainly an exception, I don’t believe it was intentional to have few works by women, it has more to do with the way our society and the tradition this music represent works.3 Fair enough. Although the compilation is an incredible retrospective focusing on a particular Western tradition, it’s also the impetus of a critique of the way that knowledge flows and an object lesson of how certain narratives are transmitted—told, taught, and reinforced—while others are omitted. Still, we couldn’t let the History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001) stand unanswered. So in 2015 we posted a response, Women in Electronic Music (1938–1990), a seven-hour selection of women composers curated by the Bay Area–based sound artists Jon Leidecker and Barbara Golden. Originally broadcast on KPFA in Berkeley, the series begins with a midcentury Theremin piece by Clara Rockmore and ends with a percussion work by the Romanian composer Ana-Maria Avram from 1990. Along the way are dozens of important and mostly overlooked experimental composers, including Delia Derbyshire, Annette Peacock, Cosey Fanni Tutti, Kaija Saariaho, Hildegard Westerkamp, and Diamanda Galás. As in the other anthologies discussed in this chapter, many composers from this series had their own pages on UbuWeb, or we built new ones for them, resulting in dozens more women’s works on UbuWeb. Leidecker’s interest in women composers began when he was making online playlists of electronic music and noticed that women composers had to wait much longer than men for their work to be released. Sometimes the wait period was as long as several decades, as was the case for Pauline Oliveros, who was fifty years old before she was given a chance to release a solo record of her own, even though she had been composing continuously since she was a teenager. He also noticed the contrary fact that users’ playlists on streaming services were heavily weighted with women composers, rebutting the overly familiar history told by the Brazilian collection. Finally, he noted that the gender gap in lineups at festivals of electronic music was increasingly becoming a topic for online discussion. Leidecker mused, “People began asking why don’t more women make electronic music? And the real question was obviously, why don’t more people know the work of the pioneers?”4 Pooling their collective knowledge, he and Golden aired their first radio show featuring women composers in 2010 and continued to do additional research for the second and third ones in 2012 and 2017. Their purview was informed largely by the publication of Tara Rodgers’s printed collection of interviews with women in electronic music, Pink Noises: Women on Electronic Music and Sound (2010), and Elizabeth Hinkle-Turner’s book Women Composers and Music Technology in the United States: Crossing the Line (2006), which traces women’s contributions to electroacoustic music from the 1930s to the present. Leidecker and Golden’s radio shows built upon an earlier effort called Her Noise, which began as an exhibition focused on sound histories as they related to gender and held at the South London Gallery in 2005. Curators Lina Dzuverovic and Anne Hilde Neset conducted dozens of interviews and compiled sound recordings and printed materials, which would eventually form the Her Noise Archive, a collection of more than 60 videos, 300 audio recordings, 40 books and catalogues, as well as 250 fanzines (approximately 150 different titles), some of which found its way onto Ubu.5 Concurrent with Leidecker and Golden’s efforts was a groundswell of rethinking about the gendered terms of the electronic music canon. In 2014, Antye Greie-Ripatti’s NERDGIRLS a herstory of electronic music appeared as a Mixcloud file that featured fifty artists spanning fifty years of women making electronic music.6 And in 2015, the group Female Pressure—consisting of more than 1,700 female, transgender, and nonbinary artists—was founded to promote the visibility of these marginalized groups in electronic music. Inspired by an interview with Björk entitled “The Invisible Woman,” where she bemoaned the lack of photographic documentation of women at work in their studios, the group put out an open call for women electronic musicians to submit a photo of themselves working, along with a statement and a link to a website. Five hundred women responded, a firm rebuttal to the narrative set forth in the Brazilian anthology. Leidecker and Golden will continue to produce additional shows; they are confident that more works by women are finding their way to audiences, resulting in greater visibility. Leidecker is optimistic about the future. “Ideally it doesn’t need the frame anymore,” he says. “It’s not ‘music by women’; it’s the history of electronic music.”7 The Wolf Fifth Collection As I mused earlier, the instability of blogs and file-sharing lockers is heartbreaking. People spend years of their lives and expend tremendous effort sharing what they love with others, only to have the product of their efforts ripped down by cease-and-desist notices from labels. This is what happened to Wolf Fifth, a blog dedicated to preserving out-of-print avant-garde classical works on vinyl that was shuttered due to copyright threats in 2012. The blog had just posted its 151st album, a selection of string pieces by Arnold Schoenberg and Mel Powell on the Nonesuch label. The preceding 150 discs were a trove of rare vinyl records, such as the box set Music Before Revolution (1972), featuring difficult works by avant-garde New York School composers and their European counterparts. When the blog went down, there was the typical and sadly predictable comment stream from readers, consisting of thanks, sympathy, sorrow, and anger. I was one of those commenters: “I am the owner of UbuWeb and would like to preserve the Wolf Fifth blog. Please contact me and we can arrange something.” In late 2012, I received an email from a Canadian architecture student named Justin Lacko, who had been reading the comments. He wrote, “I was a visitor of the Wolf Fifth blog and I saved almost every release, save one or two that I missed due to removal because of copyright claims. I am a big fan of UbuWeb and would like to offer my assistance with providing my copies of the music for you. They have all been tagged to great detail. Let me know if I can assist.”8 Naturally, I responded with great enthusiasm, and we immediately began to work together to rebuild and stabilize the vast archive, and within a few years the blog in its entirety was preserved on Ubu. Vast and various like most blogs, Wolf Fifth seemed to be put together not according to any system but by passion and whim, narrowly focused on sharing obscure avant-garde classical LPs from the 1950s to the 1980s, with titles such as Polish Modern Music, Computer Music, and Musica cubana contemporanea. Housed within the Wolf archive are huge sublibraries, such as the nearly complete run of Deutsche Grammophon’s rainbow-colored series Avant-Garde from 1968 to 1971, more than two dozen solo and compilation LPs by important experimental European composers. There are also a number of the Prospective 21e Siecle series curated by François Bayle and Pierre Henry and released by Philips from 1966 to 1972, featuring futuristic metallic-ink covers and focusing on musique concrète, electroacoustic music, and electronic music. The series had an international bent, in particular with a four- LP set called Electronic Panorama, in which each disc was devoted to a single city—Paris, Tokyo, Utrecht, Warsaw. Wolf Fifth was curated by a classically trained percussionist named Luuk de Weert, who lives in Utrecht, Holland. While studying at a Dutch music academy in the 1970s, he had a professor who encouraged his students to listen to difficult contemporary music. Feeling his students were lacking delicacy, he had them listen to pieces such as Boulez’s “Le marteau sans maître” in order to teach them how to be more sensitive percussionists. De Weert became obsessed with modern music and began collecting as much vinyl as he could, which he later ended up digitally encoding so he could listen in his car or share them with his friends. When blogging happened, it was natural for him to share his rips with others. De Weert says, “Most of these LPs were not ever released as CDs and are out of print now. This incredible situation puzzled me. Why was all this important and groundbreaking music neglected? These compositions certainly were not intended for easy listening or background music ... but it seems that nobody was interested in publishing this important material anymore.”9 He began posting high-quality transfers along with scans of the front and back covers of his LP collection. He had a few guiding rules for the blog. First, everything had to be free. Second, he wanted the blog to be simple and functional, with no information other than the title of the album, a track list, a scan of the cover, and a link to the album. Third, he limited his sharing to experimental and avant-garde “composed” LPs from 1960 to 1985. Last, he insisted on providing the best-quality transfers possible. The blog was successful, at least by his standards, drawing more than a thousand visitors a day, but he began to run into copyright troubles. The Dutch publishing house Donemus accused him of copyright infringement and ordered him to stop his posts of its Composers’ Voice series after a complaint by a composer. Around the same time, he had problems with Schott-Music in Germany, which demanded €10,000 per posted album. In response, de Weert says, “I accused them of kidnapping cultural heritage, trying to kill a mosquito with a cannon. They see this material only in terms of copyrights and (legal) property, as if it were cars or houses or whatever. But music (and of course also literature, fine-art, etc.) is much more than a commercial product; it is a reflection of who we are and who we were; in this sense, it belongs to us all.”10 Although these companies never followed up on their threats, de Weert was rattled, finally surrendering in 2012, after only a year of posting. The acquisition of this archive extended the narrative UbuWeb had already been building with the History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music and Women in Electronic Music, once more expanding and complicating our notion of the avant-garde in new directions. The PhonoStatic Cassettes Writing to John Cage in New York from Paris in the 1940s, Pierre Boulez asked, “How do you compose so far from the centers of culture?” Cage responded, “How do you compose so close to the centers of culture?” Whereas many of Ubu’s collections arise from major urban centers such as New York, Paris, and San Francisco, the PhonoStatic cassettes were born in Iowa City; yet the community that produced them was global, fueled by the rise of mail art, which distributed the work of authors and musicians working far from the centers of culture. As publisher Lloyd Dunn commented, the remote location forced the PhonoStatic publishers to be independent: “The fact that we were based in the U.S. Midwest and, like many zine producers, outside of the cultural centers on either coast (and in which we could only participate vicariously) a certain amount of cultural self-reliance was necessary and desirable.”11 In 1983, Dunn began publishing PhotoStatic Magazine, which was precipitated by the rise of cheap photocopy shops. Inspired by Dada journals, punk zines, Russian samizdat, and situationist publications, the overriding aesthetic was the smudgy and dirty photocopy: “We wanted to explore the particular formal qualities of xerography; its expressionistic contrasts, its electric granularity, its charcoal-sketch visual timbres, its ability to fragment and unite disparate images using collage techniques, as well as the performance aspects of interacting in real time with the sweeping scan light of the machine, producing unique prints each time the start button was pushed.” Dunn saw the cassette tape as analogous to the photocopy: “In the same spirit, and with the same interests in mind, the PhonoStatic audio cassette series was begun a year after PhotoStatic’s first issue; and the VideoStatic compilation a few years later. It was not just xerox [sic] that interested us; we wanted to generalize the photostatic set of practices and apply them to all accessible media.”12 In the 1980s, the cassette underground flourished. Sandwiched between mail art and the MP3 revolution, cassettes were a quick and cheap way to get homemade music into the hands of a sympathetic worldwide audience. Mail art and the cassette underground were precursors to file-sharing networks; in fact, after the rise of the internet, mail art as a genre became moribund. The cassette underground was also a site of political and artistic resistance during the Reagan years, a portable revolution that arrived in your mailbox each day. In his introduction to an anthology of writings about the cassette underground, Cassette Mythos, Robin James talks about the thrill of picking up your mail: Every time you go to your mailbox you could be picking up little packages that contain impossible sounds.... It could be something that will pop in and totally blow you away.... Lots of possibilities: garage sessions of your kid sister’s rock band, or someone in a fancy home lab mixing incredible feats of science, or a pioneer of popular rock, soothing meditation, or difficult industrial noise.... [Cassettes] are tickets to many sonic environments. It’s probably not going to sound like anything you might hear on the radio.13 The PhonoStatic cassettes are representative of the sort of stuff that the cassette underground trafficked in: media sound bites, LPs played at the wrong speeds, bizarre answering-machine messages, amateur radio plays, cheap electronic music, sound poetry, B-grade movie soundtracks taped off of late-night television, punk rock, and audio letters. As opposed to Tellus, PhonoStatic had no mainstream cultural ambitions: “It is perhaps a reflection of our fragmented attention spans that many of our models came from bodies of work decidedly outside of the art world, but it is surely a reflection, too, of our skepticism of the value of these established venues,” writes Dunn.14 And all of it was free; there was never any expectation of monetary compensation. The full runs of PhonoStatic and PhotoStatic are part of MoMA’s Library Collection, courtesy of Clive Phillpot. RE/Search magazine It’s hard to imagine today how shocking it was to stumble upon RE/Search magazine in the early 1980s. It leaped out of a sea of grubby black-and-white newsprint punk zines, and you felt as if you were thrown across the color threshold in The Wizard of Oz. A heady mix of S&M, punk rock, and critical theory, RE/Search mashed high with low and modernism with camp, resulting in a stew of art, sex, and danger. Each issue was severe, slathered in bold graphics printed on thick paper stock and boasting glossy covers. The cover of issue 6–7, “The Industrial Culture Handbook” (1983), updated John Heartfield’s X-ray collage of Hitler swallowing coins with a photomontage of a skinny, male torso sliced open to reveal its innards, consisting of a set of hand-drawn machine gears. Using a color scheme of blood red and black, the issue felt like something out of Russian constructivism, which in fact it was—the layout and page designs were swiped from a Rodchenko book. Upon opening the book, you found interviews with edgy underground postpunk artists such as Throbbing Gristle, Survival Research Laboratories, and Johanna Went, all of which were illustrated with dark photographs of smoking factories and industrial-waste landscapes. Issue 4–5 (1982) had a striking black-and-white image of William S. Burroughs, dressed in his standard three-piece suit, tie, and homburg, staring with disdain at the reader, again set against an astringent red background. The frontispiece was nothing more than a stark page of vertical black-and-white stripes, resembling a piece by the French artist Daniel Buren. The table of contents, delineated by thick, black, quarter-inch rules—a graphical theme throughout the issue—listed only three features: one on Burroughs, one on Brion Gysin, and, once again, another on Throbbing Gristle. Spanning thirty to forty pages, each feature contained in-depth interviews, unpublished manuscripts, transcriptions, travelogues, chronologies, discographies, bibliographies, and critical writing by and about each of the subjects. The Burroughs section featured a lengthy excerpt of The Revised Boy Scout Manual; a novel that had been transcribed from 3 one- hour cassettes from 1970; some new and unpublished pieces; and a long interview. The Revised Boy Scout Manual is a series of short how-to texts cut up into snippets—how to use firearms, bombs, and explosive devices; how to assassinate enemies; how to foment biological warfare; how to topple governments; and so forth—and sprinkled with bits of prose and dialogue, all mixed up and glued back together again. The feature is peppered with photos of Burroughs with guns—Burroughs in a San Francisco garden aiming a hand gun, Burroughs amid spent targets at an Oakland shooting range, Burroughs cradling a 12-gauge shotgun with a sly grin on his face, Burroughs firing a Colt Commander with both hands. His interview is all about firearms as well. About the manuscript, Burroughs stated, “The weapons I wish to advocate are weapons that change consciousness—cutups, scrambling, use of videotapes, etc.” He discusses the potential of tape recorders to escalate riots and speech scramblers to misrepresent information, thus introducing the idea of fake news a half-century ago. One creative result of Burroughs’s gun mania manifested in his Shotgun Paintings. UbuWeb has a video of Burroughs in his three-piece suit outdoors at a shooting range in Kansas making the paintings by blasting at spray-paint cans placed in front of canvases. “The paint sprays in exploding color across your surface,” Burroughs said. “You can have as many colors as you want.” RE/Search was the brainchild of V. Vale, a Japanese American born in an internment camp in 1944 and a former member of the San Francisco–based proto-metal band Blue Cheer. Raised on welfare by a mentally unstable Seventh-Day Adventist mother, he bounced around in foster homes as a child—from a Polish family in Peoria to an abusive macho uncle to an African American home in Whittier, California—which made him feel like an outsider from an early age. He began compulsively reading and writing in journals as a life raft; no matter what home he was in, he could always get lost in his books, which ultimately led him to become a publisher later in life. In 1968, after leaving Blue Cheer, he went to work at San Francisco’s City Lights Bookshop, where he stayed until 1984. Surrounded by volumes of the City Lights Pocket Books series, which included Ginsberg’s Howl and Kaddish and O’Hara’s Lunch Poems, he quickly understood the value of a brand, even if that brand is underground—“aesthetics determine consumption,” he likes to say. Vale learned that anything that City Lights owner and poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti published in this series was going to be something worth checking out. He was also exposed to an incredible amount of used early and midcentury surrealist and avant-garde material passing through the store at bargain-basement prices. Vale would snap up copies of the legendary surrealist magazine VVV from the 1940s for $12 apiece—a day’s salary—which became one of the primary aesthetic models for RE/Search (today a single issue of VVV goes for more than $1,000, with a complete mint-condition four-issue set priced at nearly $10,000). Vale fell into San Francisco’s punk scene and in 1977 began producing a zine called Search and Destroy modeled on Warhol’s Inter/VIEW. It was a typically rough affair: a tabloid-size newsprint zine full of grainy photos and text that Vale typed out on an old IBM Correcting Selectric II. Modeled on underground situationist publications of the 1960s, Search and Destroy covered everything from the Cramps to the Dead Kennedys and offered long, thoughtful interviews steeped in politics and culture. The zine seemed to embody the line that Greil Marcus later identified in Lipstick Traces— that a certain lineage of the twentieth century’s underground avant history could be traced directly from Zurich’s Cabaret Voltaire Dada performances in 1916 to the original Sex Pistols’ final concert at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco in 1978. Search and Destroy went out of its way to make clear these connections between punk and the historical avant-garde. A typical article entitled “Anarchy, Surrealism, and New Wave” observed that “in a world terrorized ABOVE All by nuclear weapons, nothing better validates the surrealist perspective on life than the emergence of something like new wave, in which outrage and art combine to provide means for revolt to claim new terrain. In a world that has answered surrealism with expanded police supervision, new wave demonstrates that a truly corrosive sense of freedom is still the finest positive agent for the transformation of life.”15 Sprinkled with Breton and Nietzsche pull quotes, Search and Destroy was evidence of the intellectual richness of certain sectors of the Bay Area punk scene. The final issue of Search and Destroy was published in early 1979, a year after the Sex Pistols’ last concert, after which a media frenzy descended upon the Bay Area, documenting for national television what had previously been an intimate local punk scene. Vale recalls exploitative TV programs such as NBC Weekend highlighting the violence and showing footage of slam dancing and mosh pits, the very opposite of the political and intellectual milieu that Vale and others had worked so hard to cultivate. He took this shift as a sign to exit the scene and start fresh with RE/Search. With seed money put up by the record label Rough Trade, Vale intended RE/Search as a sort of postpunk publication, salvaging the ideals that had been lost after the Sex Pistols. Most of the punks he knew had moved on anyway, reading Burroughs, Gysin, Acker, and Ballard and applying those writing methods to their art forms. Drawing from the intellectuals and dropouts hanging around City Lights, Vale decided to emphasize the more avant-garde elements of Search and Destroy, while mostly leaving the rock ’n’ roll behind. Although he hired Tobias Moss (designer of the Life magazine logo) to design the new RE/Search logo (note the similarities), the first few issues of RE/Search looked like Search and Destroy—printed on the same smeary tabloid newsprint. But in place of band coverage was a dazzlingly eclectic content, featuring topics as vast as genital modification, Fela Anikulapo Kuti, S&M lesbian sex, cryptofascism, pirate fashion, and cannibalism. Vale began to see the magazine as a platform for his own personal brand of cultural anthropology (J. G. Ballard once referred to Vale as an “urban anthropologist”16), a notebook or clearinghouse of ideas of things that interested him, not dissimilar to the way Dušan Barok would use Monoskop decades later. Vale sensed that if you threw enough interesting stuff together in one place, something magical was bound to happen. When Vale left City Lights in the early 1980s, he went into the typesetting business, which gave him access to technology that would produce RE/Search in its full glory, rife with multiple fonts, sharp graphics, stunning photographs, and high-quality printing. The result was an entirely new magazine, one that documented the emergence of Bay Area Industrial Culture—a postpunk movement that romanticized urban decay as the basis for a postapocalyptic utopianism manifesting itself in various strains of music, performance, and visual art that arose in the wake of Jim Jones and the murders of Harvey Milk and George Moscone. Typical of this type of art was the work of Survival Research Laboratories, a collective of Bay Area programmers, hackers, and mechanics who built and programmed robots to do things such as fight with one another, throw flames, and fire projectiles. Part Jean Tinguely and part military weaponry, their works were something out of the dystopian novels of J. G. Ballard, sculptural illustrations of what happens when technology goes wrong. As Jon Savage writes in his introduction to the “Industrial Culture Handbook” issue of RE/Search, “Punk, by this time, had not gone far enough: its style had become a pose, window-dressing for packaging and consumption though the usual commercial channels. Something new was needed: what was there?”17 As time went on, each issue focused on a distinct theme. RE/Search numbers 8–9 (1984), clocking in at 176 pages—more book than magazine—was devoted entirely to J. G. Ballard. The eerie aqua-green cover was emblazoned with a solarized, colorized photograph of a rocket ship reflected in a plate-glass window with the word THEATERS etched into it. The photo, taken by the underground photographer Ana Barrado, was one in a series of scenes of crumbling modernism and dilapidated military-industrial complexes strewn throughout the issue, perfect accompaniments for Ballard’s dark, technology-inflected writings. Constructivist design elements from the earlier issues were carried forward to this issue, becoming a house style. The book documents for the first time the vast scope of Ballard’s career, including interviews, fiction, nonfiction, critical writings about his work, images of his photocopy collages, and extensive bibliographies. It concludes with a previously unpublished list poem, a riff on Joe Brainard’s “I Remember,” called “What I Believe by Ballard,” which includes lines such as “I believe in the body odours of Princess Di,” and “I believe in the history of my feet.” RE/Search issue number 13, “Angry Women” (1991), channels the anger of punk and redirects it in the direction of gender. Decades ahead of its time by advocating for trans rights and gender fluidity, the issue is peppered with sentiments such as “the very act of subverting something so primal and fixed in society as one’s gender role, can unleash a creativity that is truly needed by society—like a shamanistic act.”18 The channel through which this subversion might be achieved, according to its editors, is anger. Reflecting the punk milieu from which RE/Search emerged, they wrote, “Anger is an emotion which must be reclaimed and legitimized as Woman’s rightful, healthy expression—anger can be a source of power, strength and clarity as well as a creative force ... Could there have been a civil rights movement in the ’60s without anger?”19 The issue featured interviews with artists and thinkers as diverse as Diamanda Galás, bell hooks, Karen Finley, and Annie Sprinkle. Galás sums up the fusion of sex and revolution when she says, “Strong women ... I picture a life surrounded by the most fantastic women in the world ... women who are very powerful, very exotic, and even though they don’t have to be beautiful, it would be nice. I’d like to be surrounded by soulful, lovely, unusual, strong women, like in that Russ Meyer film—.”20 The stakes are nothing less than revolutionary; if patriarchy can be dismantled, so can binaries, opening up unknown possibilities: “We look forward,” wrote the issue editors, “to a society which will integrate the female and the male (and all other binary dualisms) toward a new, synthesizing consciousness, in which every individual can re-ignite the creativity within. And there are no shortcuts—every single assumption of our civilization must be challenged. Ultimately, everything must be rethought ... if we are to survive.”21 Packaged so gorgeously, RE/Search was a Trojan horse, bringing outré material into the heart of mainstream culture. Issue number 12, “Modern Primitives” (1989), kicked off the tattoo and body-piercing craze that began in the following decade. In 1983, with the publication of the “Industrial Culture Handbook,” the editors had coined the term industrial music. Their early support for marginal authors such as J.G. Ballard preceded by many years his mainstream reception through Spielberg’s adaptation of his novel Empire of the Sun. And the “Angry Women” issue dovetailed with the Riot grrrl feminist punk movement from that decade and anticipated today’s #metoo movement. Issue after issue of RE/Search was inspiring—“Modern Primitives,” “Incredibly Strange Music Vols. One and Two,” “Incredibly Strange Films,” “Bob Flanagan: Super Masochist,” “RE/Search Guide to Bodily Fluids,” “Pranks,” to name but a few. Suffice it to say that without RE/Search there would’ve been no UbuWeb. That whole project, summed up in the sentence “Every single assumption of our civilization must be challenged,” remains challenging and inspiring—not to mention unanswered and unfulfilled —as it was more than three decades ago. This notion alone gave birth to the future project that would become UbuWeb. I CODA THE GHOST IN THE ALGORITHM n today’s culture, choice—and perhaps taste—is increasingly dictated by curation algorithms—bots that scrape your web-browsing history and spit it back at you in the form of a recommendation of the next thing you should watch or listen to or buy. These algorithms have become very precise, creating infinitely looping, self-reflexive, cultural filter bubbles. With the rise of what Shoshana Zuboff has termed “surveillance capitalism”1—the intensive marketing of your data trails —discovery has given way to predictability; the more targeted your clicks, the easier it is to forecast where you’ll click in the future. The result is precisely targeted advertising—the tracking and surveillance of your online activities—a marketer’s dream. But the algorithm is just a string of code deployed to execute a specific task. The algorithm can also be programmed to surprise, as in its randomizing function, a staple of early web culture. When CDs appeared, the players had a shuffle function, something that was impossible with the LP or cassette. Putting a disc on shuffle was a way of breaking up well-known sequences of songs, of de- familiarizing old records. That sensibility did carry over to the web, where the algorithmic randomizer was used as a device to discover new sites—just think of everything from Google’s “I’m feeling lucky” button (which, until 2010, was placed alongside its “search” button on its front page) to Chatroulette, which brought you into contact with random strangers, producing, needless to say, a range of interactions and experiences. In its early days, the web was tinged with surrealism, employing its methods of drift, disorientation, and disjunction as ways of opening up new and unknown experiences, if one were so inclined. Similarly and historically, other strains of the avant-garde sought to challenge prescribed habits with a panoply of de-familiarizing techniques, be it cubism’s shattered painting surfaces or atonal music’s jagged edges or modernist poetry’s chopped-up words. In the avant-garde, formal innovations were often deployed as methods of discovery: nobody ever walked out of a concert hall whistling a Schoenberg twelve-tone string quartet, which was part of his intention. Instead, each time you listened to the quartet, you would hear something different. John Cage once said, “If you listen to Beethoven or to Mozart you see that they are always the same, but if you listen to traffic you see it’s always different.”2 The result was open-ended artworks, ones that denied singular readings—how you interpret that Schoenberg string quartet is equally valid to my interpretation of it—culminating in a situation in which the audience became, in a sense, collaborators with the works. This thread of communal experience was hard-wired into modernism—be it Gertrude Stein’s Everybody’s Autobiography, James Joyce’s “here comes everybody,” or Joseph Beuys’s famous claim that “everyone is an artist”—rejecting the singular and opting instead for the multiple, the available, the plentiful, the inclusive, and the democratic. These seeds of resistance to our algorithmic world nestled within the historical avant-garde might be worth paying attention to as they resonate in the digital age. I can possess a copy of an MP3, but I can at the same time share it with a potentially unlimited number of people. At a time when algorithms increasingly determine which cultural artifacts we engage with and which we don’t, it’s important to seek out alternatives to these automated, money-driven tastemakers. An algorithm isn’t capable of a perverse sensibility, nor can it replicate the capriciousness of human taste. When accretion isn’t mandated to proceed by logical order or recommendations made by a supposedly “intelligent” algorithm, other narratives become possible, such as the dérive, an unplanned journey in which people let themselves be “drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there.”3 Algorithms abhor surprise; they wish to cater to what you already know and like. Serendipity is the enemy of the mechanical. Enhanced by new technologies and the access the internet provides, UbuWeb favors older, warmer models of discovery, such as drifting through library stacks or a used bookstore and letting certain books jump out at you or rambling through a flea market without intention, allowing yourself to be pulled by intuition and whimsy. On UbuWeb, alphabetization is our algorithm—our resources are organized A to Z so that nothing is more prominent or promoted than the next. UbuWeb is nonhierarchical; this is not more important than that. Odd neighbors—world famous and completely unknown—rub up against one another, sparking surprising connections. On Ubu, you don’t need a “this is like that” algorithm because everything is like everything else; chances are that you will be interested in anything and randomly click on it because the site was assembled by humans around the broad theme of the avant- garde. This might be like that, but not for obvious reasons; their connections can be oblique and subtle or even counterintuitive or nonsensical—all sensibilities that algorithms are incapable of. Ultimately, the curation algorithm is transactional, a means of getting you to keep spending money. All of the popular algorithms—“people who watched this also watched,” “inspired by your recent shopping trends,” “sponsored products related to this item,” “frequently bought together,” and “customers who viewed this item also viewed”—would stall on UbuWeb because of the simple fact that there are no transactions on the site. UbuWeb is a human-driven work of sorting, curating, and archiving. In the end, the impulse to collect and gather is the impulse to preserve what we love and want to share, which became possible in new ways thanks to the web. By doing so, we write our own histories because—as demonstrated here in the case of obscure, challenging, and avant-garde materials—few are writing them for us. As the poet Charles Bernstein says, “I don’t have faith that mainstream interests will preserve protect and defend any of this work. For me, the activity of archiving allows it to exist. If we didn’t do this, it would be entirely lost. What would be preserved would be mainstream work, official verse culture. That is my work, organizing alternative forms of exchange. My goal is rather straightforward: Can you create spaces for cultural exchange outside of the dominant killing forces?”4 I APPENDIX 101 THINGS ON UBUWEB THAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT BUT SHOULD ’m constantly asked what my favorite things on UbuWeb are. So here are 101 things that live on UbuWeb that I think you should know about. The list is far from complete —thousands more are worthy. Rather, it is an invitation to you to explore the vastness of the site and find things that you might want to include on your own list. While I personally uploaded just about everything that’s on UbuWeb, there’s just too damn much for me to ever know it all. When I put this list together, I found myself discovering and rediscovering things I had no knowledge of or had forgotten about. Each time you reacquaint yourself with Ubu, like with any massive reference work, you find yourself lost in it, as if you had never experienced it before. God, it’s huge. Oh, by the time you get around to looking these things up, there’s a good chance that some of them might not be there anymore. So my advice to you is to consult this list and download things immediately. In fact, download the entire site—it is possible. Make sure your local library is much richer than anything you can find online. Don’t trust the cloud—even UbuWeb’s cloud. 1. Sean Landers, “The Man Within.” A manic twenty-minute rant by Landers, accompanied to the strains of Holst’s “The Planets,” about how he is the greatest artist in the history of the world. And the scary thing is that he actually believes it (http://ubu.com/sound/landers.html). 2. Hito Steyerl, Lovely Andrea. A personal journey filmed in Tokyo of Steyerl searching for the photographer of a photo series that she posed for as an S&M model in 1987 (http://www.ubu.com/film/steyerl_andrea.html). 3. Kelly Mark, “I Really Should.” A litany of procrastination, this fifty-minute poem lists everything Mark really should do but doesn’t (http://ubu.com /sound/mark.html). 4. Adolf Wölfli, Gelesen und Vertont. While you might know of this early- twentieth-century outsider artist’s visionary drawings, you’ve probably never heard his equally visionary music (http://ubu.com/sound/wolfli.html). 5. Lynda Benglis, Female Sensibility. Two women, faces framed in tight focus, kiss and caress. Their interaction is silent, muted by the superimposition of a noisy AM radio soundtrack (http://ubu.com/film/benglis_female.html). 6. Terayama Shuji, Photothèque imaginaire de Shuji Terayama, les gens de la famille Chien Dieu. Evidence that the great Japanese experimental filmmaker was an equally great photographer (http://www.ubu.com /historical/terayama/index.html). 7. Frances Stark, [THIS IS NOT EXACTLY A CAT VIDEO]. Kids on an unmade bed watching and reacting to David Bowie videos from the 1970s (http://www.ubu.com/film/stark_cat.html). 8. Stan Brakhage, The Test of Time. A series of twenty half-hour radio shows featuring incredible music and insightful commentary, hosted by Brakhage in 1982 for University of Colorado KAIR radio (http://www.ubu.com/sound /brakhage.html). 9. Arabic Calligraphers in Paris from the 1970s. A selection of intensely detailed visual poetry, mixing traditional motifs with modernist text-based designs (http://www.ubu.com/historical/arabic/index.html). 10. Alison Knowles, By Alison Knowles. A compendium of rare Fluxus performance scores, published in 1965 (http://www.ubu.com/historical /knowles/index.html). 11. Alfred Clah, Through Navajo Eyes: The Intrepid Shadows. A little-known Native American avant-garde experimental film from 1966 (http://www.ubu .com/film/clah_shadows.html). 12. Cornelius Cardew, Piano Music of the 1970s. Following his severe avant- garde period, Cardew composed and played gorgeously lyrical workers’ anthems (http://www.ubu.com/film/al_error.html). 13. Václav Havel, Audience. A rare samizdat recording from 1978, written by and starring Havel prior to his becoming president of Czechoslovakia (http://www.ubu.com/sound/havel.html). 14. Sophia Al-Maria, Mirror Cookie. A short video in which this Qatari American video artist critiques what she calls the “misogyny-industrial complex” of Hollywood (http://www.ubu.com/film/al-maria_cookie.html). 15. Louis-Ferdinand Céline Sings. Rare recordings of Céline singing his own lyrics, accompanied by accordion in the French chanson style (http://ubu .com/sound/celine.html). 16. Agnès Varda, Plaisir d’amour en Iran. A short film about a love affair in pre- revolutionary Iran, shot in 1976 at the Shah Masjed in Isfahan (http://ubu .com/film/varda_iran.html). 17. Electronic Music Review, Numbers 1–7. An important electronic music journal of the 1960s, with articles from leading composers and inventors such as Stockhausen, Rzewski, Moog, and many others (http://www.ubu .com/emr/periodicals.html). 18. Kathy Acker and the Mekons, Pussy, King of the Pirates. Acker collaborating with a punk band in the 1990s, sounding like a cross between the Pogues and the Slits (http://ubu.com/sound/acker.html). 19. George Antheil, Ballet mécanique. Written in 1924, an avant-garde symphony replete with seven electric bells, a siren, and three different-size airplane propellers (http://ubu.com/sound/antheil.html). 20. Yayoi Kusama, Kusama’s Self-Obliteration. A rare cinematic work by Kusama documenting her legendary “nude happenings” of 1967, overlaid with her famous dots and accompanied by a psychedelic music soundtrack (http://ubu.com/film/kusama_obliteration.html). 21. Claude Closky, The First Thousand Numbers Classified in Alphabetical Order. Exactly what it sounds like it is. An astonishing conceptual poem, even more astonishing in its simplicity (http://www.ubu.com/concept/closky _1000.html). 22. Hanne Darboven, “Opus 60, Symphony for 120 Players.” While you might be familiar with Darboven’s obsessive drawings and diaries, you might not have heard her gorgeously textured minimalist music (http://www.ubu.com /sound/darboven.html). 23. Crispin Hellion Glover, The Big Problem ≠ The Solution. The Solution = Let It Be. An experimental, Residents-tinged spoken-word record by the eccentric actor (http://www.ubu.com/sound/glover.html). 24. Morton Feldman, “The King of Denmark.” For sure, the only thorny avant- garde piece ever etched onto a flexi disc. Expertly played by legendary percussionist Max Neuhaus (http://www.ubu.com/aspen/aspen5and6 /audio5C.html). 25. Eliane Radigue, Interview with Eliane Radigue (December 11, 1980). Explores Radigue’s background as a student of Pierre Schaeffer and Pierre Henry, her compositional technique involving synthesizers and tape recorders, and her life as a composer and Tibetan Buddhist (http://www .ubu.com/sound/radigue.html). 26. Momus, The Creation Records. Six seminal discs by the singer-songwriter– performance artist–author made between 1987 and 1993, accompanied by original liner notes along with reflections by the artist on how he feels about those works now (http://ubu.com/sound/momus_hippo.html). 27. Lydia Lunch, The Gun Is Loaded. Performance video that trails Lunch in 1988 through a series of location shots in New York as she fires her spoken-word manifestoes directly into the eye of the camera (http://www .ubu.com/film/lunch_loaded.html). 28. Reese Williams, The Sonance Project. An entire LP made only of vocal snippets—giggles, breaths, and parts of speech—sequenced into gorgeously looped compositions (http://ubu.com/sound/williams.html). 29. Forum Lenteng, Massroom Project. The Indonesian art collective explores the urban poetics and diversity of Jakarta in a series of nine videos (http:// www.ubu.com/film/lenteng.html). 30. Hugo Keesing, Chartsweep. A compilation of five seconds of every chart- topping single from 1956 until 1992, beginning with Dean Martin’s “Memories Are Made of This” and ending with Whitney Houston’s “I Will Always Love You” (http://ubu.com/sound/keesing.html). 31. Kader Attia, Inspiration/Conversation. A video of two black men, face to face, blowing into an empty plastic bottle, described as “the sound of all of Africa wheezing” (http://www.ubu.com/film/attia_inspiration.html). 32. Red Shadow (the Economics Rock & Roll Band), “Understanding Marx.” Marxist hippie collective of the 1970s enticing you to join the team: “Read Marx and Lenin; it will really turn you loose!” (http://www.ubu.com/outsiders /365/2003/006.html). 33. Patti Smith, Early Poetry Readings & Rock Shows, 1971–74. Where it all started. Includes a poetry reading at St. Mark’s Church in New York in 1971, with Lenny Kaye on guitar (http://www.ubu.com/sound/smith.html). 34. Buckminster Fuller, Two Interviews with Damien Simpson. Bucky appears on the New Age TV show Psychic Phenomena, filmed in Los Angeles. Surreal is an understatement (http://www.ubu.com/film/fuller_21.html). 35. Silvestre Revueltas (April 4, 1967). An introduction to and overview of this underknown Mexican modernist composer’s work, specifically focusing on its intersections with traditional Mexican music (http://www.ubu.com/sound /revueltas.html). 36. Marcel Duchamp, Jeu d’échecs avec Marcel Duchamp. Rare in-depth interview with Duchamp five years before his death, where he discusses his entire career in detail (http://www.ubu.com/film/duchamp_drot.html). 37. Peggy Awesh, Beirut Outtakes. Found-footage montage, composed entirely of film scraps salvaged from an abandoned Beirut cinema (http://www.ubu .com/film/ahwesh_beirut.html). 38. Billie Whitelaw, performing Samuel Beckett’s Not I. A film showing only the actress’s mouth reciting Beckett’s monologue of fragmented, jumbled sentences (http://www.ubu.com/film/beckett_not.html). 39. Sound Experiments in the Russian Avant-Garde, 1908–1942. A vast survey of archival recordings by Dziga Vertov, Kazimir Malevich, Varvara Stepanova, Leon Trotsky, and dozens more (http://ubu.com/sound/russian _avant.html). 40. Furious Pig, I Don’t Like Your Face. An EP of a British group of rockers who mixed sound poetry with punk rock, sounding like a cross between Indonesian kecak and football chants (http://www.ubu.com/sound/furious _pig.html). 41. Ulysses Jenkins, Mass of Images. A recorded performance of Jenkins along with TV images that engages black stereotypes perpetuated by the American media (http://www.ubu.com/film/jenkins_mass.html). 42. Lipstick Traces, accompanying CD to the book by Greil Marcus. A survey of the underground, from Dada to punk. Especially notable for the recording of Marie Osmond reciting Hugo Ball’s Dada poem “Karawane” (1916) (http:// www.ubu.com/sound/lipstick.html). 43. Don Cherry and Terry Riley, Live Köln. Cosmic jazz meets cosmic minimalism. Pocket trumpets and bubbly synthesizers (http://ubu.com /sound/cherry.html). 44. Sara Sackner, Concrete. A documentary about the Ruth and Marvin Sackner Archive for Visual and Concrete Poetry, featuring more than 75,000 works of text-based art (http://www.ubu.com/film/sackner_concrete .html). 45. Brandon Locher, Conversations. Hysterical prank-phone-call chains that work their way across America, state by state, until all fifty are accounted for (http://ubu.com/sound/locher.html). 46. Steve Reich, “Livelihood.” An unreleased three-minute distillation of ten hours of back-of-the-cab conversations. At the time, Reich was driving a cab in San Francisco, which he bugged with a microphone, secretly recording conversations and noises, mixing them into a tape collage (http:// ubu.com/sound/reich.html). 47. Fuck You: A Magazine of the Arts, edited by Ed Sanders. Full run of arguably the most important mimeo-revolution publication of the 1960s. Raided by the police and shut down for obscenity (http://www.ubu.com/vp /FuckYou.html). 48. COLAB, All Color News Sampler. A collection of clips from an underground New York community-access cable show in the early 1980s, featuring political and socially oriented works by artists (http://www.ubu.com/film /colab_news.html). 49. Banksy, The Punking of Paris Hilton. Video document of an anticonsumerist action in which remixed Paris Hilton CDs were droplifted into record stores across the United Kingdom (http://ubu.com/film/banksy_hilton.html). 50. Jean Genet, Un chant d’amour. Jean Genet’s only film, which he directed in 1950 about gay life in a prison (http://www.ubu.com/film/genet_chant.html). 51. Theodor Adorno, “Punctuation Marks.” A short essay where Adorno says that exclamation points look like index fingers, question marks like blinking eyes, colons like open mouths, and semicolons like drooping moustaches (http://ubu.com/papers/Adorno-Theodor-W-Punctuation-Marks.pdf). 52. Andrea Fraser, Little Frank and His Carp. Filmed by hidden cameras at the Guggenheim Bilbao, Fraser literally follows the museum’s audio guide to the point of absurd sensuality (http://www.ubu.com/film/fraser_frank.html). 53. Rolf Liebermann, “Symphonie ‘Les Echanges’ Komposition für 156 Maschinen.” Scored for 156 machines, including 16 typewriters, 18 calculators, 8 adding machines, 12 hole punchers, 10 cash registers, 8 humidifiers, 8 telex machines, 2 metronomes, 4 bells, 2 doorbells, 10 claxons, 16 telephones, 40 experimental signal receptors, 1 forklift, 1 copy machine, and an elevator. No, really (http://ubu.com/sound/liebermann .html). 54. Georges Perec, “TENTATIVE DE DESCRIPTION DE CHOSES VUES AU CARREFOUR MABILLON LE 19 MAI 1978 (A. C. R.).” The Oulipo writer stands on a street corner in Paris for a few hours, describing in detail everything passing before his eyes (http://ubu.com/sound/perec.html). 55. Tony Cokes, Evil 35: Carlin/Owners. Political slogans writ large on brightly colored backgrounds, critiquing capitalism, corporatism, and ownership, set to a new-wave rock soundtrack (http://www.ubu.com/film/cokes_evil35 .html). 56. Musique Concrète Soundtracks to Experimental Short Films. A collection of lost music from celluloid featuring Joan La Barbara, Bernard Parmegiani, Pierre Boulez, Gershon Kingsley, Percy Grainger, and others (http://www .ubu.com/sound/concrete_film.html). 57. Alex Bag, Untitled Fall ’95. Videos from the feminist punk/DIY/camcorder movement of the early 1990s featuring Bag, at the time an art student, “playing” Bag the Art Student (http://www.ubu.com/film/bag_fall95.html). 58. Judy Dunaway, Unreleased Balloon Tracks. A serious classical composer whose instrument is the balloon. The highlight is a balloon rendition of Weill and Brecht’s “Surabaya Johnny” (http://ubu.com/sound/dunaway.html). 59. The Collected Rants of Francis E. Dec. Paranoid flyers with over-the-top conspiracy theories mass mailed to random people, businesses, and media all over the world. In the mid-1980s, a radio DJ recorded these manic audio versions of the flyers (http://www.ubu.com/sound/dec.html). 60. Alix Pearlstein, Two Women. By juxtaposing a live performer with a photograph of a nude woman cut out from a magazine, Pearlstein addresses the problematic relationship between feminism, desire, and mass media (http://ubu.com/film/pearlstein_two.html). 61. Amiri Baraka, A Black Mass. A recording of Baraka’s play accompanied by Sun Ra’s Myth-Science Orchestra from 1968 (http://www.ubu.com/sound /baraka.html). 62. William Forsythe, “Solo.” Wild solo performance by the legendary choreographer, capturing his frenetic movements across a starkly lit stage (http://www.ubu.com/film/forsythe_solo.html). 63. The Early Films of Gilbert and George. Black-and-white films from 1972 depicting stiff British leisurely, pastoral activities, such as drinking gin and walking in parks (http://www.ubu.com/film/gg.html). 64. Alex Harsley, A Look at David Hammons. Footage of Hammons making drawings by throwing a graphite-covered basketball at blank sheets of paper (http://ubu.com/film/hammons_look.html). 65. Peter Gidal, Clouds. A beautiful short black-and-white film of the sky, where a small airplane occasionally darts in and out of the frame. The epitome of structuralist film; the soundtrack is the hum of the projector (http://www.ubu .com/film/gidal_clouds.html). 66. The Free Jack Ads. A collection of notes posted on a public bulletin board in the 1980s by a guy proposing insane service swaps such as rides to Kennedy Airport in exchange for dinners with specific ingredients: “prime rib, loin lamb or filet mignon, 1 starch and a vegetable” (http://www.ubu .com/outsiders/jack/jack1.html). 67. Anna Akhmatova, “To The Muse.” A rare chance to hear the voice of Akhmatova reading an avant-garde poem in 1924 (http://www.ubu.com /sound/akhmatova.html). 68. John Cage and Morton Feldman, Radio Happenings I–V. Recorded between July 1966 and January 1967 for WBAI. Conversations between two old friends, relaxed, smoking, and throwing out ideas, full of laughter and long ponderous silences (http://www.ubu.com/sound/feldman .html#radio). 69. On the Passage of a Few People Through a Rather Brief Moment in Time: The Situationist International, 1956–1972. A short primer about the Situationist International featuring Greil Marcus, Malcolm McLaren, and Jamie Reid (http://ubu.com/film/si_passage.html). 70. Occult Voices—Paranormal Music, Recordings of Unseen Intelligences. Audio documents of paranormal phenomena, including trance speech, direct voices, clairvoyance, xenoglossy, glossolia with ethnological material, paranormal music, “rappings” and other poltergeist manifestations, as well as so-called electronic-voice phenomena (http://www.ubu.com/sound/occult .html). 71. Captain Beefheart, Poetry Reading. A collection of the avant-rocker reading his poetry and lyrics without music (http://www.ubu.com/sound/beefheart .html). 72. Louise Lawler, Birdcalls. Lawler turning the names of famous male artists into birdsong as a critique of patriarchy (http://ubu.com/sound/lawler.html). 73. Karlheinz Stockhausen, British Lectures. Seven filmed lectures given at the Institute of Contemporary Art in London, each lasting up to three hours and including musical performances. Exhaustive, exhausting, and exhilarating (http://www.ubu.com/film/stockhausen_lectures.html). 74. Jennifer Higgie, Ten Women Who Use Film. The former editor of Frieze introduces the work of ten women who were not previously on UbuWeb, including Spartacus Chetwynd, Fiona Tan, and Annika Ström (http://www .ubu.com/film/higgie.html). 75. Inuit Vocal Games. Astonishing Indigenous peoples’ sound works, where words and syllables are made by two people using their mouths and bodies as audio resonators (http://www.ubu.com/sound/inuit.html). 76. Benjamin Weismann, “Hitler Ski Story.” The Los Angeles–based writer intones a hysterical story about Hitler learning how to snowplow and toboggan in the Alps, accompanied by the saccharine strains of Vivaldi (http://www.ubu.com/sound/weismann.html). 77. Harry Dodge and Stanya Kahn, Can’t Swallow It, Can’t Spit It Out. Ms. Kahn is seen with a bloodied nose, a Viking helmet, and a large wedge of rubber Swiss cheese, rambling around Los Angeles, talking to the camera (http://ubu.com/film/dodge_swallow.html). 78. Keiichi Tanaami, OH YOKO! Groovy animated music video for John Lennon’s song in the vein of Peter Max–era Yellow Submarine (http://ubu .com/film/tanaami_yoko.html). 79. Chris Burden, “Send Me Your Money.” In 1979, Chris Burden got on the radio and begged listeners to send him money. He starts, “I can’t legally do this, but let’s just imagine that I am asking everybody who is listening to send me money.” His pitch goes on relentlessly for an hour (http://www.ubu .com/sound/burden.html). 80. Tellus no. 14, Just Intonation. A sweeping retrospective of classical, folk, and modern microtonal music (http://www.ubu.com/sound/tellus_14.html). 81. Robin Kahn, Jesus Christ Superstar. The full rock opera, a capella, from start to finish, sung from memory by the artist, who can’t keep a tune. Astonishing (http://www.ubu.com/sound/kahn.html). 82. Yugoslav Black Wave Cinema, 1962–1972. Two dozen rare experimental films from the country’s underground and oppositional cinema (http://ubu .com/film/blackwave.html). 83. Dariush Dolat-Shahi, Electronic Music, Tar and Setar. Minimalist-flavored Iranian electronic music based on traditional instruments, tape loops, and nature sounds (http://ubu.com/sound/dolat-shahi.html). 84. Bertolt Brecht, two songs from Die Dreigroschenoper. Brecht howls out ditties from Weill’s Threepenny Opera, accompanied by a cranky pump organ and an out-of-tune theater orchestra (http://www.ubu.com/sound /brecht.html). 85. 40jahrevideokunst.de. An epic retrospective of rare German video art from 1963 to 2004, comprising fifty-seven pieces. Includes Wolf Vostell, Joseph Beuys, Valie Export, Rebecca Horn, Rosemarie Trockel, and others (http:// www.ubu.com/film/40.html). 86. Howard Finster, The Night Howard Finster Got Saved. Audio recordings by the renowned outsider artist, featuring traditional folk and acoustic gospel recordings interspersed with sermons (http://www.ubu.com/sound/finster .html). 87. Karen Finley, “I’m an Ass Man.” A vital document of the culture wars of the 1980s, featuring Finley performing a powerful monologue about rape, misogyny, and violence against women (http://www.ubu.com/sound/finley .html). 88. The Complete Recordings of Jean Cocteau. Spanning three decades, an audio retrospective of Cocteau’s plays, poems, and songs, including performances by Cocteau, Edith Piaf, Francis Poulenc, Erik Satie, and Jeanne Moreau (http://www.ubu.com/sound/cocteau.html). 89. Komar & Melamid with David Soldier, The People’s Choice Music. Artist duo who created a poll to find out which music people most liked and disliked, then made recordings of it (http://www.ubu.com/sound/komar .html). 90. Marina Rosenfeld, Emotional Orchestra. An electroacoustic string orchestra performance for forty female improvisers (http://www.ubu.com/sound /rosenfeld.html). 91. Jacques Derrida Interviews Ornette Coleman. Two titans of twentieth- century culture discuss improvisation, globalization, and race as they relate to language (http://ubu.com/papers/Derrida-Interviews-Coleman_1997.pdf). 92. Alice B. Toklas, “Recipe for Hashish Fudge.” In this recording from Pacifica Radio in 1963, Toklas reads her notorious recipe, given to her for her cookbook by Brion Gysin (http://ubu.com/sound/toklas.html). 93. The Conet Project. Eerie recordings of mysterious shortwave radio stations that broadcast only numbers (http://ubu.com/sound/conet.html). 94. Erik Satie, Pianoless Vexations. A document of an eight-hour performance of Vexations on any instrument except piano, for which it was written. Includes versions for laptops, drums, guitars, and a bluegrass band (http:// www.ubu.com/sound/vexations.html). 95. Dance with Camera. Ten dances performed specifically for the movie camera, with the intention of being filmed (http://www.ubu.com/film/dance- with-camera.html). 96. RRRecords, 500 Locked Grooves. LP consisting of five hundred locked grooves by five hundred artists, each getting about two seconds (http://ubu .com/sound/rrr-records.html). 97. Marie Menken, Go! Go! Go! Sped-up films of New York City from the early 1960s, tapping into the city’s hyperkinetic energy (http://ubu.com/film /menken.html). 98. Jack Kerouac, The Northport Tapes (1958–1964). Kerouac reading from his work while getting drunk and occasionally singing along with Frank Sinatra records played in the background (http://ubu.com/sound/kerouac_northport .html). 99. James T. Hong and Yin-Ju Chen, Suprematist Kapital. Kasimir Malevich meets globalization (http://www.ubu.com/film/chen_suprematist.html). 100. Charlotte Moorman, Audio Archive. Includes collaborations with Nam June Paik, John Cage, and Ornette Coleman. Special bonus: a recording from Moorman’s answering machine tape, labeled “Lennon, Cage, Yoko, Thanksgiving, Paik. November 24–December 6th” (http://ubu.com/sound /moorman.html). 101. Mary Ellen Bute, Passages from Finnegans Wake. A beautiful and moving attempt to turn the most difficult book ever written into a film (http://www .ubu.com/film/bute_fw.html). NOTES Introduction: The Back Door 1. Telephone interview with Clive Phillpot, November 24, 2017. 2. Bob Dylan, in Martin Scorsese, No Direction Home, documentary (Paramount, 2005). 3. Marcel Duchamp, Affectionately, Marcel: The Selected Correspondence, ed. Francis M. Naumann (Ghent: Ludion, 1999), 343. 4. Description by John Coulthart, tweet, October 8, 2019, https://twitter.com /johncoulthart/status/1181689948203884544. 5. Dick Higgins, Modernism Since Postmodernism: Essays on Intermedia (San Diego: San Diego State University Press, 1997), 30. 6. Kimberly Jannarone, “The Political Fallacy of Vanguard Performance,” in Vanguard Performance Beyond Left and Right, ed. Kimberly Jannarone (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015), 6. 7. Andy Warhol, The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975), 145. 8. Kenneth Goldsmith, Wasting Time on the Internet (New York: HarperCollins, 2016), 96. 9. There is a UbuWeb Facebook group that we have nothing to do with. And years ago I implemented a public-discussion board, which quickly descended into chaos and noise, forcing me to pull the plug a few days into it. Part I: Polemics 1. “Happy Birthday, Ubu.com!,” November 30, 2016, http://custodians.online/ubu /. 2. The impending legislation in the United States to end net neutrality and similar initiatives in the European Union might change this freeness and openness. 3. Jefferson Graham, “Flickr Plans to Start Deleting Your Photos,” USA Today, February 4, 2019, https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/talkingtech/2019/02/04 /flickr-begin-deleting-photos-users-if-they-dont-pay-fee/2769812002/. 4. Go Daddy, for example. 5. Current examples include Critical Commons, the public-media archive and fair-use advocacy network that supports the transformative reuse of media in scholarly and creative contexts, and Njalla, an anonymous hosting and domain-name service run by Pirate Bay cofounder Peter Sunde. 6. MoMA hosts very little primary-source films and videos, even of the artists in its collection, for this reason, whereas UbuWeb, operating on no money, hosts more than five thousand. For the process of what it takes for MoMA to clear a single film, see chapter 2, note 6. 7. Yunsung Hong to the author, email, October 17, 2019. 8. Jed Lipinski, “For a Gallery at the Edge, Dame Is Born Tuesday,” New York Times, October 28, 2011, https://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/30/nyregion/birth- brings-attention-to-microscope-gallery.html. 9. Guy Debord to Patrick Straram, November 12, 1958, http://www.notbored.org /debord-12November1958.html. 10. Both Tim Reilly and Cory Doctorow have said versions of this. 11. Seth Price, interviewed by the author, February 9, 2018. 1. Folk Law 1. Mick Jagger, quoted in “Sir Mick Jagger Goes Back to Exile,” NNC News, May 14, 2010, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/8681410.stm. 2. Tim Davis, quoted in “RIAA Rent Party,” Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2003. 3. “File Sharers Settle Out of Court,” NME, October 1, 2003, http://www.nme.com /news/music/nme-1936-1383174, my emphasis. 4. Jason Schultz, interviewed by the author, November 22, 2017. 5. Peter Jaszi, interviewed by the author, September 12, 2018. 6. Author to Sharan Ghuman, manager, Anti-Piracy Unit PRS for Music, email, March 6, 2019. 7. Web Capio notice to the author, email, March 7, 2018. 8. Lloyd Dunn to the author, email, March 7, 2018. 9. Ken Freedman to the author, email, November 14, 2019. 10. Ken Freedman to the author, email, November 14, 2019. Freedman assumed that the archive was going to be used by radio stations and podcasters, but it’s used primarily by filmmakers, many of whom cannot afford to license expensive soundtracks for their films. Soon all sorts of filmmakers began using it, including the Obama administration, which used a track from the archive as a background soundtrack to the president talking. 11. Author to Maria Filingeri, email, November 1, 2018. 12. Jason Christie, “Sampling the Culture: 4 Notes Toward a Poetics of Plundergraphia and on Kenneth Goldsmith’s Day,” n.d., note 2, http://www.ubu .com/papers/kg_ol_christie.html. 13. William S. Burroughs and Brion Gysin, The Third Mind (New York: Viking, 1978), 18. 14. Yunsung Hong to the author, email, September 19, 2018. 15. Peter Jaszi to author, email, September 19, 2018. 16. Amy Adler, “Fair Use and the Future of Art,” New York University Law Review 91 (June 2016): 621, 623. 17. Peter Decherney, “Communicating Fair Use: Norms, Myth, and the Avant- Garde,” Law & Literature 25, no. 1 (2013): 7. 18. Kenneth Anger, quoted in Katrina Onstad, “A Life of Anger,” The Guardian, October 27, 2006, https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/27 /londonfilmfestival2006.londonfilmfestival. 19. Mike Everleth, “Martin Scorsese: Champion of the Underground,” January 20, 2010, http://www.undergroundfilmjournal.com/martin-scorsese-champion-of- the-underground/. 20. Decherney, “Communicating Fair Use,” 5. 21. Todd Haynes, quoted in Peter Decherney, Hollywood’s Copyright Wars: From Edison to the Internet (New York: Columbia University Press, 2013), 189. 22. Decherney, Hollywood’s Copyright Wars, 190. 23. Peter Decherney, conversation with the author, December 17, 2017. 24. Peter Decherney, conversation with the author, December 17, 2017. 25. Peter Jaszi agrees but interprets this legal stipulation slightly differently. First of all, the filmmaker had to be American—this stipulation didn’t apply to European authors. He feels that the copyright lay not in the first showing but if a copyright notice was present when the prints were first distributed. The purchase of a copy by a museum or a collector was a copyright-triggering event. Jaszi says that even the sale of a unique copy of an artwork—a single copy—constituted a copyright-triggering event from the artist to the buyer. Similarly, if a museum bought a copy, it was a triggering event regardless of when it was bought. Same for rentals. Once again, these arguments speak of the many ways that copyright law can be interpreted. 26. Peter Decherney, conversation with the author, December 17, 2017. 27. Andrew Lampert to the author, email, September 29, 2018. Lampert: “That is the argument made by Mary Jordan, the documentarian who stirred up trouble for Jack Smith’s estate, The Plaster Foundation, from whom she was licensing material. There is an issue about unfinished work perhaps having more copyright protection than legal work, so in Smith’s case this is tricky since so much was left unfinished and whatnot.” 28. Salvador Dalí, quoted in Deborah Solomon, Utopia Parkway: The Life and Work of Joseph Cornell (London: Pimlico, 1997), 89. 29. Andrew Lampert to the author, email, September 29, 2018. 30. Adler, “Fair Use and the Future of Art,” 563–64, 587. 31. Jason Schultz, interviewed by the author, November 22, 2017. 32. This unlicensed posting on social media may change if the European Union approves the controversial Copyright Directive, which includes internet “link taxes” and “upload filters.” 33. Amy Adler, interviewed by the author, November 14, 2017. 34. Peter Jaszi, interviewed by the author, September 12, 2018. 35. Peter Decherney, conversation with the author, December 17, 2017. 36. Adler, “Fair Use and the Future of Art,” 575. 37. Peter Jaszi, interviewed by the author, September 12, 2018. 38. Virgil Abloh, quoted in Thom Bettridge, “Virgil Abloh: Duchamp Is My Lawyer,” 032c, March 25, 2018, https://032c.com/virgil-abloh-duchamp. 39. Alder, “Fair Use and the Future of Art,” 617. 40. Peter Jaszi, interviewed by the author, September 12, 2018. 2. From Panorama to Postage Stamp: Avant-Garde Cinema and the Internet 1. All quotations from Andrew Lampert in this chapter come from this conversation on November 17, 2017. 2. Dominic Angerame to the author, email, May 11, 2016. 3. From this point, unless otherwise noted, all quotations from Dominic Angerame in this chapter come from our telephone conversation on January 6, 2018. 4. Keith Sanborn to the author, email, March 12, 2018. 5. Rick Prelinger, interviewed by the author, November 13, 2017. 6. But even those visual artists aren’t treated too well on the MoMA website. When I go to Alfred Leslie’s MoMA page looking for The Last Clean Shirt, it’s not there. Instead, I find only ten of his works online—all drawings—six of which tell me “image not available.” Even UbuWeb’s copy of the film with two- thirds of it missing was more than what MoMA offers. The same thing happens when I search on MoMA’s site for many filmmakers on Ubu; I get thumbnails of film frames, but no moving images. I find it strange that on UbuWeb we’ve got thousands of films, whereas MoMA, as far as I can tell, has none. Why is that? I asked Lampert. And this is what he told me: You want to put a celluloid film online. Alfred Leslie produces this film [in] 1964 on 16mm film. There’s a negative of the film that comprises two parts: one is the picture, the other is the sound. A film print is a positive that combines both picture and sound in one strand. Let’s say that MoMA wants to put something online and that they would want it in the absolute best quality. They would take the negative and scan it to digital. Then they would color-correct it, synchronize the sound, add onto the digital file any credits they need, such as a MoMA title card or the funder’s name. They then would have to make the derivative files, for the web an H264 file. So you have two costs, one is the digitization and the other postproduction. Most likely MoMA would do a twofold process, make a projection master that could be used in galleries and a derivative online file. I think that they probably don’t want to show scratched copies of films with splices in them or that are color-faded. They want the absolute best quality that represents how it [the film] would’ve looked upon its initial premiere. They want to make digital that looks as good as film, but they would want to do it to a very professionalized standard. So that’s where the costs come in. From there, the next question is, How prepared is their IT department to deal with these things? Because even if MoMA wants to put up that film—assuming they have five hundred films they want to put up—is it buried somewhere on the site with a complicated URL? Is it something you could ever find twice? They’d have to get Al’s permission—he may say no, he may say yes—but only for two years or only for education or with passwords and so forth. It’s one thing to deal with the artist that’s already sometimes thorny, but typically worse is dealing with the estates: the widow, his nieces, nephews, sons, and daughters who think that a place like MoMA—with a $25 entrance fee—should pay them. MoMA would probably want to put a contract up that even indemnifies them. Al’s film ... has a tune in it called the “The Last Clean Shirt,” written by Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller, and Charlie Otis, which he might not have cleared the rights for. MoMA would have assumed that the artist had done it or that the artist would have assumed the legal responsibility. So they would probably want to have a contract that indemnifies them from a legal suit. In terms of legal, what they would probably do is write up a blanket contract stating that they have permission, whether in perpetuity or for a period of time, the right to show the film online. If there is music or found footage in the film, it would indemnify MoMA, putting the liability back onto the filmmaker or estate if legal claims come about. In terms of fees, they may, as a blanket move, offer the estate something symbolic, like $25, or give no fee at all. Dependent upon how ornery the artist or the estate is, the wiggling around and negotiating on this contract, it could take a lot of time. What’s worse is that when dealing with estates, you’re dealing with people that often don’t know or understand the work who assume that the Anthology [Film Archives], just because we have a big building in New York City and a website, that there’s a ton of money there. This is a false assumption about the economy within the avant-garde; that’s just not the case. And with MoMA it’s going to be worse—but their argument would be that we don’t pay people because it’s MoMA, it’s status, and it’s educational. So, the bottom line is that if they had to produce a digital file, the cost to put up Alfred Leslies The Last Clean Shirt at MoMA’s site could potentially cost between $3,000 and $5,000 and take months, if not years, to wrangle. And that’s just one film. (Andrew Lampert, conversation with the author, November 17, 2017.) 7. Beverly O’Neill, email, October 13, 2010, http://www.hi-beam.net/fw/fw44/0382 .html. 8. Dominic Angerame, email, June 15, 2008, http://www.hi-beam.net/fw/fw37 /0733.html, as given in the original. 9. Esorp [Peter Rose], email, October 13, 2010, http://www.hi-beam.net/fw/fw44 /0404.html. 10. Fred Camper, email, October 14, 2010, http://www.hi-beam.net/fw/fw44/0456 .html. 11. Henri Michaux, translated and quoted in “Spektr—Mescaline,” Documents blog, February 16, 2008, http://surrealdocuments.blogspot.com/2008/02/spektr -mescalyne.html. 12. Keith Sanborn to the author, email, March 12, 2018. 13. Kenneth Goldsmith, “An Open Letter to the Frameworks Community,” October 18, 2010, http://www.ubu.com/resources/frameworks.html. 3. The Work of Video Art in the Age of Digital Reproduction 1. All quotations from videoartcollector come from my phone conversation with him on March 27, 2018. 2. Greg Allen, “When Fans of Pricey Video Art Can Get It Free,” New York Times, August 17, 2003, http://www.nytimes.com/2003/08/17/arts/art- architecture-when-fans-of-pricey-video-art-can-get-it-free.html. “Videoartcollector” is named in the article. 3. Matthew Barney, quoted in Stephen Witt, “9 Rare Works of Art Internet Pirates Are Obsessed With,” BuzzFeed, June 10, 2015, https://www.buzzfeed.com /stephenwitt/9-rare-works-of-art-internet-pirates-are-obsessed-with. 4. Cheryl Donegan, interviewed by the author, March 6, 2018. 5. Cheryl Donegan, conversation with the author, March 9, 2018. 6. Pierre Huyghe and Marian Goodman, quoted in Allen, “When Fans of Pricey Video Art Can Get It Free.” 7. Cheryl Donegan, conversation with the author, March 9, 2018. 8. Lori Zippay, conversation with the author, July 6, 2018. 9. Seth Price, conversation with the author, February 8, 2018. 10. Seth Price, “[History of] Dispersion,” 2002, http://www.distributedhistory.com /Disperzone.html. 11. Seth Price, conversation with the author, February 8, 2018. 12. Seth Price, Dispersion, self-published PDF (2002), http://sethpriceimages.com /post/42277603863/dispersion-2002-seth-price-download-pdf. 4. Shadow Libraries and Preserving the Memory of the World 1. University of Louisiana Lafayette, Twitter, August 24, 2018, 10:17 a.m., https:// twitter.com/ULLafayette/status/1033040644573413376. 2. Virginia Streva, “Louisiana University Tries to Sell E-Textbook for Nearly $1,000,” Philly Voice, August 29, 2018, https://www.phillyvoice.com/louisiana- university-tries-to-sell-e-textbook-for-nearly-1000-lafayette-accounting-202/. 3. Jonathan Basile, “Who’s Afraid of AAARG?,” Guernica, August 25, 2016, https://www.guernicamag.com/jonathan-basile-whos-afraid-of-aaarg. 4. Balázs Bodó, “Libraries in the Post-Scarcity Era,” in Copyrighting Creativity: Creative Values, Cultural Heritage Institutions, and Systems of Intellectual Property, ed. Helle Porsdam (London: Ashgate, 2015), 77. 5. Marcellmars, “PublicLibrary_FairyTale.md,” revised November 29, 2013, https://gist.github.com/marcellmars/7711632. 6. Many shadow libraries emerged out of former Communist countries. Library Genesis, for instance, was founded in 2008 as a way of consolidating Russian- language texts that had been digitized by individuals over the years and strewn across the web willy-nilly. Even to the last days, the Soviet Union was a reading culture, so the drive to preserve through piracy was acute. In addition, the underground had long been adept in distributing texts via samizdat self- publishing during the Soviet period. 7. Aaron Swartz, “Guerilla Open Access Manifesto,” July 2008, https://archive .org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008_djvu.tx. 8. Librarian, “End-to-End Catalog,” Memory of the World blog, November 26, 2012, https://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2012/11/26/end-to-end-catalog/. 9. Marcell Mars, conversation with the author, January 28, 2018. 10. Marcell Mars and Tomislav Medak, “The System of a Takedown Control and De-commodification in the Circuits of Academic Publishing,” in Archives, ed. Andrew Lison, Marcell Mars, Tomislav Medak, and Rick Prelinger (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2019), 48. 11. Library Genesis is radically transparent in terms of access, making its source code and its catalogue available to anyone wanting to start a library. To date, it has 2.7 million books and 58 million science magazines. 12. Marcell Mars, conversation with the author, January 28, 2018. 13. Dušan Barok, conversation with the author, March 17, 2018. 14. Marcus Boon, “Uploading My Book to AAAAARG.ORG,” In Praise of Copying blog, October 15, 2010, https://inpraiseofcopying.wordpress.com/2010/10/15 /uploading-my-book-to-aaaaarg-org/. 15. AAARG is still available in these countries to all with a VPN, though. 16. Marcell Mars, conversation with the author, January 28, 2018. 17. L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E Distributing Service, catalogue, c. 1978, PDF, October 17, 2018, https://jacket2.org/commentary/language-distributing-service-catalog -c-1978. 18. Craig Dworkin, all quotations from James La Marre, “Poetic Protocols: An Interview with Craig Dworkin,” Jacket 2, January 5, 2016, http://jacket2.org /interviews/poetic-protocols. 19. PennSound, “PennSound: All the Free Poetry You Care to Download,” press release, January 5, 2005, http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/news/press- release-launch.php. 20. PennSound, “PennSound: All the Free Poetry You Care to Download.” 21. Charles Bernstein, conversation with the author, September 24, 2017. 22. Jens Heitjohann, “Exploring, Documenting, Archiving,” interview with Anna Ramos, n.d., http://www.perfomap.de/map3/kapitel4/ramos. 23. Heitjohann, “Exploring, Documenting, Archiving.” 5. Dirty Concrete 1. “linguaviagem,” in Poesia concreta: O projecto verbivocovisual, ed. João Bandeira and Lenora de Barros (São Paulo: Artemeios, 2008), 30, translation by Anthony Doyle. 2. Haroldo de Campos, “poesia e modernidade,” in Poesia concreta, ed. Bandeira and de Barros, 136, translation by Anthony Doyle. 3. Lori Emerson, Reading Writing Interfaces from the Digital to the Bookbound (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014), 99–100. 4. Emerson, Reading Writing Interfaces, 100. 5. Mary Ellen Solt, introduction to Concrete Poetry: A World View, ed. Mary Ellen Solt (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1968), 7. 6. “avenidas” translates as: “avenues / avenues and flowers // flowers / flowers and women // avenues / avenues and women // avenues and flowers and women and // an admirer” 7. Quoted in Katharina Abel, “Poem on Berlin College Wall Sparks Sexism Debate,” DW, September 7, 2017, https://www.dw.com/en/poem-on-berlin- college-wall-sparks-sexism-debate/a-40384180. 6. From Ursonate to Re-Sonate 1. Karin Orchard and Isabel Schulz, introduction to Catalog raisonné Kurt Schwitters, vol. 3, ed. Karin Orchard and Isabel Schulz (Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz, 2006), 33, my emphasis, translation by John Gabriel. 2. Isabel Schulz to the author, email, May 16, 2018. 3. Kurt Schwitters, quoted in Dorothea Dietrich, The Collages of Kurt Schwitters: Tradition and Innovation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 6–7. 4. See “Leaflet Advertising the December Exhibition Held at the Modern Art Gallery Ltd. on ‘Masterpieces by Great Masters’ Also Featuring ‘Paintings and Sculptures by Kurt Schwitters,’ 1944,” https://www.tate.org.uk/art/archive/items /tga-9510-4-8-1/leaflet-advertising-the-december-exhibition-held-at-the- modern-art-gallery-ltd-on/4. 5. Kurt Schwitters, Ppppppp, ed. Jerome Rothenberg and Pierre Joris (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1993), 235. 6. Schwitters, Ppppppp, 236. 7. Schwitters, Ppppppp, 234–35. 8. Schwitters, Ppppppp, 234–35. 9. Hans Richter, DADA: Art and Anti-art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1964), 142–43. 10. George Melly, quoted in Mel Gooding, “Kurt Schwitters: Artist Philosopher,” in Kurt Schwitters: Collages and Assemblages, 1920–1947 (London: Bernard Jacobson Gallery, 2013), 4. 11. Jack Ox, liner notes to Kurt Schwitters, Ursonate (Wergo, 1992), 5. 12. Ernst Schwitters, liner notes to Schwitters, Ursonate, 1. 13. Ernst Schwitters, in “Kurt Schwitters (1887–1948),” UbuWeb: Sound, n.d., http://www.ubu.com/sound/schwitters.html. 14. Jaap Blonk, “Some Words to Kurt Schwitters’ URSONATE,” June 2009, http:// www.jaapblonk.com/Texts/ursonatewords.html. 15. Blonk, “Some Words to Kurt Schwitters’ URSONATE.” 16. Tracie Morris, interviewed by the author, April 17, 2018. 17. Tracie Morris, interviewed by the author, April 17, 2018. 18. Through a fluke, Morris did become Nuyorican Poets Cafe Grand Slam Champion in 1993. In 1992, she was at the café when a contestant didn’t show up and was asked to fill in the empty slot. She lost, but the next year she quickly won all the preliminary competitions and won the slam. She has also said that she won that grand slam with all new material that was more experimental than what she’d previously written. 19. Tammie Jenkins, “A Case Study of Tracie Morris’ Project Princess,” Ph.D. diss., Louisiana State University, 2014, https://digitalcommons.lsu.edu /gradschool_dissertations/79/. 20. Tracie Morris, interviewed by the author, April 17, 2018. 21. Tracie Morris, interviewed by the author, April 17, 2018. 22. Tracie Morris, quoted in Frank Mastropolo, “ ‘A Singular Sound, a Singular Force’: Artists Remember Jazz Great Cecil Taylor,” Bedford and Bowery, April 9, 2018, http://bedfordandbowery.com/2018/04/a-singular-sound-a-singular- force-artists-remember-jazz-great-cecil-taylor/. 23. Ulla Dydo, quoted in David Grundy, “ ‘... and Not Goodbye’: Cecil Taylor (Part 2—Taylor as Poet),” Streams of Expression blog, April 29, 2018, http:// streamsofexpression.blogspot.com/2018/04/and-not-goodbye-cecil-taylor-part- 2.html. 24. Grundy, “ ‘... and Not Goodbye.’ ” 25. Grundy, “ ‘... and Not Goodbye.’ ” 26. Cecil Taylor, quoted in Grundy, “ ‘... and Not Goodbye.’ ” 27. Cecil Taylor, quoted in Fred Moten, “Sound in Florescence: Cecil Taylor’s Floating Garden,” in Sound States: Innovative Poetics and Acoustical Technologies, ed. Adelaide Morris (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997), copy at UbuWeb, http://ubu.com/papers/moten.html. 28. Music Overheard was an audio response to the exhibition Super Vision at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston in 2007, curated by Damon Krukowski. 29. Henri Chopin, “Why I Am the Author of Sound Poetry and Free Poetry” (1967), UbuWeb, n.d., http://www.ubu.com/papers/chopin.html. 30. John Cage, “Indeterminacy,” in Die Reihe No. 5, English ed., ed. Herbert Eimert and Karlheinz Stockhausen (Bryn Mawr, PA: Theodore Presser, 1961), 115. 7. People Like Us 1. Vicki Bennett to author, Facebook message, July 28, 2018. 2. Kenneth Goldsmith, “Interview with Vicki Bennett,” Found Footage, December 2015, http://peoplelikeus.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Found-Footage- Mag2-interview-2016.pdf. 3. Vicki Bennett, conversation with the author, March 17, 2018. 4. Vicki Bennett, conversation with the author, March 17, 2018. 5. Vicki Bennett, conversation with the author, March 17, 2018. 6. Vicki Bennett to author, Facebook message, July 28, 2018. 7. Scott MacDonald, “Kenneth Anger,” in A Critical Cinema 5: Interviews with Independent Filmmakers (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006), 38. 8. Vicki Bennett, conversation with the author, March 17, 2018. 9. Stephen Stapleton, quoted in Wikipedia, “The Sylvie and Babs Hi-Fi Companion,” n.d., https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sylvie_and_Babs_Hi-Fi _Companion. 10. Vicki Bennett, conversation with the author, March 17, 2018. 11. Vicki Bennett, “THE ZONE Now Silenced,” People Like Us blog, January 14, 2013, https://peoplelikeus.org/2013/interview-about-the-zone. 12. Transmediale coordinators, quoted in Bennett, “THE ZONE Now Silenced.” 13. Emily Bick, interview with Vicki Bennett, The Wire, May 2018, https://www .thewire.co.uk/in-writing/interviews/vicki-bennett-speaks-to-emily-bick-people- like-us. 8. Aspen: A “Multimedia Magazine in a Box” 1. Andrew Stafford to the author, email, January 5, 2018. 2. Andrew Stafford to the author, email, January 5, 2018. 3. Matthew Mirapaul, “3-Dimensional Magazine Lives Again in 2 Dimensions,” New York Times, December 9, 2002. 4. Executive director, Cunningham Dance Foundation, quoted in Mirapaul, “3- Dimensional Magazine Lives Again in 2 Dimensions.” 5. Andrew Stafford, quoted in Mirapaul, “3-Dimensional Magazine Lives Again in 2 Dimensions.” 6. Author to Jonas Herbsman, email, February 9, 2011. 7. Jonas Herbsman to the author, email, March 2, 2011. 8. John Lennon, “The Lennon Diary 1969,” Aspen, no. 7 (Spring–Summer 1970): item 8, UbuWeb, http://ubu.com/aspen/aspen7/diary.html. 9. John Hendricks, “Some Notes,” Aspen, no. 6A (Winter 1968–1969): item 15, UbuWeb, http://ubu.com/aspen/aspen6A/someNotes.html. 10. Ironically, today a copy of issue 6A sells for around $500. 11. Hendricks, “Some Notes.” 12. Kate Millett, “No,” Aspen, no. 6A (Winter 1968–1969): item 4, UbuWeb, http:// ubu.com/aspen/aspen6A/no.html. 13. The next month Andy Warhol, a close friend of Picard’s, asked her if she had something for a movie he was making. Picard ended up re-creating Construction-Deconstruction-Construction at the Factory, which Warhol filmed in November 1967. Appearing in the film alongside Picard were Factory superstars Taylor Mead, Viva, and Julian Burroughs. 14. Carolee Schneemann, “Divisions and Rubble,” Aspen, no. 6A (Winter 1968– 1969): item 10, UbuWeb, http://www.ubu.com/aspen/aspen6A/divisions.html, October 24, 2018. 15. Schneemann, “Divisions and Rubble.” 16. Not all the contributions by women were political. In its run, the magazine included a wide range of pieces by women, from a manifesto by Brigid Riley on op art to a psychedelic-correspondence-based photo diary by the avant- garde filmmaker Diane Rochlin. Rochlin’s piece was in Aspen number 9, “The Psychedelic Issue,” which was edited and designed by the musician and filmmaker Hetty Maclise, who was a key figure of the sixties underground world, from the Grateful Dead to Warhol’s Factory. Yoko Ono is represented by two spare solo vocal pieces, recorded on a tape recorder, and two collaborations with John Lennon. And Susan Sontag’s groundbreaking essay “The Aesthetics of Silence” was commissioned for Aspen numbers 5–6, “The Minimalism Issue.” 17. Dan Graham, “Folder,” Aspen, no. 8 (Winter 1970–1971): item 1, UbuWeb, http://ubu.com/aspen/aspen8/folder.html. 18. Dan Graham, “My Works for Magazine Pages: ‘A History of Conceptual Art,’ ” Kunst and Museumjournal 4, no. 6 (1993): no page, reprinted from Dan Graham, exhibition catalogue (Perth: Art Gallery of Western Australia, 1985). 19. Mike Metz, interview with Dan Graham, Bomb, January 1, 1994, https:// bombmagazine.org/articles/dan-graham/. 20. Lynda Benglis ventured into the paid advertisement as artwork when in November 1974 she bought ad space in Artforum and published a photograph of herself masturbating with a dildo and wearing nothing but a pair of sunglasses. Originally she wanted the photo to accompany a feature article that was being written about a solo exhibition of her work but was refused due to the photo’s pornographic nature. So she instead bought the ad space and ran the image that way. 21. In 1994, the Gap featured a gaggle of celebrities in its “[Insert celebrity name here] wore khakis” campaign, and in 1997 Apple’s “Think Different” ad campaign featured seventeen “iconic personalities.” Of course, those celebrities had nothing to do with the Gap or Apple; rather, the affiliation with their images lent the corporation credibility that its own products would never have had on their own. 22. Dan Graham, “Exclusion Principle” (1966), in Graham, “Folder.” 23. Robert Smithson, “Strata, a Geophotographic Fiction,” Aspen, no. 8 (Winter 1970–1971): item 12, UbuWeb, http://www.ubu.com/aspen/aspen8/strata.html. 24. Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge (1972; e-book reprint, New York: Vintage Books, 2010). 25. Robert Smithson, quoted in Edward S. Casey, Earth-Mapping: Artists Reshaping the Landscape (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2005), 6. 9. Street Poets and Visionaries 1. Holland Cotter, “Art in Review: Street Poets & Visionaries: Selections from the UbuWeb Collection,” New York Times, September 16, 2006. 2. Daniels told me his life story when we met for the first time at a digital-poetics conference at the University of Buffalo in 2001. I recount here what I remember him telling me at the time, now many years ago. When I began doing the research for this book, I tried with no success to corroborate his story. I reached out to one of his family members, who refused to talk to me, informing me that he wanted nothing to do with the poet. I attempted to find other contacts—from former communards to Silicon Valley moguls—but to no avail. Perhaps it was all a fiction of Daniels’s making; I wouldn’t put it past him. I hope that in time the truth will emerge, at which point I’ll amend his story. 3. When viewed as PDFs, Daniels’s works extend this metaphor, from the Jacquard loom to the grid of the screen. 4. David Daniels, “2000,” in Years (N.p.: self-published, 2002), http://www .thegatesofparadise.com/webyears/2000.pdf. 5. James Schevill, where to go, what to do, when you are Bern Porter (Gardiner, ME: Tilbury House, 1992), 208. 6. Joel Lipman, “The Sciart Origins of Bern Porter’s Found Poems,” in Bern Porter, Found Poems (Callicoon, NY: Nightboat, 2011), xv. 7. David Byrne, foreword to Bern Porter, Found Poems, ii. 8. Mark Melnicove, introduction to “Wisdom of the Questioning Eye: Five Books from the 1960s, by Found Poet Bern Porter,” n.d., UbuWeb, http://www.ubu .com/historical/porter/porter_5books.html. 9. Melnicove, introduction to “Wisdom of the Questioning Eye.” 10. Bern Porter, “The Last Acts of St. Fuck You,” MP3, UbuWeb, http://ubu.com /sound/porter.html. 11. Bern Porter, The Last Acts of Saint Fuck You (West Lima, WI: Xexoxial Editions, 2008). 12. Schevill, where to go, what to do, when you are Bern Porter, 7. 13. Hilton Als, “Christopher Knowles: In a Word Gallery Guide,” Eleanor Biddle Lloyd Gallery, September 16–December 27, 2015, http://static.icaphila.org/pdf /gallery-notes/2015_fall/christopher_knowles_galleryguide.pdf. 14. Robert Wilson, quoted in Eric Konigsberg, “Encore,” New Yorker, April 8, 2013, https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/04/15/encore-4. 15. Christopher Knowles, “I FEEL THE EARTH MOVE,” in Typings (1974–1977) (New York: Vehicle Editions, 1979), unpaginated. 16. Gertrude Stein, “If I Told Him: A Completed Portrait of Picasso” (1923), http:// www.english.upenn.edu/~jenglish/Courses/Spring02/104/steinpicasso.html. 17. Robert Wilson, “A Letter for Queen Victoria,” n.d., http://www.robertwilson.com /lqv/. 18. T. E. Kalem, “Exquisite Anarchy,” Time, April 7, 1975. 19. Robert Wilson, A Letter for Queen Victoria: An Opera (N.p.: /ubu editions, 2007), act 1, scene 4, http://www.ubu.com/ubu/pdf/wilson_opera.pdf, which gives the full text of the opera. 20. Apropos of Bern Porter, Slonimsky claimed that his own recording “Ionisation” was an inspiration to the scientists and engineers who were splitting atoms to make the atomic bomb. 21. Nicolas Slonimsky, in A Touch of Genius: The Life and Times of Nicolas Slonimsky, documentary, ed. John Huszar and Michael York (Film America, 1994), YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0LYSd05BbOg. 22. John Cage, in A Touch of Genius. 23. The 365 Days Project, UbuWeb, http://www.ubu.com/outsiders/365/index .html. 24. Nicolas Slonimsky and Thomas Bertonneau, Muses and Lexicons Oral History Transcript (Los Angeles: Oral History Program, University of California), 73– 74. 25. Lyrics transcribed by the author. 26. Nicolas Slonimsky, Writings on Music, vol. 4 (New York: Routledge, 2005), 343. 27. Frank Zappa, in A Touch of Genius. 28. S. Frederick Starr, “From Rimsky to Rock,” Washington Post, May 8, 1988. 29. In his own way, Frank Zappa moved between inside and out. These shifts are represented on UbuWeb with a recording of him reading a section of William S. Burroughs’s Naked Lunch called “The Talking Asshole.” As is well known, Zappa was a great admirer of avant-garde composers, in particular Edgard Varèse. 30. İlhan Mimaroğlu, liner notes to Jean Dubuffet, Musical Experiences (Finnidar Records, 1973). 31. Jean Dubuffet, quoted in Mimaroğlu, liner notes to Dubuffet, Musical Experiences. 10. An Anthology of Anthologies 1. John Giorno, quoted in White Columns, “I Love John Giorno VIII: Giorno Poetry Systems,” Brooklyn Rail, n.d., https://brooklynrail.org/special/I_LOVE _JOHN_GIORNO/giorno-poetry-systems/VIII-GIORNO-POETRY-SYSTEMS. 2. UbuWeb note on History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001), UbuWeb, 2011, http://ubu.com/sound/electronic.html. 3. Caio Barros, “About the History of Electroacoustic Music,” History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001), UbuWeb, 2011, http://ubu.com /sound/electronic.html. 4. Jon Leidecker to the author, email, August 5, 2018. 5. Electra with Emma Hedditch, Her Noise—the Making Of, film, 60 minutes (2007), UbuWeb, http://www.ubu.com/film/her_noise.html. 6. poemproducer, NERDGIRLS Mash, March 8, 2014, http://nerdgirls .poemproducer.com/. 7. Jon Leidecker to the author, email, August 4, 2018. 8. Justin Lacko to the author, email, November 23, 2012. 9. Luuk de Weert to the author, email, August 27, 2018. 10. Luuk de Weert to the author, email, August 27, 2018. 11. Lloyd Dunn, “PhotoStatic Magazine and the Rise of the Casual Publisher,” PhotoStatic, 2007, http://psrf.detritus.net/other/project.html. 12. Dunn, “PhotoStatic Magazine.” 13. Robin James, Cassette Mythos (New York: Autonomedia, 1992), ix. 14. Dunn, “PhotoStatic Magazine.” 15. Nico Ordway, “Anarchy, Surrealism, and New Wave,” Search and Destroy, no. 5 (1978): 27, emphasis in original. 16. From a telephone conversation in 1990 about the preparation of the RE/Search edition of The Atrocity Exhibition : “J. G. Ballard & V. Vale, 4-13- 90,” in J. G. Ballard, J. G. Ballard Conversations, ed. V. Vale (San Francisco: RE/Search Publications, 2005), 259. 17. Jon Savage, introduction to the “Industrial Culture Handbook” issue, RE/Search, nos. 6–7 (1983): 4. 18. Andrea Juno and V. Vale, introduction to the “Angry Women” issue, RE/Search, no. 13 (1991): 4. 19. Juno and Vale, introduction to the “Angry Women” issue, 4. 20. Diamanda Galás, quoted in Juno and Vale, introduction to the “Angry Women” issue, 7. 21. Juno and Vale, introduction to the “Angry Women” issue, 4, emphasis in original. Coda: The Ghost in the Algorithm 1. See Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power (New York: PublicAffairs, 2019). 2. John Cage About Silence, YouTube, n.d., https://www.youtube.com/watch?v =pcHnL7aS64Y. 3. Guy Debord, “Theory of the Dérive” (1956), trans. Ken Knabb, Situationist International Online, https://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/si/theory.html. 4. Charles Bernstein, conversation with the author, September 24, 2017. T ACKNOWLEDGMENTS hanks to those who generously gave their time, allowing me to interview them about their practices about this book, including Amy Adler, Dominic Angereme, Dušan Barok, Derek Beaulieu, Vicki Bennett, Charles Bernstein, Christian Bök, Tim Davis, Peter Decherney, Sean Dockery, Cheryl Donegan, Lloyd Dunn, Ben Fino- Radin, Al Filreis, Otis Fodder, Ken Freedman, Chris Hughes, Peter Jaszi, Andrew Lampert, Jon Leidecker, Sebastian Luetgert, Marcell Mars, Tomislav Medak, Tracie Morris, Clive Phillpot, Rick Prelinger, Seth Price, Anna Ramos, Jim Roche, Keith Sanborn, Jason Schultz, Dubravka Sekulic, Don Share, Chelsea Spengemann, Andrew Stafford, Marvin Taylor, V. Vale, Luuk de Weert, and Lori Zippay. My gratitude to the many people and organizations who over the years contributed to UbuWeb in innumerable ways, including Eylül Fidan Akıncı, Manuel Alcala, Artmob, the Avant-Garde Project, Laura Beiles, Bidoun, Marcus Boon, Mathieu Cenac, CENTRO, Roc Jiménez de Cisneros, Rosemary Coomb, Continuo, Mathieu Copeland, Pierre-Eduoard Couton, CPCW, Lou Davenport, David Desrimais, Lloyd Dunn, Craig Dworkin, Lina Dzuverovic, Pamela Echeverria, Jean Boîte Éditions, the Electronic Poetry Center, Electra, Max Fenton, Jeremy Fisher, Bettina Funcke, Jan Gerber, Claudia Gould, Otis Fodder, Colby Ford, Gabriel René Franjou, Loss Pequeño Glazier, Frank Hentschker, Homie3, Bill Kennedy, Justin Lacko, Tiffany Malakooti, Ilan Manouach, Colin Marshall, Chus Martinez, Steve McLaughlin, Mark Melnicove, David Meurer, Rachel Morrison, Anne Hilde Neset, Ingo Niermann, PennSound, Marjorie Perloff, Alexandra Perloff-Giles, Francesco Urbano Ragazzi, Irene Revell, David Hilmer Rex, Amelia Robertson, Jerome Rothenberg, Kerstin Scheuch, Emily Segal, Danny Snelson, Olivia de Smedt, Patrick Stein, John Strausbaugh, Sara Vanderbeek, Stephen Vitiello, Matt Wellins, Darren Wersher, WFMU, Rob Young, and Zarcrom. Portions of this book previously appeared in Parkett, Harriet, THEORY, The New Concrete, and OnCurating. A main motivation for wanting to do this book was to have the opportunity once again to work with Philip Leventhal at Columbia University Press, the most careful and incisive editor I’ve ever had the pleasure to work with. Many thanks also to editor Michael Haskell at Columbia University Press and copy editor Annie Barva for their careful proofreading and helping to shape this text in innumerable ways. And finally to Cheryl Donegan, who, when I said I can’t go on, made me go on. INDEX Page numbers refer to the print edition but are hyperlinked to the appropriate location in the e-book. Abakanowicz, Magdalena, 244 abecedary poetry, 225 Abloh, Virgil, 74 Abramovič, Marina and Ulay, 10 absence: from art, 235; of investigation, 2; of women, 173 Absolutely Free (Mothers of Invention), 186. See also Zappa, Frank abstraction: incantation, 163; literature, 163; maps, 212; in music, 175, 237; in nouns, 164; in poetry, 175; pop structure, 182; soundscape, 171; in video art, 109; in visual poetry, 217; vocal rhythm, 163 access, 41–43, 76, 78 Acconci, Vito, 9, 76 acid head, 215 acid rock, 138 Acker, Kathy, 5, 260, 271 Adachi, Tomomi, 171 Adler, Amy, 65, 72–74, 89 Adorno, Theodor, 275 “Aesthetics of Silence, The,” 9, 196 Agam, Yaacov, 154 algorithm: capriciousness of human taste, 267; curated, 265; logical order, 267; and perverse sensibility, 267; randomizing function, 265; and surprise/serendipity, 267; transactional, 267 Alive from Off Center, 97 All Guitars! (Tellus), 243 Als, Hilton, 227 amateurism: in archives, 16; librarianship, 117, 119; radio plays, 255; song-poems, 7; tape recordings, 238 Amazon, 115, 128, 130 ambient: in conversation; 232; noise, 178; sounds, 225; street sounds, 238 American Family, An, 61 Amiga computer, 186 Anderson, Laurie, 245 Andre, Carl, 149 Andrews, Julie, 182 anechoic chamber, 179–80 Anger, Kenneth, 66–67, 70, 182, 184–85 Angerame, Dominic, 80–82, 87–88, 90 “Angry Women” (RE/Search), 262–63 animated GIF, 154, 157 “Anna Blume, An,” 169 Another Kind of Humor, 186–87 Antheil, George, 271 anthologizing: error, 242; expertise in, 242; framework for, 242; instability of, 243; subjectivity in, 242–43; process/philosophy of UbuWeb, 242–43 Anthology Film Archives, 42, 70, 71, 75–78, 90, 105 Anthology of Concrete Poetry, An, 41 Anthology of Concretism, 154–55 antifascist literature, 121 Aphasia, 223 Apollinaire, Guillaume, 214 appropriation: in concrete poetry, 153; in film, 185; in music, 186–87; UbuWeb as appropriative artwork, 74; in visual art, 5, 72, 73, 74, 108 Archeology of Knowledge, The, 211 archive/archiving: activism, 268; as artistic practice, 111–13; instability of, 12 archive.org, 126, 188 Armstrong, Louis, 8 Arp, Hans/Jean, 164 art brut, 238, 239 Art in America, 100 Artaud, Antonin, 220 Artforum, 44 artificial intelligence, 33. See also machine learning Artists, Architects, and Activists Reading Group (AAARG), 116, 127–30, 140; history of, 127; lawsuit against, 129, 140, 288n15; The Public School, 127 asemic writing, 152, 159 Ashbery, John, 134 Ashley, Robert, 10 Aspen, 8, 196–213, 244; history, 195–96; digitization of, 196–97; copyright, 198–99; feminism, 201–3, 292n16 atonal music, 266 Attia, Kader, 273 Audio by Visual Artists (Tellus), 244 autism, 227–32 automatic writing, 159 Avant (podcast), 135 avant-garde, 11, 17, 25, 34, 37, 39, 64, 66, 181, 182; accusations of patriarchy, hegemony, imperialism, colonization, militarization, sexisim, primitivism, 10; and algorithms, 266; and artistic myth, 66–67, 68, 70; artists who dissemble notions of, 11; and Aspen, 198–99; and audience, 198; black culture and, 175; City Lights Bookstore, 258; “composed music,” 253; copyright and film, 66–69; and defamiliarization, 265; designation of, 86; as discredited, 12; downtown New York audience and, 232; economics of, 36; knowledge of, 85; in modern classical/electroacoustic music, 247–48; as orphaned, 12; and punk rock, 259; and royalties, 198; regionalism, 245; as reimagined, 12; restrictions, 140; rightist political tendencies, 11; Russian, 158; Schwitters and, 161; Spanish, 135; vilification of the new, 85; Wolf Fifth, 251–53. Avant-Garde Series, Deutsche Grammophon, 252 “avenidas” (Gomringer), 155–58, 289n6; controversy, 157 Avram, Ana-Maria, 249 Awesh, Peggy, 273 Baby Sex, 186 Baldessari, John, 30, 224 Baldwin, Craig, 182 Balinese kecak, 186 Ballard, J. G., 9, 260, 261, 263; Empire of the Sun, 263; RE/Search, 8–9, 261–62 Bandcamp, 190 Banksy, 275 Baraka, Amiri, 11, 276 Barbie doll, 67 “Barn Dance,” 233 Barney, Matthew, 100 Barok, Dušan, 123–26, 260 Baroque art, 19 Barrado, Ana, 261 Barros, Caio, 248 Barthes, Roland, 9, 196 Basile, Jonathan, 115 Basquiat, Jean-Michel, 4 Baudelaire, Charles, 159 Bay Area Industrial Culture, 260–61 Bayle, François, 246, 252 Bazin, André, 129 Beatles, the, 55, 61, 186, 200–201 Beaulieu, Derek, 158–59 Beckett, Samuel, 5, 34, 273 Beethoven, Ludwig van, 187, 266 Benglis, Lynda, 270, 293n20 Benjamin, Walter, 147 Bennett, Vicki. See People Like Us Bennett, William, 136 Berberian, Cathy, 178 Berio, Luciano, 247 Bern Porter Books, 220 Bernstein, Charles, 130–35, 268 Berrigan, Ted, 165 Beuys, Joseph, 244, 266 Big Ego, 232 Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley, Ltd., 69 biological warfare, 257 Birds, The, 193 Bitcoin, 122 BitTorrent, 39, 96, 99, 246 Björk, 250 Black-Authored Lynching: Drama’s Challenge to Theater History, 124 Black Radical Tradition, The, 131 Black Rock Coalition, 173 Blair, Linda, 193 Blake, William, 214 Blanchot, Maurice, 5 blogs: corporately owned, 23; destruction of, 27; film, 25; MP3, 14, 25, 35; 365 Days Project, 7; WFMU, 56; Wolf Fifth, 251–53 Blonk, Jaap, 169–71 Blood and Guts in High School, 127 Blue Cheer, 258 Blue Meanie, 193 bluegrass, 138 Blum, Eberhard, 170 “Bob Flanagan: Super Masochist” (RE/Search), 263 Bochner, Mel, 197 Bodó, Balázs, 116 body: art, 178; amplification of, 178–79 Bök, Christian, 157–58, 171 Boomerang, 5 Boon, Marcus, 129 Borges, Jorge Luis, 9 Boston Sunday Herald, 223 “Both Sides Now,” 193 Boulez, Pierre, 247, 252, 254 boundary blurring, 10, 16, 178 Bourgeois, Louise, 76 Brainard, Joe, 262 Brakhage, Stan, 42, 76, 82, 84, 87, 89, 270 Brecht, Bertolt, 279 Breton, André, 3, 64, 259 British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 187 British Film Institute (BFI), 190–91 Broodthaers, Marcel, 159 Bryars, Gavin, 187, 240 Buddhist Third Class Junkmail Oracle, 159 Buren, Daniel, 257 Burroughs, Julian, 204 Burroughs, William S., 62–64, 214, 260; cut-ups, 63, 257; and guns, 257; influence of, 217; and misinformation, 257; in RE/Search, 256–58; The Revised Boy Scout Manual, 257; Shotgun Paintings, 257 Byrne, David, 222, 227 Cabaret Voltaire (band), 246 Cabaret Voltaire (Zurich), 259 Cage, John: 200, 241, 247, 254, 277; anechoic chamber, 179–80; and Beethoven/Mozart, 266; concrete poetry, 146; estate of, 126; orchestral works, 6; and Slonimsky, 234; “Songbooks,” 126; sound poetry, 6; and Thoreau, 246 Caixa preta (Black Box), 147 Cale, John, 196. See also Velvet Underground Cambridge Lectures (Wittgenstein), 127 “Camera oscura,” 246 camp, 256 Camper, Fred, 89 Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC), 50 Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA), 187 cannibalism, 260 Canyon Cinema, 71, 81–84, 87 capitalism, 109; and critique of female figure, 208; as distributive system, 109; effect on art in Brazil, 146 Captain Beefheart, 138, 277 Cardew, Cornelius, 11, 240, 271 Carpenter, Richard, 67 Carroll, Lewis, 219 Casa Pound, 10 Cassette Mythos, 255 cassette underground, 255 “Cat’s in the Cradle,” 241 CBGB Canteen, 173 cease-and-desist, 18, 33, 37, 55, 56, 62, 68, 129, 191 Céline, Louis-Ferdinand, 9 Cendrars, Blaise, 165 Centro Nacional de Alto Rendimiento Mexico (CNAR), 98 Chanel, 40 Chapin, Harry, 241 Charlie and His Orchestra, 57 Chatroulette, 266 Chavez, Maria, 182 Cherry, Don, 274 chinampas (floating gardens), 177 Chinampas (Taylor), 176 Chinois, encore un effort pour etre revolutionnaires (Peking Duck Soup), 91–92 Chippewa song pictures, 8 Chopin, Henri, 6, 149, 152, 178–79, 241–42 Christian Science Monitor, 235 Churchill, Winston, 187 Chusid, Irwin, 139 Cinderella, 193 cinema: as medium, 79; as performance space, 79; technical malfunction, 80 citizen-based activism, 197 City Lights Bookshop, 258 City Lights Pocket Books, 258 City of Women, 184 Close Encounters of the Third Kind, 193 Close, Chuck, 2 Closky, Claude, 272 cloud computing, 22, 25; control of, 26; lockers, 26; politics of, 27 coauthorship, 74 Cobbing, Bob, 148, 149 COBRA, 238 Cocteau, Jean, 279 Codex Seraphinianus, 159 Cokes, Tony, 275 Cold War, 143, 189 Cole, Natalie, 172 Cole, Nat King, 172 Coleman, Ornette, 279 Coleman, Steve, 173 collage: in J. G. Ballard, 261; in Joseph Cornell, 182; history of, in Variations, 135; in La femme 100 tetes, 159; in People Like Us, 183–86; in Picard, 204; in Reich, 274; in RE/Search, 256; in Schwitters, 151, 167; UbuWeb as work of, 74; in Viénet, 91; and xerography, 254 Collected Works of Lenin, The, 122 Composers’ Voice, 253 Computer Music, 252 computer: code as poetry, 221, 223–24; directory as stratified knowledge system, 211–12 conceptual art, 9, 42, 125, 134 conceptual literature, 125 concrete poetry, 5, 6, 7, 41, 66, 242; 143–60; animated GIFs as, 157; during Brazil military dictatorship; 146; relation to computer networks, 153; and computing, 151–52; democratization of, 152; “dirty,” 148–50, 152; and electronic technology, 6, 147; and emojis, 157; relationship to information age, 153; as international movement, 146; and multimedia, 155, 157, 227; pastoral concrete poetry, 150–51; patterns in, 228; postdigital concretism, 152; presence of machine in, 148; revival of, in the digital age, 151–58; role in May 1968 (Paris), 149; and Twitter, 153; typewriter and, 148–50; and universality, 144, 147, 152; in urban setting, 145 Concrete Poetry: A World View, 155 Conet Project, The, 280 Conner, Bruce, 90, 182 Conrad, Tony, 70, 90, 92, 99 Constant, 116 Construction-Deconstruction-Construction, 204–5 content upload filters, 23, 284n32 copying: and economic value, 66, 69; on social media, 73; in visual art, 65, 72 Copyright Act of 1976, 70 copyright, 4, 18; as affirmative defense, 53; anticopyright, 93; and artwork registration, 283n25; chilling effect, 51, 66, 123; and commercial exploitation, 65; community norms, 69, 72, 73; critique of, 85; fair use, 52–53, 65, 66, 68–69, 72–74, 197, 282n5; false claims, 62–64; and footnotes, 63; gatekeepers, 66; infringement, 17, 25, 50, 73; intimidation by industry agencies, 50–51; kidnapping cultural heritage, 253; moral rights, 65; and MP3 blogs, 27; mythos of, 66–67, 68, 70; perjury, 62; and poetry, 134; and Prelinger Archive, 188; and proper names, 63; protection removal, 120; public domain, 69; transformative turn, 69, 72, 73, 74, 111, 282n5; trolling, 32, 54–55, 60 Cormier, André, 171 Cornell, Joseph, 70–72, 182 Cowell, Henry, 233 Cramps (band), 259 Creative Commons, 38 creative misspelling, 230 Cremaster Cycle, The, 100 Crowley, Alister, 5 cryptofascism, 260 cubism, 192, 266 cultural anthropology, 260 cultural artifact: in cultural limbo, 111; free dissemination of, 15, 22, 27, 39 cultural black market, 116 cultural self-reliance, 254 Cummings, E. E, 145 Cunningham, Merce, 198–99 Cunningham Dance Foundation, 198–99 Curtis, Jackie, 246 Curzon, 191 Custodians Online, 21, 34, 116 cut-and-paste, 153 Cylinder Audio Archive, 130 Dada, 5, 8, 9, 122, 123, 161–72, 222, 254, 259 Dad Rock Essentials, 241 Dalì, Salvador: bank advertisement, 5; Impressions de la Haute Mongolie—hommage á Raymond Roussel, 5; and Rose Hobart, 71; Un chien Andalou, 5 Dance (Tellus), 243 Daniels, David, 214–20, 235, 293–94n2 Darboven, Hanne, 4, 272 Davis, Tim, 50–51 deaccessioning of library materials, 115 Dead Kennedys, 259 De Andrade, Oswald, 145 “Death of the Author,” 9, 196 Debord, Guy, 37, 93 Dec, Francis E., 138, 276 De Campos, Augusto, 144–47 De Campos, Haroldo, 144–47 decentralization, 108 Decherney, Peter, 66–69, 73, 89 De Cisneros, Roc Jiménez, 135 De Kooning, Willem, 2, 196 democracy: in art, 9, 45, 266; in Aspen, 9; back door, 3; in concrete poetry, 148, 152; distribution of cultural artifacts, 200; internet, 28; in modernism, 152; in works of Seth Price, 109; typewriter, 149; vis-à-vis UbuWeb, 33 De Melo Neto, João Cabral, 145 Derbyshire, Delia, 249 dérive, 267; drift, 266 Derrida, Jacques, 279 deskilling, 240 détournement, 11, 37, 91; disorientation, 266 De Weert, Luuk, 252–53 Dial-A-Poem, 245–46 Diebenkorn, Richard, 220 Dieresis, 224 difficult music, 241 digital artifacts; abundance of, 13, 36; veracity of, 60 digital divide, 24 Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 51, 61; takedown notices, 51, 53–55 digital rights, 140 Digital Video Effects: “Editions,” 109 digitization: of books, 120–21; process of encoding, 252; and MoMA, 284–88n6; of physical media, 196–97. See also reformatting dismantling: of patriarchy, 202, 262; of binary dualisms, 262 Dispersion, 108 DIVISIONS AND RUBBLE, 205 DJ Food, 182 DK Books, 69 dodecaphony, 238 doggerel, 220 Donegan, Cheryl, 101–2, 104 Donemus, 253 Donne, John, 132 Dubuffet, Jean, 4, 217, 237–40 Duchamp, Marcel, 3, 14, 74, 111, 195, 197, 200, 221, 244, 273, 273; “A la infinitif,” 244 Duck and Cover, 188–89 Dunaway, Judy, 276 Duncan, Robert, 220 Dunn, Lloyd, 55 254–56 Dworkin, Craig, 131 Dydo, Ulla, 176 Dylan, Bob, 1 Dzuverovic, Lina, 249 East of Borneo, 71 easy-listening music, 186, 188, 253 eclecticism: in Aspen, 8, 9; in RE/Search, 260; in Tellus cassettes, 243, 245; in UbuWeb’s audience, 15; in WFMU, 56 Eclipse, 130–33 Éditions Gallimard, 145 educational films, 188 Edwards, Brent Hayes, 8 8–4 9–5 10–6 11–7, 112 Einstein on the Beach, 228–29 electroacoustic music, 247–48 Electronic Arts Intermix (EAI), 96, 101–3, 107 electronic music, 179, 238 Electronic Panorama, 252 Electronic Poetry Center, 130; Poetics List, 133 ELMO, 83 Elsevier, 115, 130 Emerson, Lori, 149 emoji, 152, 157 emoticon, 152 Empire, 79 Empire of the Sun, 263 “End, The” (the Doors), 183 Ensemble Ordinature, 171 ephemeral media, 112 EPUB: restrictions in licensing of, 119; representation of book, 200 Eric B. & Rakim, 173, 175, 176 Ernst, Max, 159 Esperanto, 144, 155 Essential Cinema (series), 71 Ethnopoetics, 8 Eurythmics, 80 Evans, Walker, 65 Everybody’s Autobiography, 255 “Exclusion Principle,” 209, 210 Exorcist, The, 193 Exotica, 240 experimental music films, 10 experimental writing, 151; African American, 175 Facebook, 27 Factory Records, 17 Fall Frum Grace, Miss Pipi’s Blue Tale, 10 Fandor, 87 Farenheit 451, 115 Farrakahan, Louis, 7 Fassbinder, Rainer Werner, 147 Fatboy Slim, 11 Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 57 Feldman, Morton, 200, 241, 272, 277 Female Pressure, 250 Ferlinghetti, Lawrence, 258 “Figurative” (Graham), 207 file-sharing networks, 255 film preservation, 77, 188 Film-Makers’ Coop, 71, 81 film: and the art world, 86; distribution, 75–94; price structure, 82; as revolutionary potential, 92; royalties, 87 Filreis, Al, 133 Finlay, Ian Hamilton, 149, 150 Finley, Karen, 262 Finnadar Records, 239 Finnegans Wake, 12, 163 Finster, Howard, 217, 279 Fiore, Quentin, 9, 222 Fischer, Wild Man, 138 Flaming Creatures, 70 Flash (programming language), 195 flea market as curatorial model, 14, 267 Fleming, Victor, 191 flexi-disc, 8, 196, 200–201 Flickr, 25, 225 flipbook, 155 fluidity of artistic practice, 227 Fluxus, 124, 175, 196 Flynt, Henry, 11 “f m s b w t ö z ä u,” 163 Fodder, Otis, 139 folk archiving, 16; in Warhol, 13 folk art, 13, 218 folk law, 16, 68, 69–74, 139 folklore, 68 Forsythe, William, 276 Forum Lenteng, 272 Foucault, Michel, 211 found footage, 182, 184, 188 found poems, 221, 227 Founds (Porter), 226 “Found Sounds” (Porter), 225 found text, 176 486B: Thy Future, 221, 223–24 “Fox on the Run,” 7 fragmentation: of the archive, 12; of attention, 256; in Beckett, 273; in Schwitters, 163, 170 Frameworks listserv, 81, 88, 94 Frampton, Hollis, 5, 92 Fraser, Andrea, 137, 275 Freedman, Ken, 56–57, 137, 139 freeform radio, 56, 137. See also WFMU free market, mechanics of, 108–9 Free Music Archive, 58, 283n10 Fuck You: A Magazine of the Arts, 159, 274 Fugs, 246 Fuller, Buckminster, 273 Futura (font), 145 Futura Poesia Sonora, 242 futurism, 124 Gaillard, Slim, 8 Galás, Diamanda, 249, 262 Gates of Paradise, The, 217–20 gender fluidity, 262 General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 24 Genet, Jean, 275 Geography of the Body, 80 George Eastman House, 76 German video art, 10 “Gesang der Jünglinge,” 247 “Get Out of My Mind, Get Out of This Room,” 38 Gidal, Peter, 276 gift economy, 22, 32, 189 Gigapedia, 119, 124 Gilbert and George, 276 Gillespie, Dizzy, 172 Ginsberg, Allen, 9, 258 Giorno, John, 245 Giorno Poetry Systems, 64, 232, 245–6 Giovanni, Nikki, 173, 176 Glass, Philip, 10, 228, 245 Glover, Crispin Hellion, 272 Gmail, censorship of, 27 Godard, Jean-Luc, 80 “God Save the Queen,” 187 Golden, Barbara, 248–51 Goldstein, Jack, 59 Gomringer, Eugen, 149, 150, 155–58 Google Books, 128 Google, 32, 130, 212; censorship by, 27; “I’m Feeling Lucky,” 266; keywords, 59 Goulart, João, 146 Gould, Claudia, 243 Gould, Glenn, 60 graffiti, 152 Graham, Dan, 4, 9, 206–10, 211, 213; editor of Aspen 8, 206–8 graphical notation, 159 graphical web browser, 5, graphic novel, 154 grassroots internet fandom, 101 Grateful Dead, 69 Grauerholz, James, 64 Gregorian chant, 186 Greie-Ripatti, Antye, 250 Grundy, David, 176 grunge rock, 150 Guerilla Open Access Manifesto, 117 Gysin, Brion, 63, 257, 260 Hammons, David, 276 Harper’s Bazaar, 207–8 Harris, Hilary, 80 Hausmann, Raoul, 163 Havel, Václav, 271 “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas,” 246 “Having a Coke with You,” 245 Hayes, Issac, 173 Haynes, Todd, 76 Heartfield, John, 256 Hedren, Tippi, 193 Help, 55 Helvetica, 143, 147 Hendricks, Jon: editor of Aspen 6A: The Performance Art Issue, 198, 202; as social activist, 202 Henry, Pierre, 247, 252 Herbert, George, 214 Herman’s Library, 121 Her Noise, 10, 250 Heston, Charlton, 193 Hillbilly Hollywood, 139 Hinkle-Turner, Elizabeth, 249 “Histories of the Universe, The,” 246 History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001), 246–48 Hitler, Adolf, 256 Hodges, Johnny, 178 Hoffman, Abbie, 10 Hollywood Bowl, 234 Hollywood Rock ‘n’ Roll, 50 Hollywood’s Copyright Laws, 66 Holzer, Jenny, 153, 159 homemade tape recordings, 7, 184, 228, 238 Hong, James T., and Yin-Ju Chen, 280 Hörspiele, 60 Hotel Palenque, 10 Howl, 258 HTML and UbuWeb, 23; compatibility of, 25 Hucko, Peanuts, 9 Hulsenbeck, Richard, 9, 200, 231 Hulu, 97 human-aided content filtering, 119 Hüsker Dü, 245 Huyghe, Pierre, 102 “I Feel The Earth Move” (King), 229 “I FEEL THE EARTH MOVE” (Knowles), 229–30 “If I Told Him: A Completed Portrait of Picasso,” 230 “I’ll Be Your Mirror,” 193 illogic, and machines, 14 “I Love Irony,” 153 image quality, and reproducible media, 65 Images du monde visionnaire, 90 impurity, and the avant-garde, 11 “Incredibly Strange Music Vols. One and Two,” 263 “Industrial Culture Handbook,” 256, 261, 263 industrial film, 188 industrial landscape, 256 industrial music, 263 information/in-formation, 208, 210 In Praise of Copying, 129 Inside the Third Reich, 122 Instagram, 14, 73, 120, 200, 225 institutional critique, 206–7 intellectual ecosystem, 129 interlaced GIF, 154 internet: attacks on freedom, 23; democracy of, 28 Internet Archive, 70 Inuit throat singing, 8 “Invisible Woman, The” 250 “Ionisation,” 233–34 “I Remember,” 262 It’s a Wonderful Life, 70 Ives, Charles, 7, 233, 237 Jacbos, Ken, 70 Jagger, Mick, 49 James, Robyn, 255 Janco, Marcel, 231 Jandek, 138 Jaszi, Peter, 52, 73, 74, 89 Je hais le mouvement qui deplace les lignes, 159 Jenkins, Tammie, 174 Jenks, Tom, 153 John Giorno Band, 246 Johns, Jasper, 196 Johnson, Phyllis, 9 Johnson, Ray, 2 Jonas, Joan, 244 Jones, Jim, 261 Jordheim, Cecilie Bjørgås, 159 Jorn, Asger, 238 Joyce, James, 11, 12, 145, 146, 163, 266 Julien Levy Gallery, 71 Kaddish, 258 Kagel, Maurice, 6, 240 Kahn, Robin, 278 kanji, 144 Katalog oslobođenih knjiga (Catalogue of Liberated Books), 121 Kaufman, Bob, 177 Kelley, Mike, 19 Kelly, Gene, 183 Kerouac, Jack, 280 Kim’s Video, 82 kinetic poetry, 155 King, Carole, 229–30 Kippenberger, Martin, 4, 244 Klangfarbenmelodie, 146 Klein, Naomi, 68 Knowles, Alison, 270 Knowles, Christopher, 217, 227–32, 240 Kokomo Jr. the Renaissance Chimp, 139 Komar & Melamid, 279 Koons, Jeff, 73 Kosuth, Joesph, 153 Koussevitzky, Serge, 233 KPFA, 248 Kruger, Barbara, 153, 159, 225 Kusama, Yayoi, 271 Kuti, Fela Anikulapo, 260 La Barbara, Joan, 6 Lacan, Jacques, 193; Séminaires, 4 Lacko, Justin, 251 La dialectique peut-elle casser des briques? (Can Dialectics Break Bricks?), 92–93 Ladyfest, 184 La femme 100 tetes, 159 “La légende d’eer,” 246 Lamantia, Philip, 220 L’amiral cherche une maison à louer, 231 Lampert, Andrew, 70, 75–80, 90, 93–94 land art, 209 Landers, Sean, 269 language: condensed, 145; disjunctive, 220; historical connotation of, 145; as image, 218; materiality of, 151–52; mathematical, 228; multidimensionality of, 153 L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E, 130 Language Centered Tendencies, 131 language poetry, 130–31, 175 “La prose du Transsibérien,” 165 “Last Acts of Saint Fuck You, The,” 225 Last Clean Shirt, The, 78 Last Journey to Jerusalem, 185 Lawler, Louise, 277 Lawson, Yank, 9 Lee, Okkyung, 79 Leidecker, Jon (Wobbly), 135, 182, 248–51 “Le marteau sans maître,” 252 Lennon, John, 198, 200–201, 222 “Lennon Diary, The,” 201 lenticular, 154 Les corps est une usine a sons, 178, 180 Leslie, Alfred, 78 Letter for Queen Victoria, A, 230–32 Levine, Sherrie, 65 levy, d. a., 159 Library Genesis, 121, 288n6, 288n11 Library of Congress, 58, 70 Life magazine, 155, 260 “Life” (Pignatari), 155 LimeWire, 50 Link tax, 23, 284n32 Linnunlaulupuu, 171 Lipman, Joel, 221 Lipstick Traces, 259, 274 literary ecosystem: circulation and varieties of, 129; in sound poetry, 177 literary readymade, 163 “Little Red Corvette,” 56 Locher, Brandon, 274 Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 8 Louis Vuitton, 74 LPs: collections of, 136; dry recorded sound, 172; inability to randomize, 265; skips and scratches on, 172, 195, 233 Lucier, Alvin, 137 Lunch, Lydia, 272 Lunch Poems, 258 Maas, Willard, 80 machine learning, 125. See also artificial intelligence Maciunas, George, 9, 206 mail art, 151, 184, 255 Making of Americans, The, 12 Mallarmé, Stéphane, 145, 147 Manhattan Project, 220 Manning, Abina, 104 Marclay, Christian, 182 Marcus, Greil, 259, 274 Maria, Sophia Al-, 271 Marian Goodman Gallery, 102, 108 Marinetti, F. T., 11 Mark, Kelly, 270 Mars, Marcell, 34, 116–23, 129 Marxism, 121, 130; in Memory of the World, 117; Red Shadow, 237 Mary Poppins, 193 Matrix, The, 192 Mattel, 67 MayDay Rooms, 116 May 1968, 149, 150, 152 McLean, Don, 193 McLuhan, Marshall, 112, 146, 196, 222 Medak, Tomislav, 117 media intervention, 207 Megaupload, 25, 27 Meinhof, Ulrike, 4 Mekas, Jonas, 36, 71, 76 Melly, George, 167 Melnicove, Mark, 222 Memory of the World, 113, 116 Memory of the World / Public Library, 115, 116–23, 133; financing of, 122; 116–22; history of, 118; librarians, 120; museum and gallery interventions with, 121; and takedown notices, 122 Mendieta, Ana, 11 Menken, Marie, 11, 280 merzbau, 161 merz (concept), 161–63, 172 Merz (magazine), 168 Messiaen, Olivier, 246 #metoo, 263 Metropolis, 192 Meyer, Russ, 262 Michaux, Henri, 90 microsound, 178 MIDI (musical instrumental digital interface), 111 Milgram, Stanley, 204 Milk, Harvey, 261 Miller, Henry, 11, 220 Millett, Kate, 203–5 Mimaroğlu, İlhan, 239 Minh-ha, Trinh T., 11 minimalism, 149, 203 Mirror, The, 192–93 Modern Art Gallery, London, 163 “Modern Primitives” (RE/Search), 263 modernism, 11, 256; in concrete poetry, 143–54; hybrid, 177; and multimedia practices, 147; in poetry, 266; and top-ten radio, 230; in typefaces, 143–54 Momus (Nick Currie), 63, 272 Mondrian, Piet, 145 Monk, Meredith, 245 Monoskop, 116, 123–26, 133, 260; as intellectual diary, 123; origins, 124; Wiki roots, 123 Moondog, 11 Moorman, Charlotte, 280 Mori, Ikue, 182 Morris, Robert, 86 Morris, Tracie, 171–76, 290n18 Morrison, Jim, 183 Moscone, George, 261 Mosfilm, 191 Moss, Tobias, 260 Mothers of Invention, 186. See also Zappa, Frank Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 266 MTV, 10, 80, 182 multilingual poetry, 231 Multimedia Institute/MaMa, 118 Mulvey, Laura, 137 Museu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona, 135 Museum of Modern Art, 1, 2, 78, 282n6; Artist’s Choice exhibition, 2; Circulating Film and Video Library, 71; digitization of media, 284–86n6; and estate of Joseph Cornell, 71–72; Library, 1, 256; relegation of film and video, 86 music, clearance of rights, 61 Musica cubana contemporanea, 252 Musica Elettronica Viva, 11 Music Before Revolution, 251 Music with Roots in the Aether, 10 musique concrète, 178–79, 230, 252 Nancarrow, Conlon, 11 Nauman, Bruce, 38 Nazis, 12, 57 Nechvatal, Joseph, 243 Neoism, 124 neologism, 164 NERD-GIRLS a herstory of electronic music, 250 Neset, Anne Hilde, 249 Netflix, 27, 97 net neutrality, 23, 282n2 neural aesthetics, 125 New Jack Swing, 111 new music (genre), 178 New Music China (Tellus), 243 New York Community Choir, 173 New York Philharmonic, 233 New York Public Library, 128 New York Times, 99, 197, 199 New York Underground Film Festival, 76 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 259 Night of the Living Dead, 70 “1983” (Daniels), 219–20 “No” (Millett), 203 Noigandres group, 144–49 noise: 10, 249; ambient, 177; from the body, 178; John Cage and, 180; and community value, 173; in Dubuffet, 238; industrial, 247, 255; and People Like Us, 186; “pink,” 249; typewriter, 148; in Varése, 234 Nono, Luigi, 247 Non-site (Smithson), 212–13 novelty music, 7 Numminen, M. A., 138 Nurse with Wound, 139, 186 Nuyorican Poets Café, 174, 290n18 O’Hara, Frank, 245 Oldenburg, Claes, 246 Oliveros, Pauline, 10, 249 Olson, Charles, 177 Onasis, Jacqueline, 13 Ono, Yoko, 9, 198–99, 200–201 open distribution, 93 open-ended artworks, 266 Open Library, 126 Operation Rolling Thunder, 183 “Oraison,” 246 Oram, Daphne, 11, 182 Organism, 80 orphaned media, 188 Oswald, John, 182, 187 OU Revue, 41 outsider art, 216–17 outsider music, 237–40. See also Songs in the Key of Z Outsiders section (UbuWeb), 7, 8 outsider writing, 6, 7 Ox, Jack, 168 oxDB, 116 Paik, Nam June, 45, 97 Pamela, Lucia, 138 Parker, Charlie, 172, 178 Parmegiani, Bernard, 247 Parsons, Michael, 240 Partch, Harry, 11, 138 ‘pataphysics, 20 Patchen, Kenneth, 220 patriarchy, 204 Paul McCartney, and Wings, 187 PBS, 97 “Peace Object” (Picard), 204 Peacock, Annette, 249 Pearlstein, Alix, 276 PennSound, 55,130; Ashbery archive, 134; download statistics, 134; history and philosophy, 133–35; preservation, 134–35 People Like Us (Vicki Bennett), 138, 181–84, 228; categorization of, 183; childhood, 184; economy philosophy, 189–90; and feminism, 183; influence of occult, 185; live performativity, 181, 182; philosophy of elevation in art, 186; relationship to free culture, 181; theories of collage, 183–85; work in radio, 186; working methods in film, 191–92; working methods in audio, 181 Perec, Georges, 275 Pere Ubu, 20 performance art, 134, 196 phanopoeia, melopoeia, logopoeia, 146 Phillpot, Clive, 1, 3, 256 Philosophy of Andy Warhol, The: From A to B and Back Again, 13 PhonoStatic Magazine, 254–56 photocopy, 254 photostatic media, 254–55 physical media, 189 Picard, Lil, 204, 292n13 Picasso, Pablo, 11 Pick, Anat, 171 Pickle, Durwood, 50 Pictures Generation, 59 “Pierrot Lunaire,” 178 Piet Zwart Institute, 124 Pignatari, Décio, 144, 155, 158 Pink Noises: Women on Electronic Music and Sound, 249 piracy, 3, 40; and author royalties, 128; economic impact on authors, 128; effect on academic presses, 128; in Memory of the World, 121; as preservation, 39–41, 91; in Seth Price’s works, 110; self-piracy, 127–28; in shadow libraries, 115; video, 95, 97, 98 Pirate Cinema, 116 Plastic Exploding Inevitable, The, 196 Plaza, Julio, 147 plundergraphia, 63 Plunderhonic, 187 “Poème electronique,” 247 Poetry of Repetitive Vertical Movement (at Sea), The, 159 Poison Boyfriend, The, 63 Polish Modern Music, 252 Pompidou Center, 78 pop art, 9, 14, 196, 206 portable mass media, 200 Porter, Bern, 217, 220–27, 234, 235, 240 “Portrait of Raoul Hausmann,” 164 Portsmouth Sinfonia, 240 poster poem, 145 potlatch, 92; book sharing, 121 Pound, Ezra, 10, 144–45 “Pound for a Brown, A,” 237 Powell, Mel, 251 Power Electronics (Tellus), 243 “Pranks” (RE/Search), 263 Prelinger, Rick, 85, 188–89 Prelinger Archives, 188–89 Price, Seth, 40, 107–13 Price Is Right, The, 222 “Primal Sonata,” 162 Prince, 56, 58 Prince, Richard, 73 “Project Princess,”174 prose poetry, 205 Prospective 21e Siecle, 252 psychedelia, 9, 196 public domain, 56 public library: budget, 115, definition, 118 Public School, the, 127 punk, 124, 150, 159, 187, 244, 254, 256, 262; Bay Area, 259–60; postpunk, 256; and RE/Search, 259–60 Putin, Vladimir, 11 Ra, Sun, 11 Raaijmakers, Dick, 168–69 racial discrimination, in music, 173 Radigue, Eliane, 272 radio: as archive, 137; as ephemeral medium, 137; online, 137; as source of sound art, 137 Radio Borecast, 186 “Radio Play,” 201 Ràdio Web MACBA, 135–37 Rainer, Yvonne, 137 Ramone, Joey, 13 Ramones, 13 Ramos, Anna, 135–37 Rapidshare, 25 Rawls, Lou, 173 Raw Materials, 38 Read, Herbert, 163 Recording Industry of America (RIAA), file-sharing lawsuits by, 50–51 Reddit, censorship of, 27 redundancy: 136; of cultural artifacts, 28, 34; of UbuWeb, 139 Reed, Lou, 9, 196. See also Velvet Underground reformatting: as artistic practice, 111, physical artifacts, 200. See also digitization reframing, of artwork, 109 Reich, Steve, 274 remix: as artwork, 108; in concrete poetry, 158; in film, 188, 193 Remote Controller, The, 189 Renaissance poetry, 132; pattern poems, 222 “Répons,” 247 RE/Search, 256–63; formation of, 258–61; “Guide to Bodily Fluids,” 263; logo, 260; and punk rock, 259–60; Search and Destroy, 259–60 Residents, 186 Resonance FM, 137 Re-sonate, 171–72 restrictive access, to cultural artifacts, 115 revisionist art history, 5 Revueltas, Silvestre, 273 Rexroth, Kenneth, 8 Rhode Island School of Design, 19 Riley, Bridget, 196 Riley, Terry, 10, 274 Riot grrrl, 263 Rist, Pipilotti, 99 Rockmore, Clara, 249 Rodchenko, Alexander, 256 Rodgers, Tara, 249 Rodin, Auguste, 102 Roget’s Thesaurus, 122 Rolling Stones, the, 49, 61 Romero, George, 70 Rose, Peter, 88 Rose Hobart, 71 Rosenfeld, Marina, 182, 279 Rosenquist, James, 196, 224 Rothenberg, Jerome, 8 rotoscope, 154 Rotten, Johnny, 187 Rough Trade, 260 Ruff, Thomas, 104 Ruggles, Carl, 7, 233, 237 Russian constructivism, 160, 256, 261 Ruth and Marvin Sackner Archive for Visual and Concrete Poetry, 159–60 Saariaho, Kaija, 249 Saint, Eva Marie, 9 samizdat, 10, 254, 271, 288n6 sampling: in film, 184; in music, 187, 188 Sanborn, Keith, 83, 91–93 Sanchez, Sonia, 175 Sanders, Ed, 159 Sandoz Pharmaceutical, 90 “Saran Wrap,” 246 Satie, Erik, 139, 280 Saturday Evening Post, 235 Savage, Jon, 261 scanner, homemade, 121 scat singing, 8, 138, 172 Scene, The, 60 Schaeffer, Pierre, 247 Schevill, James, 226 Schnabel, Julian, 4 Schneemann, Carolee, 76, 205–6 Schoenberg, Arnold, 147, 178, 251, 266 Schott-Music, 253 Schultz, Jason, 51, 72 Schwitters, Ernst, 168–71 Schwitters, Kurt, 161–72, 175, 176 Scorpio Rising, 66, 184–85, 193 Scorsese, Martin, 67 Scratch Orchestra, 240 sculpture: “founds,” in the work of Bern Porter, 221; Magdalena Abakanowicz, 244; relationship to artists’ sound works, 244; word art, 160 Search and Destroy, 259–60 search engines: blocking of, 32; ranking, 32 Search for Pet Clark, The, 60 Sekulic, Dubravka, 117, 121 Serafni, Luigi, 159 Serra, Richard, 5, 86 sexism, 201 Sex Pistols, 259 shadow libraries, 3, 15, 16, 34, 36, 39, 114–40, 133; economics of, 140; and infrastructure, 140; communist origins, 288n6 Shaggs, the, 138 sharing: as moral duty, 117; metrics of, 120; symbiosis with, 139; tactics of, 120 Sharits, Paul, 77–78 Sherman, Cary, 51 Sherman, Cindy, 225 Shuji, Terayama, 270 silence, in John Cage, 179–80 Sinatra, Frank, 186 Sinclair, John, 245 “Sinking of the Titanic, The,” 187 Sitney, P. Adams, 71 Situationist International, 11, 37, 91, 93, 150, 254, 277 16mm film, 109 Skempton, Howard, 240 slam poetry, 174, 290n18 Sleep, 79 Slonimsky, Nicolas, 7, 8, 217, 233–37, 240; Baker’s Biographical Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 235; “Children Cry for Castoria,” 236–37; conducting scandal, 233–34; Five Advertising Songs, 235; “Make This a Day of Plurodent,” 236; Minitudes, 237; Music Since 1900, 235; “Pillsbury Bran Muffins,” 236; “Utica Sheets and Pillowcases,” 236; “Vauv Nose Powder,” 236 Slowrotation, 120 S&M, 256 small press publications, 37, 132, 151 Smith, Harry, 70, 76 Smith, Jack, 9, 70, 196, 216; and copyright, 284n27 Smith, Patti, 246, 273 Smith, Tony, 9, 197 Smithson, Robert, 10, 107–8, 209–13 Snow, Michael, 30 socialism, 121 software art, 125 Solt, Mary Ellen, 5, 150–51, 157; Concrete Poetry: A World View, 155, 242; Flowers in Concrete, 150; “Forsythia,” 150; “Lilacs,” 150; “White Rose,” 150 Son[i]a, 136 “Sonate in Primeval Sounds,” 163 “Song of the Owl,” 8 song-poems, 7 Songs in the Key of Z: The Curious Universe of Outsider Music, 139. See also outsider music Sonic Youth, 245 Sontag, Susan, 9, 196 Sotheby’s, 100 sound art, 125, 136, 178; by artists, 244 sound-based transcription, 164 Soundcloud, 29 Sound of Music, The (film), 182 “Sound of Music, The” (song), 183 Sound of Radio, The (Tellus), 243 Sound of the End of Music, The, 182–83, 192 sound poetry, 6, 8, 41, 59; body as site of, 178–80; in Tellus cassettes, 244; dissonance in, 174; Futura Poesia Sonora (anthology), 242; of Raoul Hausmann, 163–64; improvisation in, 172–77, 225, 228; and modern classical music, 247; in the work Tracie Morris, 171– 76; nonverbal/nonlinguistic, 178; phraseology, 177; problems of notation, 176–77; Schwitters, 162–72; as sculptural material, 244 South London Gallery, 250 Sparta, Pietro, 42 Spiral Jetty, 107 Sprechstimme, 177, 178 Sprinkle, Annie, 262 “St. James Infirmary Blues,” 9 Stafford, Andrew, 195–97 Stalker, 190 Stark, Francis, 270 Stein, Gertrude, 12, 228, 230, 231 Steyerl, Hito, 11, 270 Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 11, 214, 277 Stranglers, the, 170 “Strata, a Geophotographic Fiction,” 210 streaming media, 6; censorship of, 26; and concrete poetry, 157; legal issues surrounding, 61; noncommercial uses of, 61; video subscription services, 105–6 street art, 152 “Stripsody,” 178 Studies in the Origins of Buddhism, 127 Summell, Jackie, 122 “Sundance Kid Was Beautiful, The,” 232 Super-8, 9, 196, 212 Superstar: The Karen Carpenter Story, 67 Surkov, Vladislav, 11 surrealism: British, 167; in early days of web, 266; in People Like Us, 183; in Porter, 221; punk rock and, 259; influence on RE/Search, 258; in Search and Destroy, 259 surveillance capitalism, 16, 23, 140, 265 Survival Research Laboratories, 256, 261 Swartz, Aaron, 117 Sweet, the, 7 Swinging London, 9, 196 Sylvie and Babs Hi-Fi Companion, 186 Symphony: New England Holidays, A, 233 Szemző, Tibor, 138 Talmud, 218 Tanaami, Keiichi, 278 Tango (Tellus), 243 Tape-beatles, 55–56 targeted advertising, 265 Tarkovsky, Andrei, 190 Taylor, Cecil, 175–78 Taylor, Shooby, 138 Television Delivers People, 5 Tellus cassettes, 243–44, 255 Ten Commandments, The, 193 text: and musical structure, 178; reader-reconstructed, 130; text/texere, 218 text art, 153 text-based painting, 160 textz.com, 116 Thatcher, Margaret, 187 Thermos Explorer, 188 35 mm film, 212 Thoreau, Henry David, 246 Three-Cornered World, 60 365 Days Project, 7, 139, 234, 235 Throbbing Gristle, 256, 257 time capsule: in Aspen, 9; in Warhol, 12, 221; as curation method, 14; in the work of Bern Porter, 221 Tinguely, Jean, 261 Title Variable (Price), 110 “To Anna Blossom,” 162 Toklas, Alice B., 11, 280 Tractatus (Szemző), 138 Tractatus (Wittgenstein), 138 Train Ride, 165 transcription: in ethnopoetics, 8; in poetry, 222, 228; in Schwitters’s Ursonate, 164, 165; in Cecil Taylor, 176, 177 transgender rights, 262 translation: in Seth Price, 108; in Schwitters’s Ursonate, 172; in Robert Smithson, 211 Transmediale Festival, 191 Trecartin, Ryan, 10, 109 Tropicália, 146 Truisms, 160 Tschichold, Jan, 166, 168 Tutti, Cosey Fanni, 249 Twelve Evenings of Manipulation, 202, 204 twelve-tone music, 266 24 Hour Party People, 17 Twitter: 33, 44; censorship and, 27; relationship to concrete poetry, 153 typography, Victorian, 144 Tzara, Tristan, 64, 231 UbuWeb: alphabetization as algorithm, 267; as anti-institution, 17; antithesis of cinematic experience, 80; anti-transactional, 268; as appropriative artwork, 74; and Aspen, 196– 213; audience of, 15; as backup for the commercial web, 41; bandwidth donation, 130; and biases, 19; coding of, 35–36; and collage, 254; and community, 15, 281n9; content of, 17; contradiction in, 3; and copyright, 52; curatorial decisions of, 31; custodianship of cultural artifacts, 43; defense of, 88–89; and dial-up connections, 24; economics of, 36– 37, 65, 103; ephemerality of, 18; and experimental film community, 75–94; and fair use, 65; fear of, 17, 103; film and video in, 9; finances of, 17; and Frameworks, 81, 88, 94; funding of, 31–32; hacking of, 88, 89; hiding in plain sight, 33; human-driven curation and archiving, 267–68; ideal users, 75–76; illusions of, 18–19; and independent projects, 38; as institution, 17, 31; lack of diversity of, 46; and lack of knowledge, 89; and licensing, 38; media quality in, 42, 44, 78, 80, 89, 92, 94, 103–4, 106; permanence of, 30, 33–35; permissions policies, 29–31, 38, 59; in physical space, 15; and piracy, 39–41; and Bern Porter, 223; importance of primary source materials to, 43–44; programming of, 22; and publicity, 33; radio stream, 139; and Ràdio Web MACBA, 135; redundancy, 139; relationship with artists’ estates, 40, 59–60, 91; relationship with art market, 60; relationship with art world, 44–45, 64–65; with to film distribution, 75–94; relationship with video distributors, 104–7; relationship with WFMU, 56; RE/Search, influence on, 263; and revisionist art history, 5; server space for, 130; as a service to artists, 87–88; size of, 35; sociopolitics of, 17; sound section, 241–53; submissions policy, 31; and subjectivity, 19; and takedown notices, 41; taxonomies in, 19; unaffiliation, 4; use of HTML, 23; user base, 15; and visual poetry, 158–59; Wall of Shame, 45, 90; web hosting, 28 Un coup de dés jamais n’abolira le hazard, 160 underground: art movements, 124; cassette network, 255; cinema, 67, 196; newspaper, 196; sculpture, 33; venues, 67 Understanding Duchamp, 195, 197 uniqueness, in artwork, 108 University of Iowa Digital Data Library, 126 University of Iowa Libraries Special Collections, 159 untrained musicians, 240 urban anthropology, 260 Ursonate, 162–72 Usenet, 98 utopia: in Aspen magazine, 9, 200; back door, 3; Brasília, 146; in concrete poetry, 144, 150; Marcell Mars and, 117; in nature, 150; in People Like Us, 181; postapocalyptic utopianism, 261; postutopia, 147; in shadow libraries, 139; and sysadmins, 24; taking back digital environment, 23; and UbuWeb, 19, 23; and urban decay, 261; in universally understood languages, 157 Vale, V., 258–61; childhood, 258; as editor, 259–63; musical career, 258 Vanishing Argument from Queerness, The, 127 Varda, Agnès, 271 Varèse, Edgard, 7, 233, 237, 239, 247 Vaughn, Sarah, 175 Veloso, Caetano, and concrete poetry, 146, 147 Velvet Underground, 193, 196. See also Reed, Lou verbivocovisual, 146 Vicuña, Cecilia, 8 Video Art Music (Tellus), 243 video art, 4, 5, 9, 10, 29, 30, 41, 60–61, 64–65, 66, 69, 75, 86, 88, 95–113; and concrete poetry, 147; distribution models/ecosystem, 101, 110; formats, 110; relationship to free culture, 105; and galleries, 99–104, 106; historical re-creations, 106; infinite reproducibility, 101; relationship to libraries, 105; media quality, 106; mislabeled as a medium, 101–2; open distribution, 101; as rarefied experience, 96; as unique artifact, 102; versioning, 107 videoartcollector, 96–100 Video Data Bank (VDB), 96, 104–5 video game soundtracks, 111 VideoStatic, 254 Vietnam: ca dao poetry, 8; Vietnam War, 182–83, 202, 204–5 Viénet, René, 91–93 Vimeo, 77 “Vincent (Starry, Starry, Night),” 193 VVV magazine, 258 Walker, Kara, 10 Wallace, Herman, 122 Walter Reade Theater, 103 Warhol, Andy, 2, 9, 12, 79, 196, 204, 221, 292n13 Washington Post, 237 We’re Only in It for the Money, 186 weasel, 33 web: and demise of film, 77; corporate control of, 22; format/formatless, 112; impermanence of, 27; impact on experimental communities, 85; independence from, 22; as remix machine, 79; restaging works, 4; as Smithsonian Non-site, 212–13 Webern, Anton, 138, 146 Weegee, 11 Weems, Carrie Mae, 11 Weiner, Lawrence, 153, 159 Went, Johanna, 256 West Africa, percussion music of, 136 Westerkamp, Hildegard, 249 WFMU, 56–58, 137–39; philosophy of, 138, 140. See also freeform radio “What I Believe by Ballard,” 262 What Is Cinema?, 129 What the Songs Look Like: Contemporary Artists Interpret Talking Heads’ Songs, 97 Whitelaw, Billie, 273 Whitman, Walt, 225 Whitney Biennial, 98 Who, the, 61 Wikipedia, 125 Wilde, Oscar, 40 Williams, Emmett, 41, 242 Williams, Reese, 272 Williams, William Carlos, 11 Willis, Wesley, 138 Wilson, Robert, 76, 217, 228 Wilson, Tony, 17 Winterland, 259 Wisdom of the Questioning Eye, 222 Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 127, 138 Wizard of Oz, 190, 191, 256 WNET, 61–62 Wolf Fifth blog, 251–53 Wölfli, Adolf, 270 Women Composers and Music Technology in the United States: Crossing the Line, 249 Women in Electronic Music (1938–1990), 246, 248–51 women: “Angry Women” (RE/Search), 262–63; in Aspen, 201; and the Black Rock Coalition, 173; and experimental music, 10, 182; gendered terms of musical canon, 250; gender gap in festivals, 249; and Gomringer’s “avenidas,” 157; and outsider art, 216; and People Like Us, 184; streaming services and, 249; in Tellus, 244; UbuWeb disclaimer for History of Electronic/Electroacoustic Music (1937–2001), 247; Women in Electronic Music (1938–1990), 246–51. See also feminism word-of-mouth, 33 Xenakis, Iannis, 241 xerography, 254 Years (Daniels), 217–20 Yellow Submarine, 193 YouTube, 14, 77, 87, 159; censorship algorithms, 26; downloading from, 27; embedding, 29; impermanence of, 41; leaking video art onto, 99; limited duration of videos on, 107; in Seth Price’s practice, 109–10; in relation to cinema, 78, 200 Yugoslav Black Wave Cinema, 9, 278 Z, Pamela, 182 Zappa, Frank, 237, 295n29. See also Mothers of Invention Zippay, Lori, 104, 106, 110 Zone, The, 190 Zuboff, Shoshana, 265 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Suzette Haden Elgin edited by Mike Allen and Bud Webster for the Science Fiction Poetry Association [publisher data, copyright data, et cetera] Table of Contents Preface7 Chapter One Defining the Science Fiction Poem 9 Chapter Two Graphics Patterning: How the Poem Looks 13 Chapter Three Phonological Patterning: How the Poem Sounds 21 Chapter Four Lexical Patterning: How Poets Choose Their Words 37 Chapter Five Syntactic/Semantic Patterning: How Poets Use Grammar Rules 46 Chapter Six Through the Old Credibility Gap 58 Chapter Seven Marketing and Promoting Your Work 65 Chapter Eight Poetry Readings, Workshops, and Other Events 78 Chapter Nine A Brief History of the SFPA 87 References & Suggested Readings 92 The Rhysling Record 106 Preface Welcome to the Science Fiction Poetry Handbook . I hope you will find it both interesting and useful. All of the example poems used in this handbook were written by me, which is unusual for a book of this kind, and requires explanation. There were three good reasons for doing it this way. First, using only my poems makes it possible for the Science Fiction Poetry Association (SFPA) to get this handbook out without the usual endless hassles of writing for permission to use the poems, and then corresponding about the permissions, and then clearing copyrights, and then raising funds to pay permissions fees, and so on. Second, using my own work eliminates the problem of deciding who to include and who to leave out from among the rest of the science fic - tion poetry community. Leaving everybody out is scrupulously fair. As any- one who has put together a poetry anthology or similar publication knows, choosing a small number of poets and poems to include, from among a much larger number, is never done to the total satisfaction of anyone involved. The third—and the most important—reason for using only my poems is that it lets me say anything whatsoever I want to say about them, which is appropriate to the intention of this book. If I had used other people’s work I would not have been able to do that. I could have gotten away with praising poems by other people, even if not all readers agreed with my judgment. But I could not have said—in the way that I can freely say for my own work—that I’d included a particular poem because it was so awful. I couldn’t have said that a particular poem was included “in spite of being a very bad poem” because I needed it there for other reasons. I don’t claim that the example poems I’ve used are all good poems. On the contrary, some of them are dreadful, and the reasons why they are dreadful are instructive. To see poems that are intended to represent only good science fiction poetry, please go to the poetry journals, the poetry anthologies, and the collected works of science fiction poets. (You’ll find a list of sources in the “References & Suggested Readings” section of this handbook.) The only claim I make for my example poems is that they serve well to illus - trate the point I am trying to make at the time. I want to express my gratitude, and the SFPA ’s gratitude, to all the people who helped produce this volume: editor Bud Webster, who scoured through the scans of the original 1986 edition, hunting for ma - chine-induced typos; poets Bruce Boston, Robert Frazier, Scott Green and Marge Simon, who helped flesh out Chapter 9; Boston again and poet Roger Dutcher, who pitched in to help update the bibliography; and cover artist Tim Mullins. Without their help, all of it donated to the SFPA, the project would have been impossible. I am especially grateful for the help of editor Mike Allen, who edited every part of this book and typeset it, and who has been there with whatever assistance I needed, every step of the way. All royalties and other non-publisher profits for this volume go to support the Science Fiction Poetry Association; none come to me, or to SFPA officers or editors or functionaries. On behalf of the SFPA, I thank you for buying the book, and I look forward to any comments or criticisms that you might want to share with us. Any errors or misperceptions you find are entirely my own responsi - bility and not that of the Science Fiction Poetry Association. Suzette Haden Elgin PO Box 1137 Huntsville, AR 72740-1137 http://www.sfwa.org/members/elgin Note: 1. Some of the material in this handbook has appeared previously, sometimes in a slightly different form, in Star*Line: The Journal of the Sci - ence Fiction Poetry Association. Chapter One Defining the Science Fiction Poem Logically, I should be able to offer you a satisfactory definition of “a poem”—a generic poem—before moving on to a specific definition for a science fiction poem. Given the many centuries during which poetry has been spoken and written, you’d think that would be easy, but it most em- phatically is not. There are plenty of definitions, but there’s no consen - sus, and they range from the most nitpicking technical list of defining characteristics to the most brute-force “I know one when I see/hear one” statements. The source of the difficulty lies in the way we have traditionally in - sisted on a binary, either/or, definition. We can always say that some - thing either is or is not a frog; we have behaved as if that same precision should be possible for poetry. If we follow the lead of contemporary science and abandon this is-or-is-not attitude, we’ll get farther with the task of definition. We need to look at all of written language as a continuum, with the most unambiguously prosy prose at one extreme and the most unam - biguously poetic poetry at the other, and an infinite number of grada - tions from prose to poetry in between. (Including the “prose poem,” which is very popular in the field of science fiction poetry.) We could then say with confidence that poetic language has at least these three pri- mary defining characteristics: 1. patterning that matters 2. deviance that matters 3. fierce resistance to change The more a sequence of language can be shown to have these character- istics, the more likely it is that it’s a poem; the less it has them, the more likely it is that it’s prose. Suppose I write a letter and include the sequence, “Send the cheese, please.” By writing that sentence I will have produced a sequence of lan- guage made up of four one-syllable words, two of which rhyme. This is an example of language patterning, no question about it. It’s also an ex - ample of deviance, because sentences of ordinary language don’t con - tain that sort of patterning. But neither the patterning nor the deviance matters, and no poetry is intended; both of those characteristics are there by accident. If my letter goes on and on like that, however—with “No potatoes, just tomatoes” and “Mutter, mutter, send more butter”— it would be reasonable to assume that the effect is deliberate, and that it was at least my intention that it should matter. Suppose I write the sentence, “I want to buy a house.” It probably wouldn’t make any difference to me if you changed that to “I’d like to buy a house” or “I want to buy a place to live.” No damage would be done and no meaning would be lost. Poetry, however, is not like that. You can’t take Oliver Wendell Holmes’ line—“Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul”—and substitute “Build thee more stately big houses, O my soul” without doing damage. If a sequence of language is a poem, changing it in any way will either ruin it or turn it into a different poem. When you can change a sequence of language without either of those things happening, you’re dealing with prose. We’ve defined “a poem” as a sequence of language that contains pat - terning and deviance that matter, and that cannot be changed without destroying its identity as that sequence. Using that as a foundation, we can move on to the question of what makes a sequence that has already been identified as a poem recognizable as a science fiction poem. The Controversy At this point I need to bring in some additional terms, because all of them are commonly used to refer to types of poems found in “science fiction poetry” publications and collections of “science fiction poetry.” We need at least these five labels: science poem; fantasy poem; horror poem; science fiction poem; speculative poem. The science poem is about science, and may have no fictional aspect at all; for example, a sonnet about the second law of thermodynamics that takes no liberties with contemporary scientific knowledge is a sci - ence poem. A sonnet about unicorns, as long as no evidence for the ex - istence of unicorns can be found, is a fantasy poem. A sonnet about vampires is almost always going to be a horror poem. These three terms are reasonably noncontroversial. It’s only the terms “science fiction poem” and “speculative poem” that are argued about. To my mind, the term “speculative poem” is so broad and so vague that it can include almost anything except the most traditional popular verse, and I’m not always certain that even that can be excluded. How - ever, many poets (and many members of the SFPA) find the term useful as a label for their work, perhaps because it doesn’t restrict them the way a more narrow term would. From the point of view of the business of being a poet today, “speculative poem” is an important term. It is the most popular cover term at the moment, and is commonly used to in - clude all four of the other labels. My personal definition for the science fiction poem itself has three parts: 1. A science fiction poem must be about a reality that is in some way dif- ferent from the existing reality. 2. It must contain some element of science as a part of its focus. 3. It must contain some element of narrative—some “story” element. The difference from existing reality may be very slight or it may be enor - mous—perhaps the poem gives earth a moon that is bright red, or men - tions a contemporary world where U.S. Presidents are allowed to serve five terms, or claims that bacteria have the ability to feel sad. The sci - ence element can range from a single word—perhaps a line that reads “geology is my passion”—to lengthy and elaborate scientific content. The narrative element may be an entire plot with beginning and middle and end, or it may be nothing more than the message that can logically be derived from the reality-difference that the poem presents. Consider the hypothetical poem about the sorrowing bacterium, for example. It could tell a story in which one bacterium observes another bacterium being killed (as a result of an antibiotic, perhaps), with all sorts of details about the second bacterium’s suffering, and about the re- lationship between the two bacteria. Or there may be nothing more of narrative than the derivable message, which is “Suppose there is a uni - verse in which bacteria are capable of feeling sadness,” with no other de- tails supplied. If I were putting together an anthology and needed a cover term, I would choose “science fiction poetry” rather than “speculative poetry.” For me that term would include the fantasy and horror poems but it would exclude the science poems, because they are about existing reality as we know it and they contain no narrative element. Many science fiction poets disagree with my definition; some of them feel that the narrative-element requirement holds back the field. The def- inition of “a science fiction poem” has been and still is a matter of con- troversy. (This was one of the reasons that I stepped down as editor of the SFPA journal Star*Line in the 1980s. I felt that it was unethical for me to base my selection of poems for Star*Line on a definition that wasn’t accepted by the science fiction poetry community as a whole, and I didn’t feel comfortable selecting poems for publication on the basis of someone else’s criteria.) I will leave it to you to decide which of the cover terms—“science fic- tion poem” or “speculative poem”—you prefer. If you like “speculative poem” better, that’s fine. It won’t create any problems for you in reading this handbook, since all science fiction poems would without question also be speculative poems. Note 1. You’ll notice that I’ve said nothing at all about “good” poems or “bad” poems. Finding that a living creature is a featherless biped mam - mal identifies it as a human being, but not as a “good” or “bad” human being. The very worst poem (for example, “Listen to the purple rain/falling on the Martian plain”) is still a poem, just as the very worst human being is still a human being and not a kangaroo. Chapter Two Graphics Patterning: How the Poem Looks Why the Graphics Level Is Important It’s safe to say that the graphics level in prose (that is, the print itself and the arrangement of the print on the page) is not really a stylistic resource for the writer. A book of prose may be so well-designed and so superbly printed and bound that we are struck by its beauty; in such cases the graphics level serves to establish the book itself, not its content, as an art object. The prose writer rarely has any control over such matters. In poetry, however, the graphics level is of major importance to the writer. At minimum it will include those graphic devices which help to indicate that the sequence is intended to be a poem, such as line length and arrangement of the lines on a page. It will include the presence of a title, which may be the only element not shared by poems and by typical advertisements. At the other extreme, the graphics level may be crucial to the meaning of the poem. The poems of George Herbert frequently took the shape of a physical object that was the poem’s subject; his poem “Easter-Wings” is in the shape of a pair of wings. A science fic - tion poem might take the shape of a rocket, or a dragon, or a sorrowful bacterium, and that shape would then be crucial to its meaning. Writing a science fiction poem that was about a rocket, while arranging its graphic shape to form the picture of a dragon, would allow a poet to in - clude in the poem’s meaning the proposition that a rocket is like a dragon—without one word appearing in the poem to actually say that. In such a case, changing the graphic form of the poem would mean the total loss of part of its content. Line length in prose, like punctuation and capitalization in prose, is a cut-and-dried matter about which the writer usually has little choice. When a prose line is shorter than the full width from margin to margin it’s because it has fewer characters in it than the space allows. With po - ems, however, the point at which a line will begin or end is a matter of the poet’s free choice, and there are formally as many potential arrange - ments as can be fit into the physical limits of the page. Readers must therefore assume that when a poet arranges lines in a certain way, or punctuates or capitalizes lines in a certain way, it’s done for a reason, whether that reason can be consciously explained or not. Please look at this example of a simple four-line verse, constructed by me for this handbook: Terra was once a paradise hung in the sky; but now it is a poisoned waste where all things die. Now let’s compare that plain-vanilla version with some possible graphics variations: (1) Terra was once a paradise hung in the sky; but now it is a poisoned waste where all things die. (2) Terra was once a paradise hung in the sky; but now it is a poisoned waste where all things die. (3) Terra was once a paradise hung in the sky; but now it is a poisoned waste where all things die. The question is, does it matter which of the arrangements is chosen when the poem is printed? Since this isn’t a case in which the poem’s shape forms a picture of a specific object, does its shape matter? It does matter, yes. If you read the four arrangements aloud (some - thing you should always do when you write a poem), you’ll find that they sound very different. Variations (1) and (3) change the rhythm of the poem drastically. Arrangement (2) can be read to sound like the original, but it creates a visual problem: Only the original version allows the poet to use both sound and visual form to place strong emphasis on the two phrases “paradise” and “poisoned waste,” contrasting them in both the reader’s eye and the reader’s ear. With arrangement (2) that may happen, but the original allows the poet to help it happen. Such things matter; they are essential parts of the poem. They matter just as much in what is usually called “free verse” as they do in the most rigid traditional forms; they are part of the resources available to the poet for making the poem. When an editor changes the way a poem’s lines are arranged (perhaps to make it fit more easily into some available empty space), the result is a different poem. It may be as good as the original, or even better than the original, but it will not be the poem that the poet wrote and entrusted to the editor. That change should never happen without the poet’s agree - ment. Do Poets Know What They’re Doing? I’m often asked (as a linguist) whether poets know what they are doing, graphically speaking, and whether they deliberately intend for the reader to notice. When a poem makes a picture, that’s obviously intentional, but what about the more usual situation? B.F. Skinner claims that poets have no idea what they’re doing; I strongly disagree. To discuss this sensibly, let’s use the two linguistics terms, competence and performance. Competence refers to the theoretically flawless knowl - edge that speakers have of their native tongue and dialect; performance refers to what happens in the real world when they use that knowledge. Theoretically, you would never make a mistake of any kind when you speak or write your native tongue, and the fact that you reliably reject unacceptable sequences of your language (such as “boy the tree big climbed”) proves that you know the rules involved. But in the real world people do make mistakes, all the time, and they are ordinarily not able to explain what rules they are following or violating. Such knowledge is not part of their conscious awareness. Suppose you are asked to provide the rule for forming an English yes/no question. You probably won’t be able to do that —but the fact that you form English yes/no questions correctly every day proves that you know the rule or rules involved. Even if you can’t explain what you are doing; even if you aren’t con - sciously aware that you’re doing it. In the same way, poets theoretically have flawless control of the sys - tem of poetic language that is native to them. But in the real world they may fall far short—in performance terms—of demonstrating that con - trol, or being able to explain it, or even being aware of it. This does not in- validate their poetic competence. Poets may not be able to explain why the line breaks in their work must fall where they do; but the fact that they would immediately reject other arrangements as incorrect demonstrates that the choice is not being made at random, or in order to fit the poem into a particular space on the page. Many people (and editors) who are willing to grant all of this don’t ap- pear to realize that it’s just as true of the poet’s punctuation. Certainly it may happen that the only reason a poet puts a dash where a comma would be required in prose is that the poet doesn’t know how to use the dash properly, but it’s never safe to make that assumption without evi - dence. Publishers and editors were forever “correcting” the punctuation that Emily Dickinson used, on the assumption that she did what she did through carelessness or ignorance; only recently have they begun to issue her poems with her own punctuation, so that readers finally have an op - portunity to see and to hear what she meant. It is the poet’s privilege to introduce deviance into the graphics of the poem—to omit all capital letters, to scramble spelling, to put punctua - tion marks into the middle of words. A device I’m very fond of is the use of curly braces, as in this line: and Terra {wrapped} in endless light rapt 16 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook I think it’s reasonable to say that science fiction readers will know that curly braces mean “choose one from this set,” and I use them deliber - ately; when an editor replaces my curly brackets with square ones, which do not mean “choose one,” I am very irritated. Poets are entitled to the assumption that the deviance they introduce matters and is done for a reason, even if they cannot readily explain that reason. How good at this the poet may be is a matter of performance, not competence, as is the poetry reader’s skill at interpreting the result. It’s inevitable that the distance between competence and performance will be greater in poetry than in prose, because so much more deviance is allowed; this is one reason why having the poem written down is so helpful. The reader has the opportunity to go over the poem many times, in an attempt to better the odds that performance and compe - tence will be more nearly equivalent. If you want to use unusual graphics devices that introduce large ele - ments of deviance into your work, that’s your privilege. But you will want to keep in mind that the more your work deviates from the con - ventions of prose or the conventions of more traditional poetry, the greater the chances are that the reader won’t understand what you’re say- ing. If that matters to you, you’ll make an effort to use other mecha - nisms of poetic language to reinforce your meaning, and to offset the potential loss of clarity that the graphics deviance brings with it. You may not care—poet Paul Valéry claimed not to care, and said that he wrote for “the happy few”—but it should be a decision you make as a poet. It shouldn’t be something that simply happens to you. The market for science fiction poetry at the time this handbook is be - ing written (in early 2004) is not as large or as strong as poets would like it to be, and many editors are very conservative. If your experiments with graphic arrangements go very far, you will probably have a harder time getting your poems published; if that matters to you, you will want to remember it when you make decisions about graphics. The market for “speculative” poetry—not clearly identifiable as science fiction, fantasy, or horror, and including straight science poems—is larger. You can send speculative poetry to almost any poetry journal, including those consid - ered mainstream. However, remember that if your poetry doesn’t appear in science fiction/fantasy/horror markets, you will have difficulty estab - lishing recognition for yourself as a science fiction poet. * * * Writing Poetry In Traditional Forms The last topic I want to discuss in this chapter is that of choosing to write poems in traditional set forms such as the sonnet or the haiku (re - ferred to in the science fiction community as the scifaiku), or in some new set form that you yourself invent. You might decide to write a sci - faiku; in that case, you have to write three lines, with five syllables in the first and third line and seven in the second. Or you might decide to write poems in a form of your own devising that has eleven lines, with twenty-one syllables in the first line, nineteen in the second, seventeen in the third, and so on by odd numbers down to just one syllable in the fi - nal line. I like to write in the French poetry form called the chantefable, which uses both rhymed-and-metered sections and prose-poem sections. The choice of any set form brings with it certain graphics constraints. It still leaves you free to vary punctuation and spelling and capitalization, but it tends to place firm limits on line length and arrangement. It’s diffi- cult to imagine how a haiku could be written that would form a picture of a dragon—the form selected rules out that possibility in advance. The invented eleven-line form is almost certainly going to be shaped like a triangle; that constraint is imposed on it by the rules of the form. Suppose that you make this rule for yourself: Every poem I write must form the shape of some concrete object. That would be less work today, when you have computers available to help you, than it would have been twenty years ago. It would be novel enough in science fiction poetry to sell poems, and you might develop a strong reputation as the poet who does that. But it would severely limit your options at the graphics level. I suspect that you’d get awfully tired of the limitations, just as you might get tired of writing only sonnets. Your goal should be to make reasoned choices among the many possible forms. Suppose you want to write a science fiction poem with the message “There is a universe in which bacteria grieve when other bacteria are killed by antibiotics.” You are free to write it as a sonnet, as “free verse,” as a prose poem, as a form of your own invention, or in many other ways; that’s entirely up to you. But there will be consequences for your poem resulting from each choice. It’s not trivial or irrelevant. It matters in terms of the effect the poem has on the reader; it matters in terms of the markets that will be available for the poem; it matters in terms of the degree of freedom you will have as you write. I would suggest that as an exercise you choose some message (the one about bacteria will do if you don’t have anything in mind) and try writ - 17 18 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ing it in a number of different strict forms. Then look at the results and consider what the differences are, and why. You do this not just for prac- tice, or for the fun of solving the puzzles it sets for you as a poet, but because it’s one very good way to bring the knowledge that you have about what you are doing to a level of consciousness that will allow you to use that knowledge systematically. It gives you control of what you know. For the same reason, and to achieve the same goal, take one of your own poems and write it with many different kinds of graphic de - viance. Vary the punctuation, the capitalization, the line breaks, the type style—then consider carefully how the resulting poems differ from one another, and why. My favorite source for definitions and examples of specific poetic forms is Babette Deutsch’s Poetry Handbook: A Dictionary of Terms ; but there are many such handbooks available, and any of them will tell you such things as how many lines a sonnet has or what the rhyme scheme is for a rondeau. At the present time no such manual exists for science fic - tion (or even speculative) poetry, but that’s irrelevant for your present purposes. Take the example of the poetic form that appears in the man - ual you are using, and rewrite it as a science fiction poem; write it out by hand, so that your body gets a feel for the form and you aren’t forced to rely on a memorized definition. The example Deutsch gives for a haiku in my copy of her handbook is this translation of one by the sixteenth-century poet Moritaki: “The falling flower I saw drift back to the branch Was a butterfly” I can take a look at this, think to myself that substituting “unicorn” for “butterfly” will turn it into a science fiction haiku, and go no farther, but I won’t learn much that way. I need to write it out and make that substi - tution, over-simplified as it is, in order to experience what it feels like to write a haiku. I need to write it out with no capital letters, and look at it carefully, and see if that seems to make any difference. And then I need to try to determine why I think so. The more you know about what you’re doing as a poet, the more likely you are to have what you write respected and accepted as being “correct” just the way you have written it. And the less likely you are to be told by editors that they will print your poems only if you make changes in them. Editors, and readers, are also capable of recognizing and respecting competence reflected in performance. Chapter Three Phonological Patterning: How the Poem Sounds Patterning at the phonological level of poetic language (the level of the sound system) is the first thing we appreciate about it. Long before a child is old enough to do more than babble, it will respond to such im - mortal sequences as “pattycake, pattycake, baker’s man!” The child doesn’t tell us that this sequence has a compelling rhythm. It doesn’t re - mark on the fascinating fact that “pattycake, pattycake” runs through the set of English voiceless stop consonants (P , T, K,) from the front of the mouth to the back of the mouth twice, or that it has a duplicated pattern of interesting vowels. The child doesn’t mention to us that “Baker’s man!” repeats the vowel pattern again in reverse. But the child notices these patterns and responds to them with delight. The consonants “P , T, K” are a natural class of English sounds (that is, things that happen to one of the set are likely to happen to all of them); and the child, busily engaged in learning the English sound system, is constantly observing such things. The pleasure found in sound patterns continues through life, although we may outgrow our appreciation for nursery rhymes. The meaningful sounds of a language are called phonemes; “P , T, K” are phonemes of English, and are usually written between two slashes to indicate that status. In ordinary language certain phonemes occur more frequently than others, as certain letters occur more frequently than oth - ers. The phoneme /zh/ (the sound of “s” in “pleasure”) occurs much more rarely in English than the phoneme /m/ represented by the letter “m” in “metrics.” But these frequencies are built into the structure of the language; we don’t, when we talk, make deliberate choices among the phonemes in an attempt to establish patterns of sound. Suppose I’m eating dinner with you and I say “Pass the peas, please.” The sequence has four monosyllables, three of which begin with the same consonant phoneme and the last two of which rhyme. We can safely assume I 20 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook didn’t use that sound patterning on purpose. In a poem, however, we would assume that this same pattern was deliberately intended. The most basic device of sound patterning in English poetry is rhyme, with its subcategories, including alliteration, assonance, and con - sonance. Rhyme is the repetition of sounds. Alliteration is the repetition of word-initial sounds (usually the first consonant or consonant cluster) as in “tree, try, trail, trifle.” Assonance is the repetition of stressed vow - els, as in “rain, gain, mail, strange, flake”; consonance is the repetition of final consonant sounds, as in “ledge, judge, bridge, fringe.” All of these devices work together in poetry to provide sound patterns, potentially patterns of great intricacy. In perfect rhyme (the most familiar kind, and the usual sense in which the term “rhyme” is used) the first sounds in the rhymed words are dif - ferent, but the other sounds match; tired pairs like “love/dove” and “moon/June” are perfect rhymes. Spelling often has little to do with this system—except for “eye rhyme,” which is a special device based on the fact that a set of words may match for the eye even when they don’t match for the ear, as with the pair “rough/bough.” It’s the phonemes of the language that are involved in rhyme, not the letters; eye-rhyme is therefore a device from the level of graphics. Example and Analysis Here is an example of a science fiction poem, with a brief analysis of some of its sound patterns, to make this more clear. Suzette Haden Elgin 21 Brochure from the Intensive Care Ward: 2081 “Emerson has written that the poet is the only true doctor. I believe him, for the poet, lacking the impediment of speech with which the rest of us are afflicted, gazes, records, diag - noses, and prophesies.” (Richard Selzer, Mortal Lessons, page 16) You will be pleased to know: Today we have therapists to provide the blessed impediment—the tongue, tied, the nerves laced decently, and laced inside. Today we find them early, diapered, nested, before their brains are hopelessly infested with images; today, they can be tested, the diagnosis made, the remedy applied, before the poison spreads. Our pride is justified ... poetry was a slow and agonizing suicide. No more those gouts of wet and living rose. Now we apply the tourniquet of prose and staunch the torturing truth before it flows. This poem has a very simple rhyme scheme; it uses four groups of three lines, with each group of three ending in perfect rhymes. The first and third groups use the same perfect rhyme (“eyed”), while the second and fourth groups have different perfect rhymes (“ested” and “oze”). You have to be careful with perfect rhymes because so many of them are trite; one way to avoid sounding like a bad greeting card is to limit your use of perfect rhymes that are one-syllable words like “love/dove.” (Unless of course you can come up with sets of such words that are truly original and splendid, in which case you should go right ahead.) I ended the example poem above with three familiar perfect rhymes: “rose, prose, flows.” But I did several things—deliberately— in an effort to keep them from being perceived as trite. 1. I made sure that of the remaining nine perfect rhymes there were eight that had two or more syllables. 2. I placed the only other one-syllable rhyme very early in the poem, at a distance from the triple set at the end. 3. I put the “rose, prose, flows” set at the end of lines that use those words in an unusual way. “Prose,” for example, does not stand alone but is part of the phrase “the tourniquet of prose,” and that’s not a cliché. There’s nothing original about either the concept of “truth that flows” or “gouts of rose”; however, they occur here as part of a hypothetical surgical procedure performed on all infant poets to cure them of the dangerous illness called poetry, and that is sufficiently novel to lessen the potential for triteness. I deliberately made the poem difficult to pronounce; it’s stuffed with consonants that clash and cluster and demand gymnastics of the vocal tract. I did that because I wanted to reinforce the concept of poetry as a sort of “speech disorder” requiring urgent therapy. It backs up the word “impediment” in the second line, next to “the tongue, tied,” both in - tended to make the reader think of speech impediments and being “tongue-tied” without having to say so flat out. (Richard Selzer’s use of “impediment of speech” in the quotation that is the poem’s epigraph helped me considerably.) There are numerous examples of the conso - nant clusters “ts,” “st,” and “sts” (“therapists, laced, gouts, staunch”) and an additional set where the cluster appears only for the eye (“nested, in - fested, tested, justified”). “Therapists” is a word that— like “desks, wasps, fifths”—forces the speaker to do violence to the sound system rules of English; it’s hard to say. In ordinary speech we deal with a se - quence like “therapists to” by saying “therapis to”; we don’t pronounce the final “ts” in “therapists” if it comes before a word beginning with another consonant. The sequence “laced decently” is similarly hard to say, and the sequence “laced inside” contains a hidden “st” between the two words. That whole opening three-line group is deliberately intended to be reminiscent of tongue-twisters and to produce a “speech impedi - ment” for the reader. Through the whole poem I relied heavily on two sets of consonants: the English stops /p, t, k, b, d, g/, so called because to produce them you have to stop the flow of air through the vocal tract; and the English fricatives /th, f, v, s, z, ch, j, sh, zh/, so called be - cause they literally produce turbulence of sound by the friction in their pronunciation. I did all this because I wanted the poem to be an illustration of its subject—poetry as speech disorder and speech impediment—and the stops and fricatives of English require more effort to pronounce than the other English sounds, especially when used in quantity. I also did it 22 Suzette Haden Elgin 23 because the word “stop” reinforces the ideas in “impediment, tourni - quet, staunch, laced” and because the word “fricative” names those sounds of English characterized by their noisiness ... their hissing and buzzing. This is special knowledge, in the sense that I can’t expect every reader to know about the linguistics terms “stop” and “fricative”; but it is a kind of special knowledge that I can use without it being a barrier to understanding, and it’s part of the science component of the poem. If that chunk of meaning is picked up, it helps; if it’s missed, it does no harm. With all that said, I must also say that it was a mistake for me to do this, and pretentious, and self-indulgent. Poetry should be made pleasant to read aloud; it should feel good in the mouth. I was showing off, being clever at the expense of the reader or listener, in Valéry fashion. But that’s not the point. The point is that, contrary to Skinner’s claim, none of the things I did was an accident. For the vowels, I bore down hard on the “eye” sound; it carries six of the perfect rhymes and appears also in “fine, diapered, diagnosis, pride, agonizing, apply.” “Pride” is another perfect rhyme in the set used for stanzas one and three; put inside the line as it is, it’s called “internal rhyme.” I did this because that sound is the sound of “cry” and it is the vowel of cries and of pain; this poem is about surgery, which inevitably means pain. I also backed up the “crying” with “diapered,” which brings in babies, who inevitably cry. Then in the final group of lines I switched to another group of vowels I associate with pain: the “ow” of “gouts” and the “oh” of the end rhymes. And all through the poem there are lots of “i” and “o” letters for the eye to see, to reinforce the pain sounds for the ear. If I did this right, the poem hisses and moans and cries in its totality of sound, and that is what I wanted. I wanted sound patterns that would make readers hear “Oh! Ai! Ow! Sssssssss! Ouch!” some - where in the backs of their minds. Counting up how many times particular sounds and/or letters are used in a poem won’t always tell you anything about a poet’s intentions. You have to take into account how frequently particular sounds and let - ters are used in that language in ordinary speech. A poem may contain a lot of examples of the letter “e” or the phoneme /t/ just because Eng - lish, as English, uses those two items so often. But poets are entitled to the benefit of a doubt. Unless there’s evidence to the contrary, it’s fair to assume that when sounds (and letters to symbolize and/or reinforce the sounds) are frequent in a poem, the poet has done that deliberately and for good reasons. Sometimes the poet will be around to confirm the assumption, as I am in this instance, but even without the confirmation 24 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook readers should be willing to grant the poet that intention. It’s the sort of thing that poets know how to do. The Word Palette There are many poets who achieve deliberate effects of sound “uncon - sciously”—that is, they rely on inspiration and their poetic competence, and it works. I’m not one of the lucky ones who can get by that way, un- fortunately. That makes me a less impressive poet, no question about that, but it does have one good feature: It makes it possible for me to provide an explanation for what I’ve done. This may be useful for other people for whom just “the Muse” or “because it sounded right to me” aren’t enough. The technique I use to do this isn’t my own, and I can therefore rec - ommend it without being hampered by modesty. I learned it from read - ing Paul Valéry, where he explains how it is done, and from reading his poems and looking at reproductions of his manuscripts where the tech - nique can be observed. Valéry would set up what he called a “word palette” for a poem. First he would write down key words that were related (in meaning or by as - sociation) to the ideas he wanted to express, until he had large groups to choose from. And then as he wrote the poem he would select from the word palette those words within each group that fit the sound pattern he was after, the way a painter selects shades of color. I almost always do this before I write a poem, and have done it long enough now that the patterns almost leap out at me; I could not possibly do it “uncon - sciously,” but I admire those who can. The key words I started with for “Brochure ... ” were “speech imped- iment, surgery, agony, poetry, prose.” The quotation, with its phrase “im- pediment of speech” (attributed by Selzer to non-poets), gave me the idea for the poem in the first place; Selzer is a surgeon, and his book Mortal Lessons is a collection of essays (extraordinarily poetic essays) about surgery. When I began I had the pair “surgery” and “agony” set up to be obvious rhymes; before I got through with the poem, “agony” had been folded into “agonizing,” where it wasn’t quite so obvious, and I had set up “surgery” as a phantom constituent. (I’ll come back to the phantom constituent in Chapter Five; for now, just think of it as a word or sequence of words that never appears overtly in the poem but that should occur inescapably in the mind of the reader.) Establishing phan - tom constituents is one of my favorite techniques in poetry, and much of that work can be done by sound patterning. You’ll notice that although of the three words “poetry, agony, surgery” only “poetry” appears in the poem, the others are reinforced by words with the same melodic pattern; “decently, hopelessly, remedy” and “poetry” itself echo them. One of the ways our brain stores words is by these melodic (intonational) patterns, and the poet can make use of that resource. I recommend the word palette technique if you, like me, have to struggle to get a poem going properly. It worked magnificently for Valéry, and it has served me well for more than fifty years. (A dictionary and thesaurus will help.) Metric Patterns Patterns of rhythm—called metric patterns, or meters—are independent of the sounds used to fill them. In instrumental music the rhythmic pat - terns depend on pure tones without a single phoneme attached. Meter ought to be a joy for us, as it is to the child reveling in the nursery rhymes; certainly we rejoice in rhythmic patterns in almost every other activity of our lives. Unfortunately, the manner in which most of us have been taught about meter has taught us only to hate it; the traditional lessons in “met - rics” use a system and a vocabulary that were just fine for Latin and Greek but that work abominably for English. Remember having to memorize “iambic pentameter” and being required to make chicken scratches under lines of poetry to indicate that an “iambic pentameter line” went “da DA da DA da DA da DA da DA”? That experience, and its various refinements, have caused much of the English-speaking pop - ulation to detest everything even remotely connected to meter and met - rics. If you’d like to read about the traditional systems and learn all their terms and principles, you’ll find whole shelves of books devoted to them in the libraries and on the Internet, and I cheerfully refer you to those materials. I don’t plan to try to duplicate them here, even in sum - mary. Instead I want to describe another way to look at English meter that I find useful, based on the work of linguists Samuel Keyser, Morris Halle, and Joseph Beaver. I’ll go through the basics here, and you will find ample material elsewhere to take you beyond them. 1. The most basic unit of meter for English is called a FOOT, and is composed of two syllables. 26 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook 2. A LINE of verse is made up of one or more FEET. 3. In English metered verse, a line will contain no more than five feet— because longer groups are perceived by the human ear as multiples of one to five feet. 4. For English the basic unit of metric stress is the STRESS MAXI - MUM, which is a syllable that has a more weakly stressed syllable on both sides of it, like the second syllable of the word “November.” (This means that neither the first nor the last syllable of any line can ever be a stress maximum.) 5. The more stress maximums (often called “stress maxima”) there are in any line, the more intense and obvious the line’s metric pattern will be. 6. English has only two basic metric stress patterns: STRESS RIGHT, as in the word “Shazam!”; and STRESS LEFT, as in the word “Neptune.” Poets are allowed to take this basic system and add variety to it in a number of ways; we’ll look at some of the most common ones below. In the examples, the metric feet are marked off by slashes; the symbol “S” indicates a more strongly stressed syllable; the symbol “W” indicates a more weakly stressed one; an S in brackets indicates a stress maximum; and a null sign (∅) indicates a syllable slot that has been left empty. A line that follows the rules without variation looks like this: / Ve- nus / ris- ing / o- ver / hill- sides / S W [S] W [S] W [S] W This line has four metric feet, and contains three stress maximums; no line with four feet could ever have more than three stress maximums, so it has made the pattern as emphatic as it’s possible to make it. (For miles and miles of this pattern, go to Longfellow’s “Hiawatha.”) Because the ear gets weary if that sort of theoretical perfection goes on too long in practice, variations are allowed. For example ... 1. You can leave a syllable slot in a line empty. /Ve- nus / ris- ing / in the / east ∅ / S W [S] W [S] W S Suzette Haden Elgin 27 Here there are still four feet in the line, but in the final foot one syllable slot is unfilled. This doesn’t delete the time that a syllable would take if it were there—the empty slot is like a “rest” in music. The line is less in - tense metrically than the preceding example because it has only two stress maximums for four metric feet; although “east” is a strong syllable it’s not a stress maximum, because it doesn’t have a weak syllable on both sides. 2. You can add an extra weak syllable to a foot. Ju- pi- ter / o- ver the / wil- der- ness / S W W [S] W W [S] W W This line has three metric feet, with an extra weak syllable added to each one; a foot with this pattern is perceived by the human ear as occupying the same amount of time as the basic S-W or W-S foot. 3. You can fill an entire metric foot with one very strongly stressed syllable. / Trolls! / Gnomes! / Orcs! / Elves! / S S S S This is a bit tricky, and it can fail you; you’ll notice that it doesn’t have any stress maximums to guide the ear at all. If it works, it works because the English-speaking reader perceives “Trolls!” as lasting just as long as “Venus” or “Beware!”, and can be counted on not to read the line as having two metric feet stressed like this: a. / Trolls! Gnomes! / Orcs! Elves! / S W S W or ... b. / Trolls! Gnomes! / Orcs! Elves! / W S W S It won’t work if you try it using one-syllable words that can’t carry a strong stress all by themselves; for example, you couldn’t turn the phrase “the gnomes” into two metric feet because “the” is too weak to carry a full stress. It usually works best if it occurs inside a sequence of lines that have already established a pattern of four feet to the line, so that the reader is expecting that to continue. 4. You can reverse the pattern in one metric foot of your line. / Wom- bats / and loons / in moats / and bogs / S W W [S] W [S] W S Here the pattern of the line is four feet with a weak syllable followed by a strong one, but in the first foot you’ve used S-W instead of W-S, for variety’s sake. This gives you four metric feet, but only two stress maxi - mums instead of the more typical three, and can be a great relief to the ear. It’s traditionally called “irregular,” or an exception, but that’s not re - ally necessary; we don’t call a musical variation an irregularity or an ex - ception. The rules of English phonology that permit more elaborate variations and cause the ear to hear them as taking the same amount of perceived time as the basic S-W and W-S sequences are of interest only to the spe- cialist. A typical rule says that two syllables count as one syllable (that is, they are perceived as taking only one syllable’s worth of time) if they are separated by only “m, n, ng, l, r.” This means that “in a tree” is perceived as taking roughly the same amount of time as “the tree” because the vowel of “in” and the vowel of “a” are separated only by the “n” sound of “in.” If you didn’t speak English you’d have to memorize all such rules, which would be a nuisance; as an English speaker, however, you can trust your ear to recognize a metric foot whether you are consciously aware of the rules it follows or not. To test your lines for meter that works—meter that “scans,” your edi - tor will say—assume that you are holding a mug of your favorite bever - age in one hand and swinging it in time to the lines you’re reading. Then follow this principle: Every swing of the mug marks off one metric foot. If any two of your lines are supposed to match metrically, but when you read them aloud and swing your hypothetical mug you don’t get the same number of swings for each line, those lines do not scan. This matters—because lines that don’t scan result in poems that edi - tors reject, and that readers and listeners have to struggle with. Making sure that your lines scan is so easy that it’s hard for editors to understand why the poet can’t be bothered to do it properly; it makes a very bad im - Suzette Haden Elgin 29 pression. Example and Analysis These two verses of a science fiction poem (titled “The Seas of Space” (singable to the tune of “The Water Is Wide”) will serve as an example for analysis, with the meter marked in the symbols we’ve been using. / Oh, come / and sail / the seas / of space / W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / that have / no shores, / and their waves / are light / ; W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / come sail / with me—/ be my con- / -stant friend / W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / on the jour- / -ney out / that has / no end. / W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / I’ll show / you won- / -ders on ev- / -ery hand / W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / you’ll nev- / -er see / on an- / -y land /, W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / and Ter- / -ra {wrapped} / in end / -less light / rapt W [S] W [S] W [S] W S / and wound / a- round / in blue / and white/. W [S] W [S] W [S] W S In the second line the sequence “and their” counts as one weak syllable, as do “be my” in the third line and “on the” in the fourth. The second syllable of “wonders” in line five, plus “on,” counts as a single weak syl - lable; and although I didn’t spell “every” in the old poetic style, “ev’ry,” that is the way it will sound. I deliberately filled every line with the three 30 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook stress maximums that are all four feet can hold, which makes the meter insistent and powerful; if it went on like that for very long, it would also make it boring. Metrics In Free Verse Now we come to a part of metrics that isn’t hard just because it’s been taught in a way that makes reasonable people hate it, but because it isn’t well understood: the question of rhythmic patterns in so called “free” verse. I’ve had students who considered traditional meter to be The Hard Part, and I agree with them that free verse looks easier. In free verse you don’t often have the problem of being unable to use some other - wise perfect word in a line because it won’t fit the pattern. But if you are trying to teach poetics, the problem of explaining free verse rhythms is a substantial one. If you’re willing to tell your students something like, “There’s no way to explain it, you just have to develop an ear for it,” the problem disap - pears. But I can’t get away with that, since I am convinced that when I set up rhythms in my poetry I do it deliberately and systematically, and I think other poets do the same. If it’s being done systematically, the sys - tem has to be based on principles and rules; if I’m being paid to explain it, I am obligated to do my best to present those principles and rules. I don’t find that easy, and I think the term “free verse” is very misleading for English. I will use it here because it’s the one that’s customary, but I use it with the understanding that I don’t find it all that “free.” In free verse the metric unit is not the foot but the cadence. Deutsch defines “cadence” as “a rhythmical unit, similar to a musical phrase, which, when recurring, gives symmetry to verse where a strict metrical pattern is wanting.” She says cadences are “phrases which fall into the symmetrical or nearly symmetrical pattern observed when speech rhythm is highly organized” and refers once again to the similarity be - tween cadences in language and phrases in music. I couldn’t improve on her definitions, but they rely on the reader to have a solid grasp of what a musical phrase is. And even if “musical phrase” and “symmetry” are clear to the beginning poet, there’s still a need for some sort of instruc - tions on putting them to use in actual poems. Talking of cadences as “breath groups” is common, and equally mysterious. Whose breath group? In what context? Breathing how fast and how often? And how do you figure out how breath groups are constructed and assembled? One way to learn about using cadences is to turn to the works of po - Suzette Haden Elgin 31 ets who use them not only extremely well but also obviously. Read a good number of their poems aloud for the benefit of the ear, and write out a good number of their poems in longhand for the benefit of the whole body, to “get a feel for” cadence. I recommend the poems of Theodore Roethke, Robert Bly, David Waggoner, and Marge Piercy for this, for starters. Example and Analysis Here is a science fiction poem analyzed for cadence, as an example. Moses, Emily Post, and the Empath: First Installment The etiquette of the flesh is truly stringent, but it varies, as does comeliness, from house to house; that which they teach the children at one table brings down the whip next door; humans are like that. The etiquette of the mind is universal, but the answer to almost every question is, forever, NO. For example: THOU SHALT NOT TOUCH ANOTHER’S MIND UNASKED. No matter how great the need. Those who do are said to be “undiapered of mind”; The barriers set against their Touchings scald them, until they learn. (We will return with another stone.) As an example of my reasons for thinking that I do what I do based upon rules, whether I can express them consciously or not, consider that line beginning “THOU SHALT NOT ...”. I would unhesitatingly reject “THOU SHALT NOT TOUCH ANOTHER’S MIND UNINVITED” as just plain wrong, in the same way that I would unhesitatingly reject a line of traditional metered verse that doesn’t scan, or a sequence of a poem that read “Dragon the flew forth hill from the.” That kind of re - jection means there is a rule involved. If this were truly “free” verse, “uninvited” would do just as well as “unasked”—it is in fact a more ac - 32 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook curate lexicalization of the chunk of meaning I was trying to give a sur - face shape to than “unasked” is. Within a musical composition there are phrases of many sizes, inside which you can identify smaller phrases. The melody to “Silent Night” starts with the phrase that goes with the words “silent night” and repeats it with “holy night.” The notes that go with “all is calm” make up a phrase that is repeated with “all is bright.” And so on. If we analyze the example poem in that way, we can find at least these three cadence groups: GROUP ONE: The etiquette of the flesh; brings down the whip next door; the etiquette of the mind; no matter how great the need; that which they teach the children GROUP TWO: First Installment; is truly stringent; but it varies; from house to house; at one table; bring down the whip; humans are like that; is universal; for ex- ample; until they learn; we will return; with another stone GROUP THREE: Thou shalt not touch another’s mind unasked; the barriers set against their Touchings scald them; it varies, as does comeliness, from house to house; the answer to almost every question is, forever; the etiquette of the flesh is truly stringent; the etiquette of the mind is universal; Moses, Emily Post, and the Empath There are subcadences and sub-subcadences as well, but this is enough analysis to demonstrate the process. I set up these groups deliberately when I wrote the poem, and I can therefore tell you that for me each member of a set of cadences listed is perceived as taking up the same amount of time as all the others. If I were to read the poem aloud I would read it so that that was essentially what happened. I say “essentially” be - cause there are variations, but those variations are systematic. Think of “Silent Night” again.... Suppose a performer sang the first phrase, “silent night,” and followed it with “holy night” sung more slowly. The second performance of the phrase would take longer in real time, but you would still recognize it as the same phrase that went with “silent night”—because the internal time relationships are preserved. That is, the pattern of the rhythm is the same, even if its tempo changes. The same thing is true for language, so that although a particular cadence Suzette Haden Elgin 33 may take more time than another in real-time units, that won’t keep you from recognizing the two as identical in rhythm if the internal relation - ship of one syllable to another is kept stable. Some parts of English cadences are not under the control of the poet but are imposed by the language. If I use “remember” in a cadence, I’m stuck with the fact that the second syllable is more strongly stressed than the first and the last, and there’s nothing I can do about that. If I decide that I want to try using “remember” and “the gate” and “Trolls!” as a set of three matching cadences, forcing that pattern on the reader by work - ing those words into a pattern that can be read no other way, I had bet - ter be awfully good at what I do, because the words themselves will fight that. If I want to put “remember” into a set of cadences based on the pattern of “three blind mice” I have to find a way to force the reader to read “remember” as if it were “ree mem burr,” and that’s not going to be easy. Gerard Manley Hopkins tried to do things like that by using spe- cial punctuation to show how the words were to be read. I don’t think it worked very well; his poems are like the written music for blues—just an approximation of what he intended—and that puts a barrier between him and his readers. But punctuation is one of the few tools you have to work with in setting up your cadences. When I wrote “Moses, Emily ... ” I wanted that one word “No” to take up as much perceived time as “for example” and “forever.” I couldn’t count on that, and still can’t. I did my best to indicate that that was what I wanted by putting “forever” on one side of it and “for exam- ple” on the other, by putting “no” on a line by itself with a period after it, and by writing “no” all in capital letters. That increases the odds of my getting what I wanted, but it doesn’t guarantee it, and words all in caps are irritating to the eye. Someone may still read that “no” as if it were just the last word of the preceding line in lower case letters, and that will change the poem. That is a penalty the poet pays for the “free - dom” from metric rules that comes with free verse. My own practice with cadences comes from the old King James Bible, hammered into me much of my life, and from Theodore Roethke. I learned by writing out (in longhand) poems by Roethke, and big chunks of Job and Ecclesiastes, and analyzing them for their cadences. I don’t know any better or easier way to do that, but there are lots of other choices to serve as your models. One of the things most likely to cause a writer’s prose to be referred to as “poetic” is an obvious and consistent use of cadence. John Stein - beck is a good example; the patterns in his prose are so clear that his books could often be written as verse as easily as they’ve been written as 34 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook prose. The style isn’t fashionable at the moment (although it’s more fash- ionable in science fiction than in mainstream fiction), but it’s worth studying if you’re trying to get a firm grip on cadence. Marketing Note People (including editors) tend to have a strong preference for or against traditional forms of poetry. Commercially distributed science fiction and fantasy magazines will often accept a rhymed and metered poem (espe - cially a sonnet or a limerick) that they wouldn’t accept if it were done as free verse on the same subject. If you’re trying to break into these mar - kets you’re somewhat more likely to accomplish it with rhymed and me - tered work. Conversely, the “literary” poetry journals, both mainstream and speculative, tend to reject rhymed and/or metered verse as too tradi- tional unless it is extremely good. According to poet and editor Mike Allen, “Free verse is the dominant form, and is usually the better bet.” However, I believe that if there is such a thing as “the most marketable poetic form of all” it is the really well done rhymed sonnet with dense sound patterns and no clichés, and that is as true in science fiction as anywhere else. Chapter Four Lexical Patterning: How Poets Choose Their Words We’ve now come to a part of the system of poetic language where the science fiction poet—at last!—has a marked advantage over the “main - stream” poet. So far as I know, only in science fiction poetry can poets who find themselves without some word they hanker for just make one up on the spot. Mainstream poets who try that may get away with it if it’s done exceedingly well, but they do it in the full awareness that it’s a risk, and it’s not something available to them as a frequent and abundant resource. For the science fiction poet, risk occurs only when insufficient information is given to let the reader figure out what the invented word means. Even then, it may not be a disadvantage, because science fiction readers often enjoy the mysterious and the enigmatic. The lexical level of language is roughly the level of word choice, of vocabulary. The term “word” isn’t quite precise enough, though; we also need “morpheme,” which is the term for any part of a word having an independent meaning. The word “unpleasant” has two morphemes—the negative morpheme “un-” and the morpheme “pleasant” to which it is attached; only “pleasant” is both a morpheme and a word. We also need “neologism,” the technical term for an invented word, and “lexicaliza - tion,” which is the name for the process of giving a particular chunk of meaning a pronounceable (or writable or signable) surface shape as a word or morpheme. 35 36 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Neologizing—Constructing New Lexical Items Lexical deviance is one of the resources a poet has for making the lan - guage of the poem novel and interesting to the reader. It can be an ex - tremely simple violation of a morphology rule, such as adding the “un-” morpheme to a word that doesn’t allow that in ordinary language. (For example, titling a poem “The Unmoon.”) It can be complex, as with Lewis Carroll’s “all mimsy were the borogroves,” but with all the lexical items still recognizable as possible morphemes of the language, with functions that can be figured out from the context. And it can be a vio - lation so extreme that all it retains of the morphology is the letters, as in the work of Michael McClure. I don’t have permission to quote from McClure, but I can construct an example of the sort of thing you’d find if I did, like this: “HRRaggghhoobrr grovreeeeegh rrRRRRrrrr 00000000 krooophgh!” When you go as far as McClure does, you risk losing your audience alto - gether; be sure that you are taking that risk because you choose to. Some neologisms are productive. That is, they are the result of a sys - tematic process that can be expanded to construct a whole set of forms made to the same pattern. I once wrote a mediocre line (in an even more mediocre poem) that went, “see this city cezanned by day,” where “cezanned” was an invented verb based on the name of the Impression- ist painter Paul Cézanne. Anyone familiar with the work of Cézanne could easily imagine how a “cezanned” city would look, and that was handy. The word set out a pattern for a productive rule that anyone could use to produce lines like “at dawn the city seemed picassoed” or “the michaelangeloed village shone in the sun” or “tomorrow I will el - greco my room,” et cetera. The size of the set of such words is identical to the size of the set of names of artists sufficiently well known to allow the reader to visualize what it would mean for the thing named to be “[artist]ed.” For a science fiction poet (or any narrative poet) even that limit can be set aside; the poet simply uses part of the poem to establish that some name is the name of a hypothetical artist, and to characterize that artist’s work in a way that the reader can understand, and then ap - plies the rule to produce the adjective or verb. It would be sufficient to include the information that “Klegdelloria” was “the Martian Cézanne” and then talk of something being “klegdellorianed.” And the process Suzette Haden Elgin 37 can be extended to other famous names, to give you such lines as “Read this letter isaacasimoved by day” or “study this treatise harlanellisoned by night” or whatever strikes your fancy. Other neologisms are not so obviously productive. Suppose I imagine a creature analogous to a vampire, that survives by coming out of its grave at night and tapping living trees for the sap; suppose I avoid the easy solution of calling it a “sappire” and arbitrarily name it a “keripink.” That’s not a naturally productive form. I could create a whole set of vampire analogs—some that tapped water pipes, some that tapped beer kegs, some that tapped perfume bottles—and use a rule to name them “seripink, feripink, teripink,” respectively. But that rule wouldn’t be im - mediately available to other poets, and clear to readers, in the way that the “cezanned” rule is. Example and Analysis Let’s take a look at an excerpt from a science fiction poem that contains much lexical deviance, and discuss what goes on in it. extraperceptory sensation in this web we BE where we ARE star-anchored we are angered by those who will not join the dance (ah, friend bend to my touch, touched, lend me your mindtips) here, hear more than all you have heard heretofore in this ruled random where lovepulses leap tenderly tracing (is such sin taxing?) from connection beloved to connection, the irritants wear (while we ARE) their handy deafcaps blithely saying “See! Man ticks slowly....” The poem’s title “extraperceptory sensation,” is formed by exchanging sound segments from the phrase “extrasensory perception”; it’s a delib - erate spoonerism, like Spooner’s famous “queer old dean” for “dear old queen.” It goes beyond the limits of what most typically happens in or - dinary language because it exchanges whole syllables instead of single sounds or sound clusters. And that is to be expected: All processes of poetic language are extensions of ordinary-language processes. The next neologism is “star-anchored,” and that’s an easy one; it can only mean “anchored to/by a star” or “anchored like a star.” I wanted it to be understood as anchored like a star, in the folk sense of star-with- separate-points; one of the reasons I used “web” and “connection” and “ruled random” was to reinforce that semantic element of a thing an - chored at various separate points. (This didn’t work, by the way; when I’ve polled my poetics or stylistics students, they’ve invariably said it means “anchored to/by a star.”) “Mindtips” probably does work, because it’s easy to see the analogy to “fingertips” after “bend to my touch.” However, I wanted to be sure that the mindtips would be understood to be organs of perception the way ears are organs of perception, and so I put it into the sequence “lend me your mindtips” to remind people of “lend me your ears” in Julius Caesar. And just in case that still wasn’t enough, I followed it with “here, hear”—both rhyming with “ear”—and “heretofore.” This was ex- cessive; I should have had more faith in my readers than that. The next neologism is “lovepulses,” which is not only obvious but trite; if I were writing this poem today I’d throw out “lovepulses” as too cutesypie to use, but in 1968 I thought it was very clever. And finally, there is “deafcaps,” which—sitting next to “handy”—is intended to be wordplay based on “handicaps.” (I’ll come back to “deafcaps” again later in this chapter.) Coining new words looks flashy, but is relatively easy to do. For Eng - lish it’s done in the following ways: 1. by borrowing from other languages, as was done with “automo - bile” and “telephone” 2. by modifying existing words in some way, as I did with Suzette Haden Elgin 39 “mindtips” and “deafcaps” in the example poem 3. by using parts (usually, in English, the first letters) of a sequence of words to create an acronym, which is how “radar” and “sonar” were lexicalized 4. by resurrecting words no longer used, as James Joyce did when he used the obsolete “quark” (subsequently appropriated by physicists) 5. by outright inventions, a process I used when I called my sap- sucking vampire-analog a “keripink.” Only the last mechanism is difficult; all the others, for a poet—perhaps especially for a science fiction poet—are just fun. Choosing Among Words That Already Exist What is hard is choosing among existing words. Sometimes the choice is imposed on you by such things as rhyme and meter, as when any bird at all would do but you need a rhyme for “grow” and so you choose “crow” rather than “hawk.” Sometimes line length requires you to choose one word rather than another, as when you’ve decided to write a poem in the shape of a dragon and only one of a set of half a dozen possible words will serve to outline the left wing. Sometimes you have set up a poem that you want patterned with the consonant sounds /p/ and /f/ and the vowel sound /u/ (pronounced “oo”), and that makes it obvious that you should choose “proof ” rather than “evidence.” But much of the time you don’t have absolutely clear constraints like those available, and you have to make your choices in less obvious ways. An excellent technique for working with lexical patterning—in order to make yourself aware of what you already know, so that you can use that information consistently and systematically—is to take other peo - ple’s poems and deliberately change their lexical choices. I said in the first chapter that using “Build thee more stately big houses” for “Build thee more stately mansions” would ruin the line. Why? Because “big houses” lacks the elegant tone that “stately” has, and therefore does not fit with “stately” the way that “mansions” does; because English word order rules prefer “big stately houses” to “stately big houses”; and be - cause “big houses” is three syllables where “mansions” is only two, and that flaws the metric pattern of the line. There are at least those three 40 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook clear and good reasons. Take some lines from poems that interest you, and analyze their lexical items this way. Substitute words or phrases that are synonymous or nearly synonymous for the words the poet used. Then consider your re - sults carefully. Is your line better or worse than the original line, to your way of thinking? Why? The “why” is what really matters. It may be accu- rate to say “It just looks/sounds/feels better to me,” but that doesn’t teach you anything about your poetic competence. What you’re trying to do is make yourself consciously aware of the principles you use for lexi- cal patterning; to do that you need to find out why you do what you do. If you have a choice among three words and it makes no difference at all to you which one goes into your line, that’s not interesting. But if you perceive two of the three words as clearly wrong choices and the other one as the right choice, you are basing your decision on something. It would be valuable for you as a poet to find out what that something is. I run into poets who are afraid that exercises like this will destroy them as poets ... will eliminate their spontaneity, will make their poetry stilted, will turn them into mechanistic hacks, et cetera. If this is a con - cern of yours, by all means avoid my suggestions. But I think the con - cern is unnecessary. It’s like suggesting that Bach would have written better music if he hadn’t known music theory and had simply relied on inspiration. Now let’s go back to the example poem on pages 39-40, this time from the point of view of making choices that aren’t neologisms. What do I know about what I was doing? I used “in this web,” for example. Why? Why not “spiderweb” or “network” or “grid”? There were reasons. I was going to use a violation from another level of the grammar, where a rule of Standard English says you can’t use “be” as an active verb. To answer “What are you do - ing?” with “I’m being” isn’t Standard English; it’s poetry, or a joke, or a smart crack, or a mistake. The idea of actively being, just like actively singing or actively running, was an important part of the poem for me. So I did three things. I chose “web,” which uses the letters of “we be”; I contrasted the ungrammatical (in prose) “we be” with the grammatical “we are” (which I reinforced all over the poem with “where” and “wear” and repetition); and I put both “be” and “are” in capital letters. “Net - work” and “grid” wouldn’t have contributed anything to this effort. “Spiderweb” was possible, but it’s so much longer than “we be” that it’s not as good a prompt—and the strongly stressed “spider” tends to push “web” into the background. I wanted it in the foreground. The choices I made in “is such sin taxing?” weren’t free choices, be - cause I was making a pun on “syntax”; I couldn’t have done that with “is such sin an effort?” or “is such wickedness taxing?” Similarly, I had little choice about “See! Man ticks slowly ...” because it was a pun on “se - mantics” and only certain kinds of words could reasonably follow “ticks” in the sequence. Those two puns were intended to work as a set, and they were lexical deviance deliberately introduced because (a) the poem was about communication, and syntax and semantics are terms from the technical vocabulary of linguistics, and (b) I was a linguistics graduate student showing off my jargon. They probably don’t work at all. If a reader spots one, the other will also be spotted, but usually both fail. I wrote this poem about thirty years ago; I certainly was doing things deliberately, but I wasn’t doing them very well. Then there’s “handy deafcaps”.... Why not “blindcaps?” Why not “useful” or “convenient” rather than “handy”? Because I was punning again. The phrase is a play on “handicap,” referring to those who are handicapped in the fictional universe of the poem because they’re not telepathic (have no “mindtips” or can’t “lend” them); that made “handy” or “unhandy” the only possible lexical choices. I used “deafcaps” be - cause I wanted to reinforce that comparison of mindtips to ears again. You’ll note that I was then a poet who thought readers couldn’t be trusted to do anything for themselves, a most unseemly sort of arro - gance. I can see today that “handy blindcaps” would have been better, because certainly the perceptual organ in telepathic communication would not be biased toward either hearing or sight; it would have been better to introduce other perceptory organs besides ears. I wasn’t skilled enough at the time to realize that. I chose “irritants” to wear the deafcaps for several reasons. I had be - gun by declaring that the telepathic speakers in the poem were angered by those who won’t “join the dance.” Anger and irritation make a nice reinforcing pair. And I was trying for the idea that someone inside your head but not doing anything there—if, for example, you were able to read that person’s thoughts but they were unable or unwilling to read yours—would be an irritant, exactly the way a grain of sand is an irritant to an oyster. This is a terrible mistake, and should be in some other poem; it turns the offending non-telepath into a pearl in the poem, and introduces a whole batch of content I didn’t want in there. Dreadful. I was thinking of the oyster, which doubtless is glad to be rid of the pearl; I had completely lost track of the pearlfisher. Finally, what does “ruled random” accomplish? Very little. It was like “web,” a way of referring to the telepathic network in which various in - dividuals—like the points of stars—serve as anchors. But I chose it be - cause it was a violation; by definition a thing that is “ruled” cannot be 42 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook “random,” and vice versa. It’s like Chomsky’s “colorless green ideas.” It has a pleasant effect in terms of sound patterns, but it’s otherwise very weak; I put it in there to show how extraordinarily witty I was, and that is exactly what it looks like. It’s fashionable in literary circles to say that lexical choice is a matter of “a good ear” and “a good dictionary” and that “nobody needs to be told” things like those I’ve been telling you. I disagree; I think it’s very important and much neglected. When you are a poetry editor, you rarely see poems that have to be rejected because their rhymes and/or rhythms don’t work—most poets quickly learn to avoid those mistakes. (And if you do reject on that basis, it’s easy to circle the mistake and suggest that it be fixed and the poem re-submitted.) But I have sent poems back by the bale because they were flawed by poor lexical choices or poor lexical patterning or both. Many editors reject poems on that basis but don’t have the time to explain to the poet how matters could be improved, even if they have the skill. The poet whose work is rejected for this rea - son is unlikely to figure it out without help, and a scribbled “this poem is trite” or “this poem is weak” isn’t likely to clarify the problem. If you make word palettes for your poems, as suggested in Chapter Three, you’ll have sets of choices laid out before you for careful consid - eration. Some will be dictated by rhyme or meter or graphics, by sound patterns or visual patterns. But when no such reason is available, it’s valuable for you to determine what is behind your choice. If it makes no difference to you which word you choose, then it may be that none of the words is the right one, and you should look for other possibilities. In po- etry you select a pattern and choose words to fit it, and because the words are few, each one must do something significant. For each word you choose, you need to be able to answer the question: What does this lexical choice do for my poem? When you have the answer, you are ready to ask yourself whether some other choice would do that even better. When you write a novel, each individual word doesn’t have that kind of crucial significance. For a science fiction writer to be like Flaubert and consider a single prose paragraph the proper output for a full day’s work is impossible unless that writer has great wealth and vast leisure. But in a poem, every word has to count and should be there for a rea - son. The more you know about what your reasons are, the more power - ful your craft will be. Science fiction poetry offers you the luxury of ne - ologizing and wordplay almost without limit; that is cause for gratitude, and for taking advantage of the blessed abundance. Suzette Haden Elgin 43 Chapter Five Syntactic/Semantic Patterning: How Poets Use Grammar Rules The grammar of a language includes at least its phonology (the sound system), its morphology (words and parts of words), its syntax (rules for combining words into larger units), its semantics (meaning), and its non - verbal communication system. The divisions among these levels are arti - ficial, because no part of the grammar can function without the simulta - neous operation of all the other parts, but nobody has yet figured out any way to discuss all (or even two) parts simultaneously. In this chapter I will compromise; I’ll begin with syntactic patterning and continue with semantic patterning, but I’ll make references back and forth between the two as I go along, whenever their interdependence makes it necessary. There’s much controversy in the academic disciplines that are involved in the analysis of poetic language and poetry. (This will come as no sur - prise to anyone.) The two major points of argument are these: 1. Is there a “grammar of poetic language” in the same way that there is a grammar of ordinary language? 2. Do poets know what they’re doing? These two questions are really the same question, because if poets do know what they’re doing they have to be doing it systematically, accord - ing to a set of rules and/or constraints. But the distinction between the two questions is maintained because, as with ordinary language, it’s pos - sible for poets to be using a grammar of poetic language without having any conscious awareness of it whatsoever. Many distinguished scholars insist that the methods used for analysis of ordinary language are totally wrong for poetry. Either they propose for poetry a grammar entirely separate from that of ordinary language, or they propose that poets depend primarily upon inspiration. The latter group find any scientific analysis of poetry offensive; they consider it to be an “art” that should not be subject to such analysis. I respect these views, but I disagree, and I won’t be discussing them further; you’ll find them abundantly represented in the academic literature on poetry and criticism. The position taken by the opposite side is that the grammar that produces ordinary language also produces poetic language, and that all grammatical operations of poetry are extensions of grammatical op - erations of ordinary language; that is the position I will be following here. In all human languages there are only four kinds of grammatical oper- ations, no matter what part of the grammar is under discussion. The four operations are deletion, insertion, substitution, and movement. The rule that yields “Eat your peas” (by removing the “you” that is its sub - ject) is a deletion rule. The rule that yields “It’s storming in Boston,” al - though there is no “it” that storms, is an insertion rule. The rule that gets you from the meaning represented by “John behaves John” to the acceptable sentence “John behaves himself ” is a substitution rule; it sub- stitutes a pronoun for the second instance of two identical noun phrases that refer to the same entity. And the rule that yields “Squid, I would never eat” is a movement rule that has operated on the more basic “I would never eat squid,” where “squid” has been chosen by the speaker or writer to be the focus point of the sentence. In ordinary language, all these rules are subject to rigid constraints. And all of them are subject to the semantic constraints called “selec - tional restrictions” that are deeply involved in choosing morphemes. For example, the object of the verb “eat” must be something edible, the sub- ject of the predicate “be pregnant” must (so far) be something female, the subject of the verb “think” must be animate, and so on. Sequences that violate these restrictions are understood as metaphors, or jokes, or mistakes, or poetry. What happens in poetry is that these selectional restrictions, as well as Suzette Haden Elgin 45 the constraints on the four grammatical operations, become optional, and that is where the deviance comes from. Poetry deviates from the grammar of ordinary language, and is recognized as deviant by reference to that grammar of ordinary language. In ordinary language the reason for the persnicketyness is that the rules all work together to preserve the speaker/writer’s meaning so that the listener/reader/signer/observer will understand what is intended. Suppose you just decided arbitrarily that you didn’t like the rule that in - serts “it” into “it is raining” and that from now on you were going to in - sert “perflage” instead. Nobody could keep you from doing that. But when you walked into a room and said, “Wow, perflage is hailing like crazy out there!” you would have no reason to believe that anybody would understand what you meant, and lots of reasons to believe that they wouldn’t bother to try. In poetry, things are very different. The only limit poets have to abide by is their personal concern for being understood by their readers, which —in the real world—will usually include editors and publishers. This is the celebrated “poetic license” that so infuriates the hard core tradition - alists; for a vast array of examples of that “license” being used exten - sively, I refer you to the work of such poets as e. e. cummings and John Berryman and Michael McClure. Readers who are strongly opposed to nontraditional poetry (or to any poetry) often complain that a modern poet is allowed to do anything at all—this is the “a blindfolded chimpanzee could write that” school. They are wrong, unless the poet literally has no interest in being under - stood. Otherwise, there are things that cannot be done; I’ll give you a single example. English has a rule allowing you to delete the second of two identical sequences when they follow one of the English auxiliary verbs (will, may, must, et cetera). So, instead of “If Mary says she will win the Neb- ula, she will win the Nebula,” you are allowed to say, “If Mary says she will win the Nebula, she will.” Such a sentence is understood because the first of the identical sequences is still there to refer to. Now suppose that you, as poet, have in mind a poetic line that goes like this: “If Heather says she will go on a quest, she will stay home instead.” You can use your poetic license and delete the sequence after the second “will”—de - ciding that you’ll just ignore the constraint that says it has to be identical to the sequence after the first “will”; nobody can stop you from doing that. But the result—“If Heather says she will go on a quest, she will”— will be understood by your reader to mean “If Heather says she will go on a quest, she will go on a quest,” no matter how good you are as a poet. That 46 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook bit about Heather staying home, which was part of what you wanted your line to mean to the reader, is lost forever, and there is not one thing you can do about it. A poet who decides to ignore all word order restrictions has not gone beyond what is possible. A line like “robots overwhelmed lawn the on the unicorns hysterical the” is possible because all its parts are still present. If you are a skilled poet, and you have readers who are willing to struggle with the problem, they can determine that your meaning is either “the robots overwhelmed the hysterical unicorns on the lawn” or “the hysterical robots overwhelmed the unicorns on the lawn.” Since se - lectional restrictions are optional in poetry, robots can be described as hysterical, and both readings are possible. The poet who, like e.e. cummings, decides to ignore the order of let - ters within the words and scramble those too—and perhaps put punctu - ation marks in among the scrambled letters—is in the same position, but has pushed the limit farther; this may or may not succeed. But not even the most skillful poet can make “If Heather says she will go on a quest, she will” mean anything but “If Heather says she will go on a quest, she will go on a quest.” If you know a way to get out of this, don’t keep it to yourself! It’s the sort of thing that wins hefty grants and prestigious sci - entific awards; by all means, write it up and get the credit you deserve. Until then, it demonstrates clearly that poetic “license” has limits. Constructing Phantom Constituents In ordinary language, the assumption is that the speaker/writer has some meaning in mind and uses the rules of the grammar to lexicalize that meaning (give it a surface shape) and turn it into a spoken or written or signed utterance in a way that comes as close as possible to expressing what was intended. The same thing is true in poetry, but the poet relies on the reader to be willing to work hard to recover the meaning from the surface shape provided. In ordinary conversation or writing you can’t count on that; how much you can count on it in poetry depends on how good a poet you are and how much your reader or listener is willing to cooperate with you. Consider this sentence: “Tracy was an orphan, and she missed them both.” In ordinary language that violates the rules and it’s unacceptable—but people don’t have any trouble understanding it. Part of the meaning of the word “orphan” is something like “a person who has neither mother nor father living”; that information is filed in the mental dictionary of both speaker and hearer (or signer and observer). You understand “them both” in the sentence as referring to the deceased parents, who are therefore phantom constituents. In ordinary language, that’s forbidden; in poetry, it’s encouraged. In science fiction poetry you could get a lot of mileage out of “Tracy was an orphan, and she missed all eleven of them,” which would give us a perfectly possible science fiction poem. Like this ... Poor Tracy Tracy was an orphan, and she missed all eleven of them All right? It deviates from existing reality, proposing that there is a uni - verse in which a person can have eleven biological parents; the science component is biology (or perhaps genetics or medicine); and the narra - tive element is “Tracy had eleven biological parents, and they all died, and she missed them.” In ordinary written language, setting up phantom constituents is usu - ally difficult. It depends on such things as finding words that have mean- ings with obligatory pieces the way “orphan” does and putting them into sequences where they are obvious, and it’s usually more trouble than it’s worth. When it happens, it’s reasonable to assume that it’s an accident— a performance problem. But in poetry you have the luxury of a perma - nent form for the sequence of language, a form that readers can look at over and over until they figure out what the phantoms are. Because hu - man beings take pleasure in solving problems, and in finding the missing parts of patterns, they can be counted on to do that, with varying de - grees of skill and enthusiasm. * * * Example and Analysis 48 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook This is an example of a science fiction poem that contains a lot of syn - tactic and semantic deviations, for discussion. NAKEDIALOGUE O my dearest love, you must not think you must [GET BACK BACK BACK!!] not think I do not love you, in your gloried wordcloak, as you seem, my darling [STAY BACK BACK BAAAAACK!!!]; I have heard you speak and seen the people, purring, lapped in your language, ready to be mastered by your most simple, your most casual [NONE OF THEM ARE CASUAL!!] word ... love, be satisfied. Let me too be a great warmed cat, stroke my thick-furred belly and back and I promise you I will writhe my pleasure round you till you have no words left, till they fall softly from you like feathers ... but I could not bear what-you-really-are; you are mind- twining- twined- minding ... That Just That [!] is your mindtouch. above my right I. is your shower-of-gold. Get out of my head! You are so lovely ... you will break my heart You [IN THAT WINDSWEPT CIRCLE WE COULD SPEAK FREELY] must be [A SKULL IS LARGER FAR THAN ALLOFSPACE] only what-you-seem [GET OUT OUT OUT OUT OUT!!!!!] to be. Lady, I do not choose to know, I do not dare, such privilege is the winding { stair } to the attic brain stain where all things rotten drip toward thoughtslime. Suzette Haden Elgin 49 Come with me to the suburbs and be my love and we will all the customary pleasures prove and you will grace me carrying sheafs of lilacs over my lawn and there is nothing that I will not do for you [THEN, LET ME _____] except [THEN, ACCEPT MY _____] I cannot face [THAT IS NOT MY FACE.... FEEL THE SMELL OF CINNAMON AND THE PEEL OF LEMON] your thinking. [?????] ... [AND HEAR THE SOUND OF FRESH CUT { THYME }] TIME Beloved, let me love you; do not lay aside the decent seemly clothing of your mind. [DEAR ONE, I AM VERY LONELY HERE, WATCHING YOU RUN ... ] I don’t know whether this poem works or not; probably not. I was trying to present a dialogue between two telepaths who are trying to keep their telepathy from destroying their relationship. As a narrative, that plot is a science fiction cliché, or at least one of those plots that must be done extremely well to avoid cliché. The poem is intended to present both sides of the dialogue simultaneously, which is a violation of the English discourse rule that says only one person may talk or sign (or write) at a time. It has the necessary narrative element, its science component is neuroscience and/or linguistics, and it deviates from accepted reality; in that sense it is a science fiction poem, whatever its quality. The title “NAKEDIALOGUE” overlaps the end of one word with the beginning of another by deleting one of the letter Ds; this violates the graphics and lexical constraints of English, but is understandable be- cause one of the pair remains. If I had tried to use “NAKEIALOGUE” the chances of being understood would have been slim at best. The se - quences in capital letters inside brackets, as in “you must [GET BACK BACK BACK!!]” indicate utterances inside other utterances, with the contrast between upper case and lower case letters being used as a sym - 50 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook bolic analog for the contrast between two different voices. The brack - eted sequences are an extension of the process of ordinary language known as embedding, as when you use “I knew that Mary would forget that the art auction starts at noon” to embed “the art auction starts at noon” inside “Mary would forget that ...” and to embed “Mary would forget that the art auction ...” inside “I knew that Mary ...” In ordinary languag e the r ules don’t allow the embedding of one speaker/signer/writer’s utterances inside another speaker/signer/writer’s utterances; I’ve violated these rules throughout the poem. The line that includes “your most casual [NONE OF THEM ARE CASUAL!] word ...” involves a phantom constituent. It has “them” sub- stituting for a phantom “MY WORDS” in “NONE OF MY WORDS ARE CASUAL,” but “MY WORDS” isn’t present in the way that “A DECEASED MOTHER AND FATHER” are present in the word “or - phan.” There would be no way to know what “them” referred to if the sequence “none of them are casual” occurred in isolation, and it’s only the fact that the sequence is embedded in the other speaker’s “your most casual word” that makes it possible to understand the meaning of “them.” I’ve allowed one speaker to refer to something in the other speaker’s utterance, and to do it before the utterance has been made; this is called “mindreading” and is ungrammatical, although any rude person who goes around finishing other people’s sentences for them does it all the time. The lines about the cat are plain old-fashioned garden variety metaphor of the “My love is a rose” type. This is conventional in Eng - lish poetry, anything but novel, and requires no further comment; how - ever, it does violate many a selectional restriction. “I will writhe my plea - sure round you” is a minor deviation that relies on the phrase “wrap X round Y” in the context established by this metaphorical cat, and the similarity of “writhe” to “wrap,” and the mention of thick fur. The deviation in “but I could not bear what-you-really-are” is that it fails to lexicalize a chunk of meaning. Suppose I were to tell you to sit down at the table by saying, “Sit down at that-constructed-object-at- which-eating-customarily-takes-place.” The be-hyphened sequence would be a failure on my part to lexicalize that chunk by using either “ta- ble” or the accepted “whatchamacallit” or “thingamajig” that are accept - able lexicalizations when you have temporarily forgotten the word needed. The poem presupposes that no lexicalization for “what-you-re - ally-are” exists in English. Unlike the situation in non-telepathic commu- nication, however, the persons involved have access to one another’s un- lexicalized meanings, and this is the result. Suzette Haden Elgin 51 Then come the three lines with the giant exclamation point in the middle of them in brackets; this is an attempt at symbolization/lexical - ization of body language (astonishment, emphatically expressed), but the body language is within the mind where it’s not considered perceptible in existing reality. “Just above my right I” is a syntactic/semantic violation, since it as - sumes the existence of a left “I” as well and substitutes “I” for “eye” on the basis of identical sound alone. This is trite; there must be tens of thousands of poems that use the accidental sound-identity of “eye” and “I” this way. The pair of lines beginning with “lady, I do not choose to know” and ending with “the attic brain” was fun to do; it just plays about with graphics to collapse “privilege is the winding stair” (rhyming with “dare”) and “privilege is the winding stain” (rhyming with “brain”) into a single sequence. It would be simple to write a formal rule for this oper- ation, and to generate an infinite number of other such pairs from the rule; it is an extension of the use of ambiguous sequences in ordinary language. For example, “Visiting dragons can be dangerous” is under - stood as meaning either “to visit dragons can be dangerous” or “drag - ons that are visiting can be dangerous”; but in ordinary language you aren’t allowed to express both possibilities in a single utterance at the same time. Furthermore, “Visiting dragons can be dangerous” could not be used in ordinary language to mean the pair “Visiting dragons ...” and “Visiting dungeons ...” just because they happen to be similar in sound and shape. In poetry all of that is perfectly possible. The line “you will grace me” violates the semantic selectional restric - tions; people cannot “grace” people, although they can grace some - body’s table; this is piddling deviance, quite traditional. We understand sequences like this by transferring part of the meaning of one element to another one that ordinarily lacks it. For example, as Uriel Weinreich has explained, we would understand the phrase “a vampire ago” by transferring the semantic feature [+TIME] that belongs to words like “month” and “day” and “year” to the word “vampire,” using the familiar frame “a _____ ago” as a way of making the transfer clear. (For more on this process, see Weinreich 1963.) Now we come to the line that has two utterances in brackets flanking “except”; this is deviance pushed to the limit. There’s no way at all to de- termine what would fill the two blanks; whatever isn’t being lexicalized, or whatever has been deleted, is just absent. You can’t recover it from the context, and nothing in the surface structure provides clues. I did this deliberately, knowing that it meant total absence of meaning, be - 52 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook cause I really wanted to leave it entirely to the reader’s imagination. This is like what’s routinely done in science fiction when the writer chooses to leave to the reader’s imagination the precise details of how the loath - some alien creature looked, or what the loathsome alien creature did, and is a convention of the genre. There are minor violations of selectional restrictions when one speaker commands the other to feel the smell of cinnamon and lemon peel, and to hear the sound of fresh-cut thyme/time, with the deviance compounded by the fact that time is not something that can—in ordi - nary language—be “fresh-cut.” The poem ends with a pair of utterances that present both sides of the dialogue in summary, overtly. One begs the other to stop the telepa - thy because it’s horrible and will make love impossible; the other, either having refused to do that or being unable to do that, mourns the loneli - ness of watching the reluctant one flee. Everybody who speaks or signs a human language has a dialect differ - ent from every other dialect whatsoever (called an idiolect) and every poet has his or her own idiolect of the poetic grammar. You might observe someone’s spoken dialect and notice that they consistently leave the final “g” off their “-ing” morphemes; you might decide that you liked the ef - fect and were going to add it to your own idiolect; thereafter you would say “I’m tired of walkin’ when ridin’ would be more fun.” In the same way, you might examine a poet’s poetic idiolect, observe some pattern that you liked, and decide to use it too. You might decide that those curly braces of mine are handy, and add them to your own poetry. When this sort of borrowing is carried to an extreme, the result is parody— which is often very satisfyingly funny, if it’s intentional—and any prop - erly programmed computer could do it. We recognize a poem by a par - ticular poet because we recognize that poet’s idiolect in use, and we refer to it as a “style” or a “voice.” Another example of a systematic (and very borrowable) syntactic/se - mantic violation is the deletion of one of a pair of roughly identical forms at the end of one line and the beginning of another. It has an an - cient history; in Japanese court poetry it was referred to as the use of “pillow” elements. I’ve seen Heinlein (in I Will Fear No Evil ) do this in “prose” for more than a whole page without stopping. The process looks like this: I bridled a unicorn is a mythical beast is under the mountain Suzette Haden Elgin 53 It collapses “I bridled a unicorn” with “a unicorn is a mythical beast” by deleting one instance of “a unicorn.” It collapses “a unicorn is a mythi - cal beast” with “a mythical beast is under the mountain” by deleting one instance of “a mythical beast.” The poet uses the privilege of setting line length to reinforce and clarify the meaning, as in the examples above. This process is more rigidly constrained in English than it is in Japa - nese; for example, it won’t usually work if one of the pair of identical forms is a noun and the other is a verb. If you try it with “Don’t tell a lie” and “lie in my bed” it will fail. The two words “lie” are identical, which is required; and they are right next to one another, which is re - quired. But the result—“Don’t tell a lie/in my bed”—loses the meaning of the second command irretrievably. I first noticed this process in the poems of e. e. cummings, and then began hunting for examples of it in the poems of others; I found the description of its use in Japanese poetry by accident, and later was as - tonished to find it being done for nearly two pages in Heinlein’s novel. I had written a paper about it, and proposed some constraints, and then Heinlein proved me wrong. I had claimed that English would not allow you to do this with only part of a word. But Heinlein had an example something like this: “She had other fish to Friday is the fifth day of the week.” Which demonstrated that you can do it with parts of words— not even morphemes, just parts—if they are in an idiom or fixed phrase such as “other fish to fry.” People know the whole phrase as a single chunk, and the meaning doesn’t get lost just because you take out a piece. I added this process to my own poetic dialect because I liked it, and I liked its effect, and it was a challenge; unlike many sorts of poetic de - viance (the “my love is a rose” metaphorical process, for instance) this one appears not to happen in ordinary language. It’s an extension of a grammatical process of ordinary language (the process of deletion un - der identity, as in “If she says she will go on a quest, she will”); but so far as I can determine, it never happens except in poetry. That makes it novel, and interesting. I recommend to you as an exercise the sort of analysis I’ve done here. Look at your poems carefully. Identify your syntactic/semantic viola - tions. Decide what type of rule or rules you are breaking, and how you are accomplishing that, and what purpose it serves in your poem to do that. This will increase your own awareness of your poetic competence and make that competence more acceptable to your conscious mind for use in your work, thus strengthening your poetcraft. Look at the work 54 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook of other poets in the same way, and for similar reasons. If it offends you to borrow something from another poet’s idiolect, don’t borrow; the an - alytic exercise will still increase your poetic skills. There aren’t many markets in the science fiction magazines right now for poetry that has wildly extensive syntactic deviance; the audience of science fiction poetry readers is not that large or that dedicated. Editors know that; they may be reluctant to publish a poem if they have to struggle to understand it because of syntactic violations like wildly scrambled word order. If you’re unwilling to restrain your syntax, your poetry should be submitted only to publications that welcome nontradi - tional work. That is, it should go to speculative poetry journals and “lit - tle” literary magazines and reviews rather than to Asimov’s. However, al- most any degree of semantic violation is allowed, and even encouraged, in science fiction poetry, in keeping with the requirement to deviate from ordinary reality. Suzette Haden Elgin 55 Chapter Six Through the Old Credibility Gap One of the major technical problems in writing fiction of any denomi - nation is believability—how to counter the oh yeah? reaction in the reader. Mainstream fiction has it a bit easier, since it can fall back on that set of consensus statements we call the Real World. The fairy tale has an easy out, since unbelief is automatically suspended if the rules are fol - lowed: Start with “Once upon a time”; end with “And they lived happily ever after”; and in between, things must come along in ones, twos, threes, or sevens. Science fiction does not have these advantages. Science fiction poetry can’t rely on saying “this is real because it hap - pened as written,” because it has to deviate from existing reality. It has no set of recognized conventions (like “once upon a time”) to signal au- tomatic suspension of disbelief. In mainstream poetry there is the con - vention that when a poet says “My love has a nightingale in her throat” we understand that there’s no intention to include the lice and parasites and bird-dung that are associated with real world nightingales. But in a science fiction poem you can’t rely on that at all. The lice and dung may be crucial to the poem; the poem may be about an alien culture in which every young girl at puberty goes through a rite of passage that involves having a real bird stuffed down her throat. It takes a long tradition to build a set of conventions for a literary form, and science fiction poetry hasn’t had time to do that. Finally, the science fiction poem almost al - ways must be short. The tolerance of the contemporary reader for po - etry tops out at about one hundred lines, and it’s safe to assume that the tolerance for science fiction poetry is even lower than that in all but the fanatics who do such things as belong to the Science Fiction Poetry As - 56 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook sociation. When you combine the restrictions just described, you will realize that their sum is this: The science fiction poet who wants to be widely pub - lished and widely read must produce the verse equivalent of the short- short story, without the advantage of the established conventions that help the short-short story writer. That it can be done at all is amazing; that it’s often done superbly well is a kind of miracle. (The skilled and effective science fiction poet ought to have the sort of fame and fortune enjoyed by rock stars—but in America today that is a fantasy.) There is neither time nor space in a science fiction poem to indulge in the sort of elaborate World Building & Universe Construction that is the staple resource of the science fiction prose writer. There’s nowhere to put a chronology and a set of maps and a glossary. It all has to be done in a handful of lines of words. It’s therefore very important to exploit to their fullest the resources the language offers you for making your work believable. In this chapter we’ll examine one of the most powerful of those resources—presupposition—briefly. Presuppositions: Even My Gnome ... Consider the following sentence: 1. Even John could have written that poem. If you are a native speaker of English you know that if that sentence is true, so are these two sentences: 2. The poem mentioned is a poor excuse for a poem. Suzette Haden Elgin 57 3. John is no great shakes either. Notice that neither of those sentences appears in the surface shape of “Even John could have written that poem” anywhere, but both are in - escapably part of its meaning. Such semantic phantoms are called presup- positions; we say that #2 and #3 are presupposed of #1. It is the presup - positions imposed by English that will make you object to Sentence #4 and find it unbelievable. 4. Even Shakespeare could have written that poem. Assume that you wanted to get across in your work the fact that on Planet X men are looked upon as second-class creatures. There are sev - eral ways to go about passing this along to the reader. You can just say, “On Planet X, men were looked upon as second-class creatures”; you could put the information into a character’s mouth, as in: “Looking the Terran ambassador firmly in the eye, the Empress of Planet X said, ‘You must understand at once that on this planet men are looked upon as sec- ond-class creatures.’” Either of these will do the job and both are ac - ceptable in limited usage; both are often boring. There is a better way, as in this sentence: “She was only four years old, but she was not easily intimidated and she knew when she had been in - sulted. ‘Even a man could answer that question!’ she spat.” That sentence does not come right out and say, “I, Writer, tell you, Reader, that [X]”; instead it slides the necessary information right through the Old Credi - bility Gap by presupposing it. And in a poem, where a very few words must accomplish this same task, the presupposition of information is one of your most valuable tools. For example: 5. Even a man could have taken Mona’s throne. That line presupposes that Mona’s throne is ripe for plucking, and that little or no strength or skill or wisdom is needed to accomplish the deed. Begin your poem that way and you have saved yourself many lines of explanation. How about this? 6. Even those who forget to eat their dead and drink their blood ... Gross. Certainly. But note that this pair of lines presupposes, without wasting one overt word, that those who do not routinely eat their dead and drink their blood are abnormal and to be looked down upon, and it puts the reader immediately within the context of a fictional world where such ultimate recycling is the accepted mode of behavior. The presuppositional trigger word in these examples has been “even,” although no dictionary definition of “even” will explain why that is so. “Even” is only one of a large array of such triggers, all available to you as a fluent speaker of English to help you make your reader believe in the universe your poem presents, quickly and economically. Another example is the possessive pronoun; English is so constructed that the use of these pronouns automatically presupposes the existence of the thing possessed. An adjective or two following the pronoun makes the presupposition of existence even more unavoidable, and that is why you won’t care for these two sentences: 7. My horse does not exist. 8. My beautiful white horse does not exist. To say “my smallest and my loveliest dragon” in a poetic line is far less likely to produce an oh yeah? than saying “I had a small and lovely dragon.” To stop doing something presupposes that you began doing it at some previous time. So ... 9. When I ceased to buy my dragons from the Klarg and turned to markets beyond the Nether Rim ... You have, in those two lines, doubly presupposed the existence of your dragons, first by using the possessive “my” and second by using “ceased to buy,” which presupposes that you at some earlier point in time started buying whatever it was and therefore they must have been in existence for purchase. Very handy; very economical. Fifteen Ways to Presuppose Your Gnome Anything that you can presuppose, you will not have to claim. In poetry this means a great saving of words, and in poetry that matters; I am go - ing to provide you now with a list of linguistic environments that will al- low you to economize in this way. All of them let you avoid making the claim that Gnomes exist, while still presupposing that they do. This isn’t a complete list, but it’s complete enough to illustrate the point. Where Suzette Haden Elgin 59 necessary, I’ve added a few words of explanation, along with the neces - sary jargon. 1. The Gnome ... (Some Gnomes, my Gnome, that Gnome ...) In English, the use of a determiner before anything you name presup - poses that it exists. The definite and indefinite articles (a, an, some, the), the possessive pronouns (my, his, ours, et cetera), and the demonstratives (this, that, these, those) all function as determiners. 2. Gnasher Gnattly Gnome wobbled past. The use of a proper name increases the presupposition of existence. 3. The pale and emaciated chiffon-shrouded Gnome wobbled past. Here we see what is called a “definite description” used to make the pro- posed existence of the Gnome more believable. The more intricate and detailed that description is, within reason, the greater the presupposition of existence. That’s why a sentence like “My beautiful white horse with the flowing mane and tail and the silver-studded saddle does not exist” is so strange. 4. Gnomes do not mate with bats. The use of a generic term (“Beavers build dams”) presupposes exis - tence. 5. The stubborn Gnomes who had refused all our offers and blandish- ments wobbled past. This illustrates the addition of a relative clause (“the X who [Sentence]”) after you announce your candidate for existence; it’s another kind of de- scription, and it strengthens that candidacy. 6. It was a Gnome that stole the ancient talisman. What the Gnome needs is a saddle for his frog. These two sentence patterns (called “cleft” and “pseudo-cleft”) are used to put particular elements into the position of greatest semantic promi - nence in the sequence, the focus position. Anything that is the focus of 60 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook a sentence has its credibility enhanced by that status. 7. If that’s the new Gnome, give her some beer. The use of “the new Gnome” presupposes that there was an “old” Gnome previously; thus, Gnomes exist. 8. I wonder where the third Gnome is hiding? As a “new” Gnome presupposes an old one, a “third” one presupposes a first, a second, and so on; thus, Gnomes exist. 9. But a bigger Gnome wouldn’t fit in your pod, Commander! A comparative (an adjective plus “-er” or “more [Adjective]”) presup - poses another such entity that has less of the characteristic mentioned. The same thing applies to the superlative (an adjective plus “-est” or “the most [Adjective],” as in “The biggest Gnome always arrived at the restaurant before dawn.” 10. It’s odd that the Gnomes arrived so early in the fall. In English there is often a presupposition of truth, validity, etc., associ - ated with an embedded sentence preceded by “that.” “I know that” and “It’s obvious that” presuppose that the sentence that follows is true. 11. If that Gnome kisses me again, I’ll scream. For the Gnome to have kissed you again, it has to have existed to kiss you at least once before. 12. Only the Gnome would swear loyalty to you, Sire. Even the Gnome eats pizza. Don’t be alarmed, Sire—that was just the Gnome. These three true adverbs—“only, even, just”—are extremely powerful; when you use them in sentences like those in the example, they increase your credibility, and they increase your Gnome’s credibility. 13. If you had paid more attention to your Gnome, Young Prince, you would not be weeping in the swamplands now. Suzette Haden Elgin 61 A pattern like this is called a “counterfactual” and oddly enough it adds believability. “Had I but heeded the Gnome’s advice ...” and “Would that I’d known the Gnome was lurking nearby ...” are other examples of the same kind. l4. Wasn’t it you that slapped the Gnome? A negative question presupposes its positive counterpart—in this case, “It was you that slapped the Gnome.” 15. The Gnome’s arrogance assumed a sinister significance. This last example, called a nominalization, is a very handy device in Eng - lish for presupposing the existence of anything whatsoever. If you say “The poets destroyed the files,” you have made that claim and must sup- port it. If you say “The poets’ destruction of the files surprised us all,” you have presupposed that they destroyed the files, and all you are claim- ing is that we were surprised by that. Nominalization turns verbs and adjectives into nouns, either by the use of special forms (abandon/abandonment, careless/carelessness, de - stroy/destruction) or by simply adding “ing” to the verb or to the “be” before the adjective. When nominalization is combined with a posses - sive, it’s almost irresistibly compelling. So, “He is cruel” requires sup - port; but both “His cruelty is astonishing” and “His being so cruel is as - tonishing” presuppose his cruelty. Never think that credibility is unimportant in science fiction. The most unlikely Thing that ever oozed across a basement floor depends entirely on its believableness. Because the instant the reader says “I don’t believe it,” the Thing ceases to be frightening and is only silly. The reader who doesn’t believe is a reader who doesn’t care, and that reader will put your poem down and go read something else. Chapter Seven Marketing and Promoting Your Work If you’re not interested in getting your poems published, or you plan to self-publish exclusively, just skip this chapter and go on to the next. (If you do plan to self-publish, go to one of the excellent books available on the subject before you take the plunge. Self-publishing is both re - spectable and potentially profitable, but doing it without ample prepara - tion is like choosing a stock portfolio by sticking a pin at random into a list of possibilities—very risky.) Preparing and Submitting Your Work The most important thing I can tell you on this topic is: Always start by looking for the writers’ guidelines for the publication you plan to send your work to. This is especially important for online publications that want you to sub - mit your work by e-mail. The whole field of Internet poetry is in such a state of flux that requirements change constantly; be sure you check. (I won’t be trying to cover e-mail submission requirements here. Perhaps by the time a new edition of this handbook is needed, things will have settled down sufficiently to make that possible, but that day hasn’t yet ar- rived.) Most publications that use poetry either publish their require - ments and preferences in writer’s magazines and market guides, or they have a free guidelines sheet that you can send for or look at on the Inter- net, or both. Always check those preferences if you can; it will save you a lot of time and postage. It will keep you from sending limericks to edi- Suzette Haden Elgin 63 tors who want only sonnets, and sonnets to editors who use only limer - icks. It will keep you from e-mailing poems to publications whose edi - tors don’t accept e-mail submissions, or sending print submissions to those that want only e-mail. It takes time to check the guidelines, and it can be tedious, but it has to be done. Otherwise, you risk having a poem rejected unread just because you’ve annoyed the editor. In those rare cases when no guidelines are available, here are the ba - sics. 1. Your poems have to be typed, on one side of the page only, on good quality white bond paper that is not the instant-erasing kind. I double space my poems so that that the editor can conveniently write between the lines, unless the publication’s guidelines say specifically that I should single space. (Many poets disagree with me on this and always single space their work; others use one-and-a-half line spacing as a compro - mise.) Between the verses of a poem, add one extra space. 2. Whether you’re using a typewriter or a computer, be sure that the printed result will be crisp and clear and easy to read, that you avoid un - usual or hard-to-read typefaces, and that you use only black ink. The safest typefaces are twelve-point Courier and twelve-point Times Roman 3. Put only one poem on a page, even if it’s only a few lines long. You do this so that, if the editor sees three of your poems and wants only one, the other two can be conveniently returned to you (and you can equally conveniently market them elsewhere). Even if you aren’t asking that rejected poems be returned to you, it’s awkward and inconvenient for editors to have to deal with more than one poem on a page. 4. If you know how many poems the editor in question prefers, send only that many. Otherwise, send no more than five in one batch; if you’re sending long poems, send no more than two. 5. In the upper left-hand corner of the page, single-spaced, you put your vital statistics; in the upper right-hand corner you put the poem’s statis - tics. Then you leave several inches of white space for the editor to write things in before you type in your poem’s title and “by [your name]. Like this: 64 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Tracy Poet Poem 100 Main Street 20 lines Anytown, MO 33333 Member: SFWA/SFPA (or whatever is correct for you) TITLE by Tracy Poet [text of poem] 6. If you’re sending fewer than ten pages, you can fold them in thirds in the ordinary way and send them in a standard business envelope; for ten or more, mail them flat in a large manila envelope. 7. Don’t staple your pages together or put them in a binder or folder or anything of that kind unless the guidelines specifically tell you to do so; that just makes it harder for the editor to look at them. 8. If you want your material to be returned to you, always enclose an en- velope addressed to you, with enough postage on it. (If you send the po- ems in a manila envelope, enclose a manila return envelope or you will get the poems back folded and have to prepare new copies before you can mail them out again.) If you don’t want rejected poems returned, en- close a #10 business envelope with a first class stamp on it so that the editor can use it to respond. Just including your e-mail address isn’t enough, unless the guidelines for the publication specifically tell you that the editor prefers to respond by e-mail. 9. When you market prose, it’s all right to make one or two corrections that show on a finished page, written neatly in black ink or typed in above the line of text. Most poems are so short, however, that doing that makes a bad impression; I’d advise you not to do it. When you don’t have information, use your common sense—read a Suzette Haden Elgin 65 copy or two of the publication to see what sort of material is used, and follow the guidelines for manuscript preparation in this chapter. It’s bet - ter to go wrong on the conservative side (fewer poems than the maxi - mum allowed, for example) than on the radical side. If you are Ray Bradbury or Ursula K. Le Guin you don’t have to worry about these things; if you have written the greatest poem since “Paradise Lost” you don’t—maybe—have to worry about these things. But most of us do have to worry about them, and I strongly recom - mend them. I’m not going to include a list of markets in this book, because any list I might prepare would be out of date very quickly. (This is especially true now that there are Internet markets for poetry, which can appear and disappear almost overnight.) Instead, I refer you to the annual edi - tion of Poet’s Market, which is available in almost any public library, and to the directories of small presses and literary magazines also available in libraries and on the Internet. Also valuable are the current market lists that appear in writers’ magazines (watch for issues that feature poetry markets), the market information that appears in Star*Line, and the list of market links you’ll find at the SFPA website (http://www.sfpoetry. - com). Improving Your Chances for Publication—Things Not to Do Now, let’s assume that you’ve done all the sensible things. You’ve pre - pared your manuscript in the proper way, and you haven’t forgotten the SASE (self-addressed stamped envelope). You’ve tailored your material to the market that you’re submitting it to, and you’re complying with any requirements or preferences the editor has stated. Now what? Are there things you can do to increase the chances that your poem will be ac - cepted, beyond this obvious minimum? One thing you can do is make sure you’ve avoided all of the most common reasons for rejection. The list below is not ranked for degree of seriousness or anything of that kind, because that will differ from ed- itor to editor; it’s just one typical reason for rejection after another. 1. The poem contains clichés and trite expressions ... sequences like “snow-white hands” and “heart of stone” and “turgid blood”, et cetera. 2. The poem is set up like traditional rhymed and metered verse, but the rhymes don’t work, or the lines don’t scan (have mistakes in the meter), 66 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook or both. 3. The poem is about a subject that has recently been done to death. For example, a poem about the death of a unicorn sent to a magazine that has published three poems on that subject in the past year. 4. The poem is accompanied by a letter of self-advertisement for the poet, listing all the terrific things the poet has done lately, who the poet knows and how intimately, and strongly urging that the poems be ac - cepted before someone else grabs them. No matter how good the work is, a letter like that will guarantee rejection. The same thing is true of a letter that gives the editor orders, such as, “If you decide not to accept my poems, please send a brief letter explaining the reason for the rejec - tion in the enclosed envelope.” This infuriates an editor—even an editor who, before reading your instructions, intended to do that. 5. The poem is gross. Unless you know, absolutely, that the publication welcomes work about disembowelment and extraterrestrial pus and so on, don’t send this kind of thing. 6. The poem is an obvious near-clone of somebody else’s poem. I’m not talking about plagiarism here—that’s a very different matter. I’m talking about the poet who’s read a lot of work by some other poet and has un- intentionally written something that is recognizable as too close to the other’s work. This happens all the time, and it happens to everybody, not just beginners. 7. The poem is racist, or sexist, or anything-ist. Editors don’t need the controversy that sort of material brings them, even when they happen to agree with your opinions personally. 8. The poem is totally incomprehensible without very special knowledge like a Ph.D. in physics or a Ph.D. in Early Medieval Literature or a solid command of Japanese. (This is elitist, and is an extension of #7, but is so common that it deserves its own special number.) You’re entitled to assume that science fiction readers will have some familiarity with broad principles of science. But if your poem can’t be understood without a firm grasp of some highly specialized item (the Fibonacci series, the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, Göedel’s Theorem, the Doppler effect, etc. ad infinitum) you are not entitled to take that knowledge for granted. Pro - vide a definition in a footnote, or in a quotation between the title and Suzette Haden Elgin 67 the body of the poem, or—best of all—find a way to work the defini - tion of the term into the poem itself. Elitists among the readers will re - act by complaining that you’ve insulted their intelligence with your gratu- itous explanations; don’t worry about that. Most readers and editors will appreciate your courtesy. 9. The poem is wildly experimental in form. In science fiction poetry the market for that sort of thing is extremely limited. 10. The poem would be costly to print. This includes extremely long po - ems (anything over 200 lines), poems that require unusual typographic symbols, poems that have to be written in spirals or the shape of a rain- bow—anything other than straight lines. Most publications won’t print such work. If you have something extremely good that would cause problems of this kind, send the editor a query letter describing the work and asking permission to submit it. (Except in a case like this, I’d advise you never to send a query letter or cover letter for poems unless the guidelines tell you one is required.) 11. The poem is boring. What makes a poem boring will vary from edi - tor to editor, but it’s a frequent reason for rejection. 12. The poem mentions living persons or their work, or both, in a way that they might object to. The possible resulting commotion isn’t worth the risk, from an editor’s point of view. I may have missed some important items, but if your work avoids this distasteful dozen, you will be well ahead of the pack. I have poetry-edi - tored from time to time, and have been involved in considering poems for awards or grants from time to time, and for me the worst items on the list are #1, #4, #5, and #7. The last three of those are obvious, but the first must not be—I know that I have had a terrible time over the years making poets understand why a particular phrase (often their fa - vorite phrase in the poem) is trite and should be replaced. Editors will sometimes accept an otherwise good poem that contains just one shop - worn phrase, but that’s the upper limit. If it’s just one, it may not matter; if it does matter, the editor might write you and ask you to provide an improved substitute for that single phrase. Usually, however, the poem with one cliché is a poem with a dozen, because the writer doesn’t clearly understand what clichés are. 68 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Improving Your Chances for Publication—Things Worth Doing There are also some positive things that you can do to better your chances. The primary principle is novelty. So few publications use sci - ence fiction poetry, and so much of it is submitted, that you need some- thing to make your work stand out from the rest. For example: 1. Send poems that (when printed on the page) will be just about the size of the average business card. Editors frequently have little holes about that size that have to be filled with something; they can use a small ad, or a cartoon—or your poem. 2. Invent an interesting new poetic form, and send poems that fit it. And mention that in your title. You don’t have to title a poem “Weary An - droid: A Sonnet,” because the sonnet form is so familiar; but if your poem is an example of a form you invented called “the drodeau” your title should be “Weary Android: A Drodeau” or “A Drodeau for A Weary Android” or something similar. 3. Send poems on subjects that are unusual. During a single year, the edi- tor will look at hundreds of poems about dragons (or robots, or the United States space program, or anything-at-all of amber). If your poem is one of those it has to be extraordinarily good to overcome the prob - lem of satiation. Do a poem on the science of crop rotation, or anything else that’s not being sent in constantly. (If you establish a reputation for yourself as a poet who writes on that more novel subject, you’ll stake out a territory. Then, when an editor suddenly needs a poem on that subject, you’ll get a request for such a poem. Very satisfying.) 4. Tie your poem to some marker of time. Submit a science fiction Christmas poem (in June, to allow for editorial and production time). Poems that are tied to a particular event (the return of Halley’s Comet for example) are good, but will arrive in large numbers if the event is well known—look for events that aren’t going to provoke competition. Send a poem tied to the birthday of an obscure scientist, or to the day something was discovered. Something that is less obvious than the flight at Kitty Hawk. 5. Send very well crafted sonnets or haikus. Both forms are extremely marketable, primarily—I’m sorry, but it’s true—because they are so Suzette Haden Elgin 69 short. Here, for example, is a sonnet of mine that was in the December 1985 issue of Asimov’s, on page 140: Presuppositional Ghostbusting EXAMPLE: “Even John could write this sonnet!” It tells us John’s worth little, and the sonnet less ... The linguist shakes that sentence like a rug, pokes it with tweezers, tortures it in a press, seeking what in it says that John’s pathetic, seeking what in it says the sonnet’s poor. Those words aren’t in it anywhere. And words are the only things of which a linguist can be sure. What phantoms from deep structure, deep and shapeless, does every native speaker hear and comprehend, haunting the interstices of that sentence, betraying both John and the sonnet in the end? The linguist’s mystification is still total: why should they lurk in “even” and a modal? 6. Put genuinely interesting brief quotations between title and poem, as in the poem on pages 22-23 of this handbook. 7. Send poems that are funny. Humor is in short supply in science fic - tion, and most editors would be delighted to have good brief funny po - ems (which do not have to always be limericks). The exception to this is the strictly “literary” publication, which may have no interest in humor whatsoever. There are countries where books of poetry routinely make the best seller lists and poets are celebrities whose names everyone knows; the United States is not (so far) one of those countries. There are American publications in which it is taken for granted that a dozen poems will ap - pear each issue; none of the major science fiction (or fantasy, or horror, or even science) publications is like that, although some can be counted on to publish as many as four, and there are signs that the situation may now be slowly improving. Being a poet is easy: You write poems, and you are therefore a poet; you don’t have to pass any qualifying exams or buy a license or set up a place of business. But making money as a poet, much less making your living at it, is horrendously difficult in the United States. There are a few grants and fellowships to be had; there are a few markets that pay substantial money for poems; and there are a few slots for such roles as “poet in residence” in the schools. But they are very few, they are not receptive to science fiction poetry, the competition for them is ferocious, and most of the time that competition includes numerous well-established writers. The subset of such plums restricted to begin - ners and/or unknowns is miniscule. It’s not fair. Writing good poetry is at least as hard as writing good prose. The business side of being a poet—keeping records, mailing things out and keeping them going the rounds, filing taxes, promoting work if it does get published, futzing with copyeditors, all those endless things—is just as complex as the business side of being a prose writer. The only advantage a poet can be said to have it that he or she may have somewhat less typing to do than the average prose writer. But there’s nothing much you can do to change the situation except to write and publish poetry so very good that it draws readers, who let editors know that it draws them, so that the editors will publish more. The only peo - ple who have any chance of changing the American apathy—or outright dislike—for poetry are the poets themselves. And when poets don’t do the very best they can, but manage nonetheless to publish something that they just dashed off in a hurry and couldn’t be bothered to polish, they reinforce the public perception that poetry is a waste of the page it’s printed on. They can do themselves, and all other poets, real harm that way. Building Your Image as a Science Fiction Poet There are also a few things you can do that are slightly different than just the writing-and-submitting routine. You may not want to do any of these things, or you may not have time to do them. But they are worth doing if you’re willing and able. They are primarily activities that serve to build the recognition of you as Poet, which—in this country, and with our media—is something that can help to place your work. If your name stands out in the cardboard box full of poems the editor has to plow doggedly through, that may get your poem the extra piece of editorial attention it needs to make it into print. 1. Smuggle your poetry into print. One of the reasons that I began writ - ing science fiction novels and short stories was that I couldn’t sell my science fiction poetry. I wrote prose into which I could put my poems, Suzette Haden Elgin 71 tailoring the prose so that the poem was appropriate. This is a lot of trouble; on the other hand, it is a way to get paid for your work and get it into print. 2. Donate your poetry for “occasions,” so that it will get publicity and build your reputation. If your town has a centennial, write a poem in honor of the event. Write poems for the County Fair, the opening of the local school, the Winter Festival, the Spring Carnival, the local bas - ketball team. There’s no reason at all why such poetry cannot be science fiction poetry. For your town’s centennial, do a poem about what that town will be like in another hundred years. For the basketball team, do a mildly humorous poem in which your team is up against a team from outer space. It takes only minor ingenuity to slant a science fiction poem toward a real world place, event, entity, whatever. Submit this sort of work to your local paper, which will usually be delighted to get it (unless your local paper is the New York Times, Washington Post, etc., in which case what you do is adopt a small town paper nearby.) If the poem is good, it will get picked up by other papers; furthermore, your congressperson will get sent a copy of it and will read it into the Congressional Record at taxpayer expense. Never take money for poems of this kind unless you have been commissioned to do them. You will benefit far more from the goodwill the poems earn for you than you would from the small sums of money that you’re giving up. It’s just barely possible that you’ll find yourself in the position of the musician who is always asked to play for everything local for free, or the artist who’s always being called on to dash off a drawing for everything local for free— it is possi- ble. If it happens to you, congratulations! You put an end to it in exactly the same way such a musician or artist does: by explaining, politely but firmly, that you don’t have time to do the requested items, until the hint is taken. (It’s not a likely problem.) 3. Use your own poems for all your greeting cards, instead of the poems Hallmark provides. You don’t have to be able to do art to manage this; if you’d feel uncomfortable using copies of a poem as holiday cards, buy appropriate cards that have no message printed on them or inside them. Copy or print your poem on a separate sheet, and insert the sheet in the card. 4. Enter contests, even if the prizes are very small. Apply for poetry awards—sometimes you get them, and they are good for the reputation. I got a Saxton Poetry Fellowship once, and although the resulting book 72 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook of poems was never published, that fellowship has opened many doors for me over the years. 5. Do poetry events. (See the chapter on readings and workshops for de- tails.) And at those events, unless it’s not appropriate or not allowed, have poetry merchandise for sale. Your own books, either self-published or commercially published, for example. I think audiences find it offen - sive when you do a sales pitch for your own work from the podium, or hold up a stack of your own work at the podium and announce it at length. I don’t think it is at all offensive or immodest to make that work discreetly available on a small table at the side of the room, or in a dealer’s room, or to end your presentation with a very brief and non - threatening announcement that the merchandise is available. 6. Invest in a badge-making machine and supplies and put some of your very short poems on badges ... nice black lettering on handsome bright colors. Put these with your merchandise, give them as gifts, keep them moving. (And by all means expand to teeshirts and coffee mugs if you have the equipment.) 7. Put up a website for your poetry on the Internet. There was a time when this was only for people with lots of money and advanced com - puter skills, but that time is long past. Today you can find companies that will host your site for $5.00 a month (or even for free, in return for letting them put ads on your site), and they will walk you through the construction process. It’s painless and it’s cheap, and it’s one of the best possible ways to promote your work. 8. Do everything you can to promote science fiction poetry as a whole. You don’t have to do this out of altruism—it’s simply good business. The more public acceptance there is of the idea that science fiction po - etry is a Good Thing Much To Be Desired, the more publications will open up to science fiction poetry. And the more editors will feel that if they use science fiction poetry they should pay for it. More niches will open up in the area of contests and grants and jobs. In the long run, this means a greater potential for you personally, as well as for the genre. If people ask you to give talks, do it. If you are part of a convention, vol - unteer to do a poetry thing. If your town has a coffeehouse (or some - thing similar), organize a poetry reading—if it doesn’t, try the public li - brary. If you see a science fiction poem in a publication, send a note to the editor saying that you’re glad it appeared and that you’d like to see Suzette Haden Elgin 73 more of the same. Create a need and fill it. 9. Join the Science Fiction Poetry Association. If you don’t like the SFPA, find a similar group and join that one. If you can’t find anything that suits you, start your own group. People who are involved with sci - ence fiction poetry, and who are in a position to ask you to submit po - ems or participate in poetry events or enter competitions or be part of readings, can’t do any of those things if they don’t know you exist. 10. If you read well and have access to decent recording equipment, make a poetry tape or CD. The cost of duplicating and boxing and label- ing ten good quality voice-only tapes or CDs at this writing is roughly $20.00; how much less depends primarily on what quantity you buy your supplies in. Assume a conservative estimate—assume it costs you $2.50 to produce one tape or CD, and you sell them for $10.00 each—you have quadrupled your money and furthered your reputation at the same time. 11. Finally, if you write metered and rhymed verse, consider writing some science fiction songs. The “filksong” (science fiction music with lyrics) movement is very popular; almost every science fiction conven - tion has filksinging sessions in the evening. Write science fiction poems for existing traditional melodies if you don’t want to (or can’t) write your own. This is an excellent way to promote your work, especially if you are a competent performer with a pleasant voice (or can find one to per - form your songs for you, which isn’t difficult.) I realize there are poets who find the very idea of doing things like this repulsive, and “commercial,” and worse. That’s fine; they need not do them. I realize that a good poet is a national treasure, and should be revered the way a great artist or musician is revered. I realize that a good poet ought to be able to devote all his or her time to writing poems, at a satisfactory salary, with generous perks and a pension plan thrown in. I do know all that, and I wish things were like that, but they aren’t. While we wait for the millennium to arrive and the poet to assume the proper place in our culture, there is no harm in doing what we can to hurry the millennium along. And if you happen to know someone who can’t do any of these things because he or she is painfully shy, or for some other personal rea - son—but would like to do them—it wouldn’t hurt at all to do some of them on that person’s behalf, with that person’s permission. 74 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Chapter Eight Poetry Readings, Workshops, and Other Events Science fiction poetry suffers badly from a lack of publicity, and espe - cially from a lack of good publicity. It needs some good solid promotion to build its reputation and get out information about the genre. Any - thing poets or poetry-lovers can do to help with that will move the cause of science fiction poetry forward. I’m going to describe some possible promotional activities in this chapter, in as much detail as space in this brief handbook allows. I’ll be using “science fiction convention” as a cover term; however, the event could also be a book fair, an academic conference, a local Magnolia Festival, or other public gathering. At a Science Fiction Convention First, you need a space and a time. Contact the Program Committee run- ning the convention, well in advance of the convention date. Ordinarily a convention books an entire hotel/motel, or a vast portion of same, and in among the booked rooms will be one or two small ones that aren’t scheduled for anything. Ask for one of these, since you can be sure your audience will be small. (Unless, of course, you have Bradbury and Le Guin reading, or something similar—in that situation, they’ll give you a big room and you’ll be able to fill it.) Ideally your event would be three hours long, with a break in the middle for refreshments; if you have a shorter time period, which is usually the case, don’t take a break —just tell people to feel free to leave the room and return if they need to do so. Now you have the space and time, and you have the microphone. Suzette Haden Elgin 75 (You do need the microphone, unless the room is only 8 by 10. Nothing is more boring than poetry read aloud so softly that it can’t be heard.) The next thing you need is a program flyer/handout for the workshop. You want the flyer to be attractive—fancy isn’t necessary, but it should be pleasant to look at, easy to read, and with all details made clear. Make a stack of copies. Put some of the programs at or near the registration desk (with Program Committee permission), some at the back of your room, and have somebody around to see that people get them as they come in, if possible. See to it that a copy of your flyer is prominently displayed on or be - side the door of the room, so that people going by can see what’s hap - pening inside and decide if they want to come in. Have one program in the hands of whoever is moderating the session, so that what happens does match what’s written there. If the flyer says Poet X will be reading his/her poems from 10:30 to 11:00, then somebody coming in at 10:30 is entitled to find that going on at that time. Your moderator has to keep the events on schedule (which means, of course, allowing some slack in the way you set them up). I often speak at conferences (not SF) where two administrators are scheduled to speak before me, and each has been given ten minutes. There is no such thing on the face of this earth as a ten-minute opening speech by an administrator (much less two adminis - trators in a row trying to outdo one another); generally, it takes longer than ten minutes for them just to introduce some other speaker. By the time the presentation actually starts, we’re already running late. Don’t make that kind of mistake; always allow the amount of time it ought to take, plus at least five minutes extra for reality time—and then be pre - pared to stick to that schedule and to do amusing things to fill any empty holes that appear by accident (or by luck). What should be on the program flyer? If the event is a poetry reading, you list the poets who are scheduled to read, with their time-slots. If there will be an Open Mike slot (a time when anyone can show up and read his or her poems), you list the time-slot for that, and any rules and procedures. If it’s a workshop, you need something more substantial. Here’s a short list of possible programs ... 1. A brief history of science fiction/fantasy poetry, supplemented by a written handout. Nobody wants to hear someone spouting dates and references; they want that kind of thing on a piece of paper that they can look at. 2. Scheduled poetry readings by people whose work is interesting to lis - 76 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ten to, set up so that you have some variety. That is, if you have two people that do rhymed metered sonnets and one wild barbarian yawper, put the yawper between the two formalists. (Never put someone totally unknown and totally terrified either first or last. Put that sort of person —who will not be that sort of person forever—between two solid draws, so that people will stick around.) Never set up your readings on the “I don’t know how to judge the quality of a poem” basis; if you don’t know, find someone who does. Get the people who are actually scheduled as readers to give you copies of the poems they’ll be reading, in advance, so that you can suggest an ordering that will be entertaining for the audience. 3. An “open reading” time, when anybody who wants to can read. For this, as for any “hoot,” you set up a limit: For example, nobody reads more than three poems, and the three together must not take more than ten minutes; thus, a person with one ten-minute poem reads only one. And stick to that; it’s ghastly if you don’t. You do this by making up ahead of time a set of cards that say “You have three minutes left” and “You have one minute left” and “You are out of time” and having the moderator put these discreetly before the reader at the appropriate mo - ments. (Some people are highly skilled at “not seeing” the cards; with them, just don’t be discreet.) Needless to say, the moderator must have a watch that runs and is accurate. 4. A panel on some subject of general interest to the audience. For in - stance: The Market for SF Poetry How to Write SF Poetry The SF Poetry of [Poet’s Name] Why Editors Hate Poetry How to Be a Poet and Not Starve Basic Poetcraft Advanced Poetcraft Poetry Grants and Awards and How to Get Them Choose a panel topic suitable for the audience you expect to have— don’t do the “Basic Poetcraft” one if everybody at the event has a Ph.D. in Literature. And vice versa. Choose panelists who are interesting, who can be heard, who are willing to get their act together in advance rather than fake it, and who—if possible—will be a draw. Suzette Haden Elgin 77 5. If and only if you have somebody who is really charismatic, can really hold an audience, and all that stuff—an actual talk, solo. If you can get a major science fiction poet who is both interesting and audible to give a talk, terrific. Or if you can get a science fiction editor, also interesting and audible, to talk on why poetry is so hard to sell, terrific. Unless you have this ideal situation, panels are preferable to individual speakers. A “generic” workshop program might look like this: 9:00-9:30 Introduction and Welcome 9:30-10:30 X, Y , and Z Reading Their Poetry 10:30-10:45 Coffee break 10:45-11:15 Open Poetry Reading (plus where to sign up and what the rules are.) 11:15-noon Panel on “XXXXX” (plus a list of the panelists) Or like this: 10:00-10:15 Introduction and Welcome 10:15-11:00 X and Y Reading Their Poetry—OR an Open Mike Reading 11:00-noon Panel on “XXXX” (plus a list of the panelists) Never put an open mike reading last on the program. That’s not fair. Put it before something that people will want to stick around for, so that ev - erybody doesn’t walk out and leave the poets reading to one another and an empty room. If possible, you should have an exhibit of science fiction poetry stuff —books, magazines, and “poetic artifacts”—at some secure spot in the room for people to look at. Poetic artifacts include the following and whatever else you can think of along the same line: a famous writer’s cuff or napkin with a poem on it somewhere, or a piece of a poem; the usual buttons and badges and bumperstickers, either with poetry on them or “Support Your Local SF Poet” or some such thing; original po - ems and/or limited edition poems, hand-lettered by the poet and signed by the poet, on heavy paper and suitable for framing (or already framed); books and magazines of science fiction poetry autographed by the poet(s); copies of the Rhysling Awards Anthologies; teeshirts with a sci - ence fiction poem or poetry slogan silk-screened on them; paperweights made of that transparent resin stuff with a science fiction poem embed- 78 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ded in them. And so on. Try to arrange for someone in the dealer’s room to let you put to - gether an assortment of books, magazines, tapes, and CDs of science fiction poetry, plus poetry artifacts, for sale at said dealer’s table. Usually you can find someone who will be willing to do that in exchange for a reasonable percentage of the profit. You won’t be needing more than a corner of a table. Try to get your space with a dealer who has books and prints, or perhaps jewelry and art objects, rather than the gamers’ tables. Gamers are not usually going to be the same people who are interested in buying signed original sf/fantasy poems. When You’re Not at a Convention ... If you want to do a science fiction poetry workshop that’s not tied to a convention, that’s also feasible. You can run it all day if you like. If you want to make money (or at least clear your expenses) this is how it’s done. 1. Find a local motel or hotel that has adquate conference rooms for rent. Holiday Inns, Ramada Inns, Days Inns, et cetera. You can usually rent a small conference room (long table with executive type chairs around it, blackboard or flip chart, microphone, wet bar and refrigerator, bathroom attached) for 25 people, for $100.00 to $150.00. (It will be more expensive in the heart of the tourist season.) You can rent a full- sized conference room, the kind with all the stuff listed above except bath and wet bar, but with many chairs lined up in rows; the cost of a room like that will depend on its size, the hotel or motel’s location, and other factors. Make your arrangements with the staffperson who handles these things; the desk clerk will know who that is. For a fee, the motel will bring a coffee/tea/soft drink setup at designated times. They won’t let you brown-bag it in their rooms, for obvious reasons; for an arrangement of that kind you need to do your renting at a local YMCA or church or library or similar civic facility. Find out about cancellation privileges—usually you can cancel from 72 hours to five business days prior to the scheduled date. Get all this in writing, including what will be supplied; unless it says in writing that there will be water glasses and pitchers of water and an extension cord there won’t be any of those things. (And I recommend bringing your own extension cord, no matter what it says on your agreement.) Suzette Haden Elgin 79 2. Get your program together and make a flyer, photocopy as many copies as you need, and make it the kind you can fold up and mail with - out an envelope. At the bottom of the flyer have a coupon the person mails back to you to reserve a place at the workshop, and make it very clear that nobody will be admitted unless they’ve reserved their place. Be sure that there’s a space on that coupon for their address (both postal and e-mail) and phone number. Mail out your flyers, post them in laun - dromats, send them to local writers’ groups and to nearby colleges and universities and bookstores. Send out as many additional copies by e- mail as is appropriate for your plans and needs. 3. Send press releases to local papers, radio stations, television stations, bookstores, schools, writer’s groups, bookstores, and so on. Many will ignore you, but the three or four people you pick up will be worth the investment. Post the press release (and the flyer) on your website; send announcements to any other Net locations for which that’s allowed and appropriate. 4. Be sure your flyer (as well as any other informational announcement) has a deadline date after which reservations won’t be accepted, and that the date in question is in advance of the last day for you to cancel your reserved room. This way, if you don’t get enough registrations to cover your expenses, you take no real risk. You’ll be out your time, the cost of the flyers and mailing, and perhaps a small deposit, but the sum won’t be large—and it will be a deductible tax loss. Figure out how many registra - tions you have to have in order to clear expenses (or make a profit, if that’s what you’re after) and unless you have that many by the deadline, you simply call the motel/hotel and cancel your arrangements. Then you write or call or e-mail the people who did register, explain to them about the cancellation, and apologize, promising to let them know when you reschedule. Keep their contact information for a mailing list when that next time comes around, return their checks, and don’t worry about it. This happens. Sometimes it’s because you’ve set up your workshop in competition with some much bigger local event; sometimes it’s because of bad weather; sometimes it’s just the luck of the draw. It will also hap- pen if the workshop doesn’t sound interesting, or if you didn’t bother to make sure your publicity material was user-friendly and free of typo - graphical errors. 5. Prepare an interesting and attractive handout, with useful information that’s relevant to your program. This is truly important. Most people like to take away some physical object with them when they leave, and a handout is easy and inexpensive for that purpose. The big question is of course whether to do a small event or a big one. Do you want 100 people at $10.00 each or 25 people at $30.00 each? Do you want an all day or a half day event? What do you call it? Do you have a reduced rate for students and seniors and the disabled? (Yes, if possible ... and be certain your room is accessible to the handicapped or that you’ve made arrangements to make it so for the duration of the event.) You are the only one who can make these decisions, and you should make them on the basis of your goals, your budget, and your ex - perience. If you haven’t done this sort of thing before, start small. If the profit you might make is not a major concern for you, donating the money taken in after expenses to a charity, nonprofit organization, or something of the kind is an excellent idea. It will build goodwill for po - ets and poetry, and will set a useful precedent for future events; further - more, people may attend who would not do so if the money went di - rectly to you. I do a lot of workshops and seminars (and used to do more, when I wasn’t so busy). I do them on a variety of subjects; there’s no reason why you can’t do one on science fiction poetry writing and publishing. You’ll need more advance planning and publicity if you try a program like that described for a convention, but it can still be done—especially if you’re able to draft somebody with a Big Name to come by in ex - change for expenses and a small honorarium (which you then add to your budget) and either read poems or give a talk. One warning—be sure you know what you’re doing, if you try one of these all on your lonesome. The experience of being shut up in a room with 24 people who’ve paid you to provide them with several hours of something-or-other worth what they paid, and then not being able to de- liver, is excruciating. Word will get around, and nobody will ever sign up for your events again. If you’re boring and you know it, or if you’re shy, or if you’re no good at thinking on your feet—if people try to escape from you when you want to talk to them—don’t do this. Get a friend who is charismatic and capable to do it with you, and split both expenses and proceeds. Stay out of that person’s hair and let him/her run the workshop. After watching your partner a time or two you may find that you can do it solo after all. It’s well worth it, by the way, to do two or three of these events at just-barely-break-even rates or for free, in order to get the word out that you can present something worth going to and to establish your relation- Suzette Haden Elgin 81 ship with the space and staff you want to work with. Workshops are one of the ways to Be A Poet And Not Starve; I have in the past done well giving workshops on How To Put On Workshops. If you have the necessary equipment and skill, I recommend taping a reading or workshop that lends itself to taping (either audio or video). If the tape is good, and if everyone involved is willing to give you the nec - essary written permission, you’ll then have a tape that you can sell copies of at later poetry events. And even a tape that you can’t sell is worth having as a part of your archives; you never know when it may be ex - actly what you need for a class you’re teaching, or for some similar occa - sion. Be very sure, though, that you do get the written permissions. Other Options In addition to readings and workshops, or when you can’t get a room, there are other things you can do. For example ... 1. Find somebody really good who will write a science fiction poem for people on demand, on a subject of their choice, and sign it, for a dollar or two—roughly like having somebody who does quick caricatures. 2. Find somebody really good who will critique other people’s poems and offer suggestions on how to fix them, for fifty cents a poem or something equally ludicrous. A booth with a sign reading “Walk-Up Sci - ence Fiction Poetry Clinic, Get Your Poems Repaired Here,” staffed as much of the time as you can manage, is a good idea. People like to have their poems thoroughly overhauled, in approximate privacy. (Whoever does this must be skilled, patient, and tactful.) 3. Reserve space in the art show, and organize a display of hand-lettered poems signed by the poets, matted or framed the way drawings or paint - ings are matted or framed. If enough of these things happen, and if they go moderately well, we might see a day arrive when people who go to conventions would com - plain if there aren’t any scheduled poetry events, and when people would call or e-mail their local poets to find out when their next poetry event was going to be held. That’s the goal. 82 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Chapter Nine A Brief History of the SFPA If the Science Fiction Poetry Association (SFPA) were an academic or - ganization, or a business association, or had been run from the begin - ning by meticulously well-organized people with lots of free time, this chapter would have a predictable form. There would be exact dates and names and facts; there’d be a list of all the officers and editors and their terms of office and their accomplishments; there’d be a detailed account of the various versions of Star*Line as the official publication of SFPA; and so on and so on. If I tried to write something like that, however, it would have to be science fiction, if not fantasy. SFPA has never been like that, and perhaps never will be. What follows, therefore, is a rough account based on my own recollections and those of other longtime members, intended only to explain how the SFPA got from there (1978) to here (2004). When I founded the SFPA in 1978, I had very broad reasons and very narrow goals. I had noticed that people interested in science fiction po - etry seemed isolated; at conventions, you saw them all alone in isolated corners reading strange-looking publications or scribbling on tiny scraps of paper. I had a vague general idea that I should do something to at least make it possible for them to identify one another and stay in touch, such as starting a science fiction poetry organization and providing it with a modest newsletter. Suzette Haden Elgin 83 This didn’t strike me as a large or difficult task. I was sure that I’d be doing well if I could rustle up 25 members and keep 20 of them longer than a year. I was at that time a busy assistant professor at a large Cali - fornia campus (not the kind where the prof only sees two graduate sem- inars, each containing four people); I had five children at home and a house to run; I was moonlighting in various ways on the side; and I had a writing career to see to. It seemed to me that I could just barely man - age the amount of correspondence and interaction that would be needed for a 25-member organization with a mimeographed newsletter stapled in one corner for mailing. And from that position of ignorance, I wrote a first issue, called it Star*Line, ran off fifty copies, sent them out to likely candidates, and waited. I was wrong on all counts, of course. In the first place, the amount of work necessary for a 25-member SFPA, with a newsletter that published and reviewed poetry as well as fulfilling service functions, was far too much for any one person to do unless it was the only work they were doing. I had never suspected that. In the second place, there turned out to be far more than 25 willing and energetic members; 150 to 200 was the accurate number. Very soon, even with the publication of Star*Line held to every other month, I found myself in serious trouble and con - templating closing the whole thing back down. The SFPA was saved by Maureen Kaplan and artist Karen Jollie, who simply stepped in and took all the work off my hands. They did the pro- duction, the assembly, the mailing, the record-keeping, the accounts, the art—everything except writing (and typing) the material, and editing— on a completely volunteer basis and with never a word of complaint. They not only did it willingly, they did it superbly well, and I am more than happy to tell you that it was bliss. From within that context of bliss, a lot of work got done. I found a volunteer (author Elizabeth Chater) who was willing to serve as our first President on the condition that she would have no official duties except appointing a replacement should she ever decide she didn’t want to con - tinue to serve. I wrote a Constitution & Bylaws of the vaguest and most informal kind, and offered to send a copy out to any member who wanted to see it (no one did), and I declared it approved on that basis. SFPA established an annual award for the best short science fiction poem (up to 49 lines) and the best long one (50 lines or more) of each year. With Robert Heinlein’s kind permission, it was called the Rhysling Award (pronounced “Riseling”) after the Blind Singer of the Spaceways in The Green Hills of Earth . SFPA members may nominate one poem in each category, and the nominated poems are published in an annual 84 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Rhysling Anthology with a ballot enclosed. This means that when SFPA members vote for a Rhysling Award they have had the opportunity to read all of the nominated works; the only exception has been in rare in - stances when we could not obtain permission to reprint a particular poem. The winning poems have appeared most years in the Science Fic - tion Writers of America’s Nebula Awards Showcase . The list of Rhysling winners and their winning poems appears at the end of this handbook. SFPA also began an active campaign to establish science fiction poetry as a valid genre and to open markets for it. Those of us who attended science fiction conventions and writing conferences (or any other appro- priate function) put on poetry panels and readings and workshops as of - ten as anyone would let us. We took samples of Star*Line with us to public meetings and displayed them, to get the word out; we held SFPA meetings and room parties and invited anyone interested to attend. We wrote letters to the editors of science fiction publications asking that they begin carrying poetry if they did not already do so; we doggedly submitted science fiction poetry even to editors who gave us only tepid and tentative maybes. A number of our members published science fic - tion poetry journals of their own, and poetry collections and chapbooks of their own; some of our members received grants to carry out projects in science fiction poetry. We produced a cassette tape of mem - bers reading their own poems and offered it for sale. We also worked to convince the Science Fiction Writers of America— a much more formal and structured organization, with all the traditional bells and whistles—that science fiction poetry was a legitimate medium for becoming a member of SFWA. You can imagine the problems with that idea. It’s one thing to claim that three science fiction sonnets sold to respectable paying publications are equivalent to three science fiction short stories published in similar venues by Gregory Benford or Nalo Hopkinson; it’s quite another thing to prove it. Very briefly, we got it done, but it didn’t last; science fiction poems, no matter where they are published, are no longer considered relevant as sole qualifications for SFWA. We are not going to see a science fiction poetry equivalent of Paradise Lost on the best seller lists in my lifetime—although I have lived to see the publication of book-length science fiction poetry, and that is defi - nitely progress. But thanks to the hard work and cooperation of all our members, SFPA has brought science fiction poetry out of those isolated corners I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. We now have a community of science fiction poets and a forum (three forums, now that there’s also a website and a listserv) where they can communicate Suzette Haden Elgin 85 with one another. Meanwhile, back to the history ... A time came when I found myself unable, even with so much help, to maintain the standards of service to which SFPA members were entitled. And along came another rescuer, in the person of poet and editor Robert Frazier. I was then and am now deeply grateful to him for taking over my duties, with almost no notice, when I so badly needed his help. In 1986, after a year assisting Bob, Elissa Malcohn accepted the post of Star*Line editor, and Bob stayed on a year to help her. When she retired, Bob returned as newsletter editor from mid-1988 to mid-1991. Over the years he had help from poets Gene Van Troyer and Bruce Boston. Others who have served as editor include J.C. and Barb Hendee, David C. Kopsaka -Merkel, Tim Pratt and Marge Simon, who had the job for five years in the 1990s and has taken up the reins again. There have been bumps and joggles from time to time, especially in periods of editorial transition, but Star*Line is alive and well, and the SFPA is more activethan ever before. Through all of this, Star*Line (assisted in recent years by the SFPA website) has remained vigorous, serving not only as a steady forum for poetry and articles about poetry but also as an information clearing - house on every aspect of the science fiction poetry genre. The letters columns have not been just lively, they have been passionate; and many issues have been wrangled there at the top of our collective lungs. The SFPA has always been an informally structured organization, ded- icated to keeping bureaucracy, and the trappings of bureaucracy, to an absolute minimum. Our first president was Elizabeth Chater; the office was then accepted by Gene Wolfe. In years that followed, there often wasn’t a titular president, but Bob Frazier kept things running. In 1992, poet and artist Marge Simon took up the presidency. During her tenure, a formal SFPA constitution was drafted and the organization gave its first Grand Master Award, to Bruce Boston. Poet Scott Green took over in 2001. At the time of this writing, the President is poet and editor Mike Allen. We have mostly made do without committees and caucuses and codi - cils, thus far, and I cannot see that that has held us back. The amount of money that science fiction poets are paid has saved us from needing tax accountants, grievance committees, audits, or people to see that our as - sets are properly invested. This proves that there are some advantages to publishing works that earn from nothing at all to perhaps $50.00; very few forms have to be filled out, and which money market fund to turn to is the least of our worries. The SFPA is now 26 years old, and has survived and grown and made much progress toward its goals. We would welcome your membership and your participation, as it continues to grow. How to Join the SFPA See the SFPA website for current information and to join online. Dues include award nominating and voting privileges, issues of Star*Line, SFPA ’s quarterly journal, and the annual Rhysling and Dwarf Stars an - thologies. Inexpensive .pdf memberships are now available: http://www.sfpoetry.com/join.html Suzette Haden Elgin 87 References And Suggested Readings [Note: This is an informational bibliography, and is not intended to be comprehensive or complete. In particular, there are hundreds of fine chapbooks and small-press poetry collections that I haven’t seen and am simply unaware of. The list below is here to give you an overview of the range of material available, and to help you find resources for further reading.] Articles Allen, Dick, 1975. “What Rough Beast: SF Poetry.” In Extrapolation 17:1. Beaver, Joseph C., 1968. “A Grammar of Prosody.” In College English 29:310–21. ———, 1971. “The rules of stress in English verse.” In Language 47:486–614. ———, 1971. “Current metrical issues.” In College English 33:177–197. Cureton, Richard D., 1979. “E.E. Cummings: A Study of the Poetic Use of Deviant Morphology.” In Poetics Today: 1:213–244. 88 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Halle, Morris, 1971. “Illustration and defense of a theory of the iambic pentameter.” In College English 33:154–176. ———, and Samuel J. Keyser, 1966. “Chaucer and the Study of Prosody.” In College English 28:187–219. (Highly technical) Hansen, Tom, 1980. “Letting Language Do: Some Speculations on Find- ing Found Poems.” In College English 42: 271–282. Joron, Andrew, 1981. “Is This Poetry or Is It Science Fiction?” In Port- land Review 27:2. Levin, Samuel R., 1965. “Internal and External Deviation in Poetry.” In Word 21:225–237. Ohmann, Richard, 1964. “Generative Grammar and the Concept of Lit- erary Style.” In Word 20:424–39. Pickrel, P ., 1985. “Identifying Clichés.” In College English 47:252–261. Rich, Mark, 2002. “The Idea of the Real: Notes on the History of Spec- ulative Poetry.” In Strange Horizons , online at http://www.strangehori - zons. com. ———, 2002. “Speculative Poetry: Notes on Function.” In Full Unit Hookup 1: 20–22. Ryan, Marie-Laure, 1991. “Possible Worlds and Accessibility Relations: A Semantic Typology of Fiction.” In Poetics Today 12: 553–57. Skinner, B.F., 1972. “On Having a Poem.” In Saturday Review for July 15, 1972, pp. 32–35. (This article is as far from the position taken in this handbook as it’s possible to get, with Skinner claiming that poets are no more entitled to credit for their poems than poultry are for their eggs.) Thorne, James, 1965. “Stylistics and Generative Grammars.” In Journal of Linguistics 1:49–59. ———, 1969. “Poetry, Stylistics and Imaginary Grammars.” In Journal of Linguistics 5: 147–150. Weinreich, Uriel, 1963. “On the Semantic Structure of Language.” In J. Greenberg, ed., Universals of Language , pp. 114–171; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Books and Chapbooks Abbott, Michelle, ed., 1993. Out of This World . Peterborough, UK: An - chor Books. Ackerman, Diane, 1976. The Planets: A Cosmic Pastoral. Morrow Ackerson, Duane., ed., 1977. Rocket Candy: Speculative Poetry . Salem, Or.: Dragonfly Press. ———, 1978. The Eggplant and Other Absurdities: Poems and Prose Poems . Lewiston, ID: Confluence Press. (Highly recommended.) Addison, Linda, 1997. Animated Objects. New York, N.Y .: Space & Time. ———, 2001. Consumed, Reduced to Beautiful Grey Ashes , New York, N.Y .: Space & Time. Aldiss, Brian W ., 1995. At the Caligula Hotel and Other Poems . Sinclair- Stevenson. ———, 2002. The Dark Moon Rises. Avernus Media. Allen, Blair H., ed. 1999. The Cerulean Anthology of sci-fi/outer space/fantasy poetry and prose poems. Cucamonga, CA: Cerulean Press. Allen, Mike, 2000. Defacing the Moon and Other Poems . Radford, VA: DNA Publications. ———, 2003. Petting the Time Shark and Other Poems . Radford, VA: DNA Publications. Arnzen, Michael, 1997. Writhing in Darkness . Brentwood, CA: Dark Re - gions Press. ———, 2000. Paratabloids, Ozark Triangle Press. 90 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ———, 2003. Gorelets: Unpleasant Poems, Auburn, WA: Fairwood Press. Ballentine, Lee, 1992. Dream Protocols. Beech Grove, IN: Talisman. ———, ed., 1989. Poly: New Speculative Writing . Mountain View, CA: Ocean View. Bishop, Michael, 1998. Time Pieces. Cambridge, MA.: Edgewood Press. Boston, Bruce, 1984. All the Clocks Are Melting. Velocities Chapbook Se- ries, edited by Andrew Joron. ———, 1989. The Nightmare Collector, Rockford, IL: 2 AM. ———, 1990. Faces of the Beast. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House. ———, 1993. Specula: Selected Uncollected Poems , 1968-1993. Miami, FL: Talisman. ———, 1995. Sensuous Debris: Selected Poems 1970-1995. Concord, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, 2000. The Complete Accursed Wives . Brentwood, CA: Dark Re - gions Press. ———, 2001. Quanta: Award Winning Poems . Napa Valley, CA: Miniature Sun Press. ———, 2001. White Space: The Selected Poetry of Bruce Boston . Brentwood, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, 2003. Pitchblende. Brentwood, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, with Robert Frazier, 1992. Chronicles of the Mutant Rain Forest. Horror’s Head Press. ———, with Marge Simon, 2002. Night Smoke. Napa Valley, CA: Minia- ture Sun Press. [Online at http://www.miniaturesunpress.com.] Bunch, David R., 2000. The Heartacher and the Warehouse Man . Palo Alto, Suzette Haden Elgin 91 CA: Anamnesis Press. Bradbury, Ray, 1982. The Complete Poems of Ray Bradbury . New York: Al - fred A. Knopf. ———, 2002. I Live By the Invisible: New and Collected Poems. Salmon Po- etry. ———, 2002. They Have Not Seen the Stars: The Collected Poetry of Ray Bradbury. Stealth Press. Breiding, G. Sutton, 1984. Autumn Roses. Albuquerque, NM: Silver Scarab Press. Clark, G.O., 2001. A Box Full of Alien Skies: Selected Poems 1988–1998 . Brentwood, Ca.: Dark Regions Press. ———, 2003. The Other Side of the Lens . Brentwood, CA: Dark Regions Press. Cornford, Adam, 1988. Animations. San Franciso, CA: City Lights Books. Daniels, Keith Allen, 1992. What Rough Book. Palo Alto, CA: Anamnesis Press. ———, 1998. Satan Is a Mathematician: Poems, of the Weird, Surreal, and Fantastic. Palo Alto, CA: Anamnesis Press. ———, ed., 2001. 2001: A Science Fiction Poetry Anthology. Palo Alto, CA: Anamensis Press. Darlington, Andrew, 2000. Euroshima Mon Amour . Huddersfield, UK: Hilltop Press. DeLuca, Sandy, 2000. Burial Plot in Sagittarius. Thievin’ Kitty Publications. Deutsch, Babette, 1969. Poetry Handbook: A Dictionary of Terms, 3rd Edi - tion. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. Disch, Thomas M., 1989. Yes, Let’s: New and Selected Poems. Johns Hopkins University Press. 92 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ———, 1991. Dark Verses & Light. Johns Hopkins University Press. Donahoe, Erin, ed., 2002. The Modern Art Cave . Cedar Rapids, IA: Sam’s Dot Publishing. Dorman, Sonya, 1978. A Paper Raincoat. Orono, ME: Puckerbrush Press. ———, 1984. Palace of Earth. Orono, ME: Puckerbrush Press. Dumars, Denise, 2003. Letting in the Dark. Adrian, MI: Yellow Bat Press. Fairfox, John, ed., 1969. Frontier of Going: An Anthology of Space Poetry . London: Panther Books. Frazier, Robert, 1978. Peregrine. Dennis, MA: salt-works press. ———, 1987, Perception Barriers. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Poets Workshop & Press. ———, 2000, The Daily Chernobyl. Palo Alto, CA: Anamnesis Press. ———, ed., 1984. Burning With a Vision: Poetry of Science and the Fantastic . Philadelphia: Owlswick Press. ———, with Bruce Boston, 1992. Chronicles of the Mutant Rain Forest. Horror’s Head Press. ———, with Andrew Joron, 1993. Invisible Machines . Le Grande, OR: Wordcraft of Oregon. Freeman, D., ed., 1970. Linguistics and Literary Style . New York: Holt, Rinehart. (One of the most convenient sources for articles that are oth - erwise scattered through the scholarly journals, including a number of those listed here.) Gaiman, Neil, and Stephen Jones, eds., 1991. Now We Are Sick . DreamHaven Books. Garey, Terry A., and Eleanore Arnason, eds. Time Gum . Minneapolis, MN: Rune Press. ———, ed., 1991. Time Frames: A Speculative Poetry Anthology. Minneapo- lis, MN: Rune Press. Gordon, Bonnie Bilyeu, ed., 1985. Songs from Unsung Worlds: Science in Po - etry. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser. Gottlieb, Daphne, 2003. Final Girl. Soft Skull Press. Green, Scott E., 1984. Baby Sale at the 7-11. Newark, NJ: Bloom. ———, 1989. Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Poetry: A Resource Guide and Biographical Directory. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Gross, Harvey Seymour, ed., 1966. The Structure of Verse: Modern Essays on Prosody. New York: Fawcett. (Like the Freeman book, this one in - cludes many important articles from scholarly books and journals other - wise hard to find outside university libraries. It is an excellent resource for traditional discussions of metrics from about 1900 through 1965.) Haldeman, Joe, 1997. Saul’s Death & Other Poems. Palo Alto, CA: Amam- nesis Press. Halle, Morris and Sameul J. Keyser, 1971. English Stress: Its Growth and Its Role in Verse. New York: Harper and Row. Heinlein, Robert, 1978. I Will Fear No Evil. New York: Putnam. Hensley, Chad, 2000. What the Cacodaemon Whispered . Bayville, NJ: Flesh & Blood Press. Jacob, Charlee, 2000. Flowers from a Dark Star: The Selected Poetry of Charlee Jacob. Concord, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, 2002. Guises. North Webster, IN: Delirium Books. ———, 2003. Cardinal Sins. Napa Valley, CA: Miniature Sun Press. [On- line at http://www.miniaturesunpress.com.] Joron, Andrew, 1987. Force Fields. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House. 93 94 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ———, 1992. Science Fiction. Berkeley, CA: Pentagraph Press. ———, 2003. Fathom. Black Square Editions. ———, with Robert Frazier, 1993. Invisible Machines . Le Grande, OR: Wordcraft of Oregon. Kasturi, Sandra, 2002. The Day I Ate Jupiter (and other poems). Toronto: Kelp Queen Press. ———, ed., 2003. The Stars as Seen from this Particular Angle of Night . Cal- gary: Red Deer Press. Kerman, Judith and Don Riggs, eds., 2000. Uncommon Places: Poetry of the Fantastic. Mayapple Press. Kopaska-Merkel, David C., 1991. underfoot. Port Charlotte, FL: Runaway Spoon Press. ———, 1999. Y2K Survivalist. Tuscaloosa, AL: Smoldering Banyan Press. ———, 2003. Shoggoths. Cedar Rapids, IA: Sam’s Dot Publishing. Le Guin, Ursula K., 1981. Hard Words and Other Poems . New York: Harper & Row. ———, 1988. Wild Oats and Fireweed. New York: Harper & Row. ———, 1994. Going Out with Peacocks and Other Poems. New York: HarperPerennial. Levin, Samuel R., 1962. Linguistic Structures in Poetry . The Hague: Mouton & Co. Lindow, Sandra, 1996. A Celebration of Bones. Le Grande, OR: Wordcraft of Oregon/Jazz Police Books. Lorraine, Lilith, 1952. Wine of Wonder. Dallas: The Book Craft. (Report - edly the first science fiction poetry collection by a woman.) Suzette Haden Elgin 95 Lovecraft, H.P ., 2001. The Ancient Track: The Complete Poetical Works of H.P. Lovecraft. S.T. Joshi, ed.: Night Shade Books. Lucie-Smith, Edward, ed., 1969. Holding Your Eight Hands . New York: Doubleday. Lunde, David, 1995. Blues for Port City. Saginaw, MI: Mayapple Press. ———, 1999. Night Fishing in the Great Sky River . Palo Alto, CA: Anam - nesis Press. Martinson, Harry, 1999. Aniara: A Review of Man in Time and Space , Translated from Swedish by Stephen Klass and Leif Sjoberg. Asland, OR: Story Line Press. McGarry, Terry, 1997. Imprinting. Palo Alto, CA: Anamnesis Press. McLaughlin, Mark, 2003. Professor LaGungo’s Exotic Artifacts & Assorted Mystic Collectibles. Bayville, NJ: Flesh & Blood Press. ———, 2003. The Spiderweb Tree. Adrian, MI: Yellow Bat Press. ———, with Rain Graves and David Niall Wilson, 2002. The Gossamer Eye. Atlanta, GA: Meisha Merlin. Memmott, David, 1996. The Larger Earth: Descending Notes of a Grounded Astronaut. San Francisco, CA: Permeable Press. Muldoon, Paul, 1990. Madoc: A Mystery. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. Murphy, Patrick D., and Vernon Hyles, eds., 1989. The Poetic Fantastic: Studies in an Evolving Genre. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Oestreicher, Joy E., and Richard Singer, eds., 1993. Air Fish. Cupertino, CA: Catseye Books. Piccirilli, Tom, 2000. A Student in Hell. Wilmington, NC: Skull Job Press. ———, 2002. This Cape Is Red Because I’ve Been Bleeding . New York: Cata- lyst Press. 96 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook ———, ed., 2004. The Devil’s Wine. Cemetery Dance Publications. Plotz, Helen, ed., 1955. Imagination’s Other Place: Poems of Science & Mathe - matics. New York: Thomas Y Crowell. Porter, Dorothy, 2002. Wild Surmise. Sydney, Australia: Picador. (A verse novel.) Ragan, Jacie, 1994. The Crow’s Companion: The Selected Poetry of Jacie Ragan . Concord, CA: Dark Regions Press. Reed, Jeremy, 1992. Red-Haired Android. San Franciso: City Lights Books. Redgrove, Peter, 1996. Assembling a Ghost. London: Jonathan Cape . Riley, Jame A., Michael N. Langford and Thomas Fuller, eds., 1995. Once Upon a Midnight ...: New Dark Verse. Atlanta, GA: Unnameable Press. Romanko, Karen A., 2004. Raven’s Runes: Equations in Time. Cedar Rapids, IA: Sam’s Dot Publishing. Rothenberg, Jerome, ed., 1969. Technicians of the Sacred. New York: Dou- bleday. ———, ed., 1972. Shaking the Pumpkin. New York: Doubleday. ———, and George Quasha, eds., 1974. America: A Prophecy. New York: Random House. (These three volumes are not science fiction poetry; they are hefty collections of poetry from all over the world, with exten - sive commentaries. To my mind, they are indispensable resources for the science fiction poet, nevertheless.) Santitoro, Teri, and L.A. Story Houry, eds., 2003. Random Planets: A Sci - faiku Odyssey. Cedar Rapids, IA: Sam’s Dot Publishing. Schwader, Ann K, 2003. Architectures of Night. Brentwood, CA: Dark Re- gions Press. Schweitzer, Darrell, 1997. Poetica Dementica. Strafford, PA: Zadok Allen. ———, 2000. Groping Toward the Light: Poems for Midnight and After. Suzette Haden Elgin 97 Gillette, NJ: Wildside Press. Selzer, Richard, 1976. Mortal Lessons: Notes on the Art of Surgery . New York : Simon and Schuster. Simon, Marge, 1995. Eonian Variations . Concord, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, 2003. Artist of Antithesis. Napa Valley, CA: Miniature Sun Press. [Online at http://www.miniaturesunpress.com] ———, with Bruce Boston, 2002. Night Smoke. Napa Valley, CA: Minia- ture Sun Press. [Online at http://www.miniaturesunpress.com] ———, and Steve Eng., eds., 1991. Poets of the Fantastic . Small Press Writers and Artists Organization. Smith, Clark Ashton, 1971. Selected Poems. Sauk City, WI: Arkham House. Sneyd, Steve, 1991. Bad News From the Stars . Mountain View, CA: Ocean View. (Half of an Ocean View Double.) ———, 2000. Gestaltmacher, Gestaltmacher, Make Me a Gestalt. Stevenage, UK: The Four Quarters Press. ———, ed., 2003. Dreaming Scryers True Deceivers : Science Fiction Poets Read at Oxford. Huddersfield, UK: Hilltop Press. Stewart, W . Gregory, 1993. Antepenult: The Selected Poetry of W. Gregory Stewart. Concord, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, 1996. Blood Like Wine.... Silver Spring, MD: Preternatural Press. Stockwell, Peter, 2000. The Poetics of Science Fiction. London: Longman. Tem, Steve Resnic, 2003. The Hydrocephalic Ward. Brentwood, CA: Dark Regions Press. ———, ed., 1982. The Umbral Anthology of Science Fiction Poetry. Denver: Umbral Press. (This is one of the indispensable books for the sf poet; it’s a superb anthology.) Turner, Frederick, 1985. The New World. Princeton University Press. Utley, Steven, 1998. This Impatient Ape. Palo Alto, CA: Anamnesis Press. Valéry, Paul, 1958. The Art of Poetry. New York: Vintage Books. VanderMeer, Jeff, 2003. The Day Dali Died. Canton, OH: Prime Books. Vas Dias, Robert, ed., 1970. Inside Outer Space: New Poems of the Space Age. New York: Doubleday. Watson, Ian, 2001. The Lexicographer’s Love Song and Other Poems . Radford, VA: DNA Publications. Weber, Jean J., 1996. The Stylistics Reader: From Roman Jakobson to the Present. New York: St. Martin’s Press. Winter, Laurel, 2003. A Galaxy in a Jar. Brentwood, CA: Dark Regions Press. winter-damon, t., 1992. The Hour of Hallucinations. Miami, FL: Talisman. Wolfe, Gene, 1988. For Rosemary. Kerosina Press. Zelazny, Roger, 1996. Hymn to the Sun: An Imitation . Greenfield, MA: DNA Publications. On the Internet Bain, David. Whispering Worlds . A/A Productions. [Online at http://www.geocities.com/Area51 / Shadowlands/4464] Elgin, Suzette Haden. “About Science Fiction Poetry.” [Online at http://www.sfwa.org/members/elgin/ SFPoetry.html.] Sneyd, Steve. “Gnawing Medusa’s Flesh: The Science Fiction Poetry of R o b e r t C a l v e r t . ” [ O n l i n e a t h t t p : / / w w w. a u r a l - innovations.com/issues/issue18/02_sneyd. html] ———. The Rhysling Anthology Archive. [Online at http://www.sfpo - Suzette Haden Elgin 99 etry.com/archive.htm] — — — . “ T h e S c i f a i k u M a n i f e s t o . ” [ O n l i n e a t http://www.scifaiku.com/what] — — — . S c i f a i k u M a i l i n g L i s t . [ O n l i n e a t http://groups.yahoo.com/groups/scaifaiku] ———. Science Fiction Poetry Association website. [Links to many sci - ence fiction poetry resources, including markets, journals, poet’s web - sites, articles, interviews, and more. Online at http://www.sfpoetry.com] ———. SFPANet. [Online at http://groups.yahoo.com /groups/sf - pa.net] ———. The Ultimate Science Fiction Poetry Guide. [Online at http://www.magicdragon.com/UltimateSF/sfpo.html] [Not complete, but very detailed, with a great deal of information.] Science Fiction Poetry Magazines [The list below is restricted to publications that publish only science fic - tion poetry and related information such as science fiction poetry re - views, articles on science fiction poetics, market listings, and the like. A list of other publications in the genre that publish occasional poetry is available at the SFPA website (http://www.sfpoetry.com) and in the usual market listing sources.] Astropoetica, website edited by Emily Gaskin; e-mail, editor@astropoeti - ca.com. [Online at http://www.astropoetica.com] Dreams and Nightmares , edited by David C. Kopaska-Merkel; 1300 Kicker Road, Tuscaloosa, AL 35404. E-mail, dragontea@earthlink.net. [Online at http://home.earthlink.net/~dragontea/index.html] Illumen, edited by Tyree Campbell and Erin Donahoe; PO Box 782, Cedar Rapids, IA 52406-0782. E-mail, illumensdp@yahoo.com. [Online at http://www.samsdotpublishing.com] Mythic Delirium , edited by Mike Allen; P .O Box 13511, Roanoke VA 100 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook 24034-3511. E-mail, mythicd2001@yahoo.com. [Online at http://www.mythicdelirium. com] Star*Line, edited by Marge Simon; 1412 NE 35 th St., Ocala FL 34479. E- mail, SFPASL@aol.com. [Online at http://www.sfpoetry.com] The Magazine of Speculative Poetry , edited by Roger Dutcher, P .O. Box 564, Beloit WI 53512. E-mail, sfpoetry@yahoo.com. [Online at http://www.sff.net/people/Roger-Dutcher/#msp] THE RHYSLING RECORD 1978 Long Poem Gene Wolfe: THE COMPUTER ITERATES THE GREATER TRUMPS Short Poem (tie) Duane Ackerson: THE STARMAN Sonya Dorman: CORRUPTION OF METALS Andrew Joron: ASLEEP IN THE ARMS OF MOTHER NIGHT 1979 Long Poem Michael Bishop: FOR THE LADY OF A PHYSICIST Short Poem (tie) Duane Ackerson: FATALITIES Steve Eng: STORYBOOKS AND TREASURE MAPS 1980 Long Poem 102 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Andrew Joron: THE SONIC FLOWERFALL OF PRIMES Short Poem (tie) Robert Frazier: ENCASED IN THE AMBER OF ETERNITY Peter Payack: THE MIGRATION OF DARKNESS 1981 Long Poem Thomas M. Disch: ON SCIENCE FICTION Short Poem Ken Duffin: MEETING PLACE 1982 Long Poem Ursula K. Le Guin: THE WELL OF BALN Short Poem Raymond DiZazzo: ON THE SPEED OF SIGHT 1983 Long Poem Adam Cornford: YOUR TIME AND YOU: A NEOPROLE’S DATING GUIDE Short Poem Alan P . Lightman: IN COMPUTERS 1984 Long Poem Joe Haldeman: SAUL’S DEATH: TWO SESTINAS Short Poem Helen Ehrlich: TWO SONNETS Suzette Haden Elgin 103 1985 Long Poem Siv Cedering: A LETTER FROM CAROLINE HERSCHEL Short Poem Bruce Boston: FOR SPACERS SNARLED IN THE HAIR OF COMETS 1986 Long Poem Andrew Joron: SHIPWRECKED ON DESTINY FIVE Short Poem Susan Palwick: THE NEIGHBOR’S WIFE 1987 Long Poem W . Gregory Stewart: DAEDALUS Short Poem (tie) Jonathan V . Post: BEFORE THE BIG BANG: NEWS FROM THE HUBBLE LARGE SPACE TELESCOPE John Calvin Rezmerski: A DREAM OF HEREDITY 1988 Long Poem Lucius Shepard: WHITE TRAINS Short Poem (tie) Bruce Boston: THE NIGHTMARE COLLECTOR Suzette Haden Elgin: ROCKY ROAD TO HOE 104 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook 1989 Long Poem (tie) Bruce Boston: IN THE DARKENED HOURS John M. Ford: WINTER SOLSTICE, CAMELOT STATION Short Poem Robert Frazier: SALINITY 1990 Long Poem Patrick McKinnon: DEAR SPACEMEN Short Poem G. Sutton Breiding: EPITAPH FOR DREAMS 1991 Long Poem David Memmott: THE AGING CRYONICIST IN THE ARMS OF HIS MISTRESS CONTEMPLATES THE SURVIVAL OF THE SPECIES WHILE THE PHOENIX IS CONSUMED BY FIRE Short Poem Joe Haldeman: EIGHTEEN YEARS OLD, OCTOBER ELEVENTH 1992 Long Poem W . Gregory Stewart: THE BUTTON AND WHAT YOU KNOW Short Poem David Lunde: SONG OF THE MARTIAN CRICKET 1993 Long Poem William J. Daciuk: TO BE FROM EARTH Short Poem Jane Yolen: WILL 1994 Long Poem W . Gregory Stewart and Robert Frazier: BASEMENT FLATS: REDEFINING THE BURGESS SHALE Short Poem (tie) Bruce Boston: SPACER’S COMPASS Jeff VanderMeer: FLIGHT IS FOR THOSE WHO HAVE NOT YET CROSSED OVER 1995 Long Poem David Lunde: PILOT, PILOT Short Poem Dan Raphael: SKIN OF GLASS 1996 Long Poem Margaret B. Simon: VARIANTS OF THE OBSOLETE Short Poem Bruce Boston: FUTURE PRESENT: A LESSON IN EXPECTATION 1997 105 106 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook Long Poem Terry A. Garey: SPOTTING UFOS WHILE CANNING TOMATOES Short Poem W . Gregory Stewart: DAY OMEGA 1998 Long Poem Laurel Winter: WHY GOLDFISH SHOULDN’T USE POWER TOOLS Short Poem John Grey: EXPLAINING FRANKENSTEIN TO HIS MOTHER 1999 Long Poem Bruce Boston: CONFESSIONS OF A BODY THIEF Short Poem Laurel Winter: EGG HORROR POEM 2000 Long Poem Geoffrey A. Landis: CHRISTMAS (AFTER WE ALL GET TIME MACHINES) Short Poem Rebecca Marjesdatter: GRIMOIRE 2001 Long Poem Joe Haldeman: JANUARY FIRES Short Poem Bruce Boston: MY WIFE RETURNS AS SHE WOULD HAVE IT Suzette Haden Elgin 107 2002 Long Poem Lawrence Schimel: HOW TO MAKE A HUMAN Short Poem William John Watkins: WE DIE AS ANGELS 2003 Long Poem (tie) Charles Saplak and Mike Allen: EPOCHS IN EXILE: A FANTASY TRILOGY Sonya Taaffe: MATLACIHUATL’S GIFT Short Poem Ruth Berman: POTHERB GARDENING 2004 Long Poem Theodora Goss: OCTAVIA IS LOST IN THE HALL OF MASKS Short Poem Roger Dutcher: JUST DISTANCE 108 The Science Fiction Poetry Handbook T H E X E N O T E X T B O O K 1 C H R I S T I A N B Ö K T H E X E N O T E X T C H R I S T I A N B Ö K c X 1 Internationally renowned poet Christian Bök has encoded a poem (called ‘Orpheus’) into the genome of a germ so that, in reply, the cell builds a protein that encodes yet another poem (called ‘Eurydice’). After having illustrated this idea in E. coli, Bök is planning to insert his poem into a deathless bacterium ( D. radiodurans ), thereby writing a text able to outlive every apocalypse, enduring till the Sun itself expires. Book 1 of The Xenotext is an ‘infernal grimoire’ that intro- duces readers to the conceptual groundwork for this project. The book offers a primer in genetics, even as it revisits the pastoral heritage of poetry, updating the orphic idylls of Virgil for a new age of mythic danger – be it in the beauty of artful biogenesis, if not in the terror of global extinction. ‘The cellular “rules” that govern this extraordinary text allow Bök to create one of the most beautiful poems of our time – a poem in which the georgics of Virgil join forces with the double helix of Watson and Crick.’ – Marjorie Perloff ‘If Human reverence was slanted more toward Nature and less toward the exaltation of gods, our scriptures might have looked something like The Xenotext .’ – Peter Watts $19.95 cdn | $18.95 us coach house books the first work of ‘living poetry’ in the world, by the author of the bestselling book eunoia . X isbn 978 1 55245 321 6 c X 1 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 1 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 2 T H E X E N O T E X T B O O K 1 C O A C H H O U S E B O O K S C H R I S T I A N B Ö K (After 128 generations.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 3 Copyright © Christian Bök, 2015 first edition This book was published with the generous assistance of the Canada Council for the Arts and the Ontario Arts Council. The publisher acknowledges the support of the Government of Canada (via the Canada Book Fund) and the Government of Ontario (via the Ontario Publishing Tax Credit). library and archives canada cataloguing in publication Bök, Christian, 1966-, author The xenotext / Christian Bök. Poems. Contents: Book 1. isbn 978-1-55245-321-6 (book 1 : paperback) I. Title. ps8553.o4727x45 2015 c811'.54 c 2 01 5 - 9 0 502 2 - 7 The Xenotext (Book 1) is available as an ebook: isbn 978 1 77056 434 3 Purchase of the print version of this book entitles you to a free digital copy. T o claim your ebook of this title, email sales@chbooks.com with proof of your purchase, or visit www.chbooks.com/digital. (The publisher reserves the right to terminate this offer of a free digital download at any time.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 4 The xenotext offers no redemption... It ‘means’ what its interpreters cannot prevent it from meaning. Brian Rotman Signifying Nothing(1987 ) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 5 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 6 for the maiden in her dark, pale meadow TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 7 the late heavy bombardment colony collapse disorder the nocturne of orpheus colony collapse disorder Exordium Epilogue the xenagogue 11 22 23 24 29 34 38 44 50 53 59 64 71 74 75 On the Apiary of the World On the Armies of the Realm On the Keeper of the Grove On the Labour of the Horde On the Plight of the Swarm On the Ritual of the Crypt On the Tirade of the Swain On the Ordeal of the Augur On the Lament of the Lover On the Ritual of the Altar i. ii. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 8 the march of the nucleotides the central dogma genetic engineering the nucleobases Adenine Cytosine Guanine Thymine Uracil the genetic code the march of the nucleotides death sets a thing significant each orchard claims its realm the virelay of the amino acids alpha helix vita explicata 78 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 109 113 117 139 149 iii. iv. v. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 9 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 10 T H E L A T E H E A V Y B O M B A R D M E N T (After 325 generations.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 11 12 the late heavy bombardment Welcome, Wraith and Reader, to the Hadean Eon of the Earth. When Myrmidons hurled their cobalt bombs into your molten world of basalt and bronze. When mighty golems swan-dove from orbit to drive their glaives of iron into your black mesas, only to be engulfed by the blast waves. When meteors fell earthward in droves, each one a gigaton warhead, ablaze. When supervolcanoes erupted, flammivomous, after each hammerblow from these endless blitzes of ærolites and firebombs. When bolides of brim- stone collided, then exploded into ablative cascades. When tsunamis of lava, like napalm, bedrowned a subcontinent in a deluge of flames. When millions of Molotov cocktails shattered all at once upon the cobblestones of Hell. When Trojans, berserk with rage, stormed over the brink of your abyss, vowing to claw your face from the skull of the Moon. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 12 13 What dire seed must these onslaughts have scattered, like shrapnel, across your cremated badlands? What prion? What virus? What breed of spore must have emerged, like a spear point or a sword blade, from these early ovens of Auschwitz (each cyanide bonfire, burning in reverse, spit- ting forth a fitful embryo, cloned from the smoke and the dross)? What orchid must have bloomed among the flame- throwers in the furnace? What dragon must have hatched from a burnt geode, buried in these ashes? Must the uni- verse be so pitiless as to immolate all its offspring at birth? Even now, the astronauts have marshalled their forces to march, resolute, across the kill zone of your godforsaken crematorium. Even now, they forge ahead, onward, through war games of wildfire (unaware that, far away, a doomsayer murmurs prayers against them from a fiendish grimoire). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 13 14 What howl can beckon, from the benthic fathoms of your damnation, so alien a ghoul as Vampyroteuthis infernalis (‘the vampire squid from Hell’), a maw that can hurl itself at your soul, like an overcloak cast upon a coat hook in the dark? What does such a black brain, afloat in its vat of ink, know about the death blows to your planet? What does such an emissary think about the pageant of living things that go extinct, en route to your incinerators (the trilobites, the nautilites, the gorgosaurs, the pterosaurs, the iguanodons, the megalodons – all of them massacred, but unmourned)? All the deepest seas have withered and soured. All the tallest alps have crumbled and burned. Y ou have choked on miasmas of methane. Y ou have upturned all your braziers, spilling embers across the flagstones. All your fossils have dissolved in a flash flood of acid rain. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 14 15 What Great Comet has yet to plummet from the heavens, like a rocket engine dousing its jets during splashdown in your oceans of nitroglycerine? What thunderclap has yet to herald the advent of this plowshare, which can bulldoze a mountain into rubble upon impact? What match-heads, when scraped against your atmosphere, can ignite its oxy- gen, turning the sky into a blazing typhoon? Only a demi- god, like 99942 Apophis, can offer you this apocalypse by becoming the juggernaut that smashes through the massive bulwark of your bedrock. Only destroyers, like 2102 Tantalus or 4179 T outatis, can erase all earthlings with the ease of suicide bombers at a marketplace. Can an oyster in its shell survive the inferno of free fall from outer space? Can a crocus thrive in soil made from pulverized meteorites? All hail, Hale-Bopp (and every superbomb yet to detonate)! TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 15 16 What Great Dying must the Earth foresee in the barren mirror of the Moon? What Fate? What Fury? What Muse must gaze upon the grim face of grief, reflected in your silver shield (a faceplate of bulletproof glass, pitted and strewn with scars)? What cinders, aflame, disintegrate in your grey seas of nectar, of vapour, of crisis? What shell shock must greet you when you stumble, aghast, upon the charred remains of a forest at Tunguska (its evergreens, toppled and blasted, all of them split, like matchsticks)? What crater, among the lunar maria, must you yearn to recreate whenever you vaporize an atoll? Even now, your battalions of astronauts stride across green plains of trini- tite to storm the walls of Castle Bravo and Castle Romeo. Even now, Neil Armstrong returns, like Orpheus, to the air- lock, his spacesuit reeking of gunpowder and burnt steel. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 16 17 What American falconer must aviate your spyplane by the stray light of meteor storms from the Draconids or the Scorpiids (the flak raining down, like glitter dust, upon the desert during a nocturnal firefight)? What scythe-blades must the Vikings forge from the wreckage of an asteroid, recovered from Cape Y ork? What Archangel must the mar- tyrs placate when they kiss the Black Stone of the Kaaba at Mecca during the Hajj? What sunburst must erupt, like Krakatoa, over the Arctic Circle (when the firepower of your payload exceeds by tenfold all the dynamite exploded during World War ii )? Even now, the President of the United States sits alone at night, dreading the grim hour when he must open the memo from his aide, only to read upon the page the single phrase: pinnacle nucflash (the newsflash that chronicles the omnicide of the world). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 17 18 What global threat of Sturm und Drang must your armies yet endure (even in their granite bunkers, deep beneath the massif of Cheyenne Mountain)? When every fountain of hellfire in the firmament can destroy you. When a k-dwarf star, like Gliese 710, can plow through the Oort cloud, bombarding the Earth with cometoids that shatter every land mass. When a Wolf-Rayet star, like wr 104, can out- shine the galaxy in a burst of gamma rays so bright that the blaze must burn away the ozone layer. When the Sun itself can bloat, then flare, to engulf you in a flaming embrace that atomizes the iron core of your planet. Even now, your astronauts are running out of air while they writhe inside their blazing coffins. Even now, you must despair, for you have listened to the throb of the universe, yet you do not hear the cries of any other souls in Hell. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 18 19 Tell me, Wraith and Reader, tell me: Will love save us from our fear that we are here alone? What then if we peer into the sky at night but see no distant lantern blink- ing at us from the far end of the cosmos? What if such a beacon goes unnoticed, like a dying flame in the dark- ness? What if only the most wicked people in the world (the pharaohs, the warlocks, the assassins) ever get to read this signal from outer space? What if the message, when decoded, says nothing but a single phrase repeated: ‘We despise you! We despise you!’ What if we find the evidence for such hate embedded in our genomes? Even now, colonies of dark ants from a species called Mystrium shadow feed themselves upon the blood of their young. Even now, my love, these words confess to you that the universe without you in it is but a merciless explosion. Come with me, and let me show you how to break my heart. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 19 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 20 C O L O N Y C O L L A P S E D I S O R D E R (After 133 generations.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 21 22 the nocturne of orpheus this covenant of love in a dirge for a god has delighted an angel who obeys my plea, each sonnet a rhythm for her to decipher, making legible a key in her dream of dusk: a redness that darkens the hue of a tulip is richening her view on the hill of a lea, dappling her vista at the end of my vigil, even if havoc calls forth ruin to kill me. no church, no chapel, is a refuge in a storm, if we beg to be warm, yet let die the candle. no herder, no hermit, enchanted by the sea, has hitherto known the ennui of a coward, even when infernos in hell burn the hero: radiant as flint, be the ache of my sorrow. For ‘the maiden in her dark, pale meadow’ (on nights when I have fears that I may cease to be...). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 22 23 colony collapse disorder Exordium European honeybees ( Apis mellifera ) have suffered from a pandemic syndrome that causes workers to forsake their duties, foraging without returning home, leaving the queen and her brood unattended, until the hive itself dwindles into abandonment; moreover, any stores of honey in the forsaken dwelling often go unlooted by other pests for much longer than expected. While entomologists have proposed several factors that might account for this disorder (includ- ing bouts of infection by either varroa mites or fungal smuts), the problem is likely aggravated by the broad usage of the pesticide imidacloprid, a neonicotinoid that can disrupt the nervous systems of bees, impairing their ability to navigate. The disorder threatens this species of insect with extinction – thus posing a danger to the welfare of humanity, which relies upon such bees to pollinate crops. Chensheng Lu, et al. ‘Sublethal Exposure to Neonicotinoids Impaired Honey Bees’ Winterization Before Proceeding to Colony Collapse Disorder.’ Bulletin of Insectology 67.1 (2014): 125–130. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 23 24 1. On the Apiary of the World Airborne honeydew sweetens my spirit with a perfume that, by divine decree, hath enticed me to perform these sonnets for thee, my mæstro, Gaius Mæcenas. Study, with grimness, the plight of puny gods – warlords in a daylong dynasty, whose sieges and jihads I must belaud in song. Scant be my labour, but not my reward, if Apollo favours these rhymes. Annex first to the hive, a haven, blind to winds that hinder foragers in flight, then suffer neither yak nor ewe to trek across these meadows, nor oxen to dash away the dew from phloxes and grasses. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 24 25 2. Disperse from thy honied stalls the gaily tinted geckos, then repel the red-plumed bee-eaters, which echo flocks of swallows (the progeny of Procne, her blouse still bloody from her filicide). Let no throng of songbirds indulge in such butchery, by which a bee, tweezed in a beak, is fed to savage broods, like a dainty morsel, but let some streamlet of meltwater run near mossy pools of greenery, then let the fronds of betel palms or olive trees drape each entryway to thy catacomb, wherefrom the oligarchs at dawn deploy their convoy of drones on vernal forays. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 25 26 3. Thistles and brambles by the riverside beckon thy scouts from the toil of travel to rest awhile in hidden groves of shade. Upon the shallows, whether swift or still, place a willow bough or a paving stone – a footbridge for the flyers that alight to preen each winglet made of diaphane (for Eurus often bids the sudden breeze to douse such envoys in spritzes of mist or drown such pilots in speckles of rain). Let flower beds of basil, thyme, and clove overgrow these clover fields, the fiefdoms of the hive, heavy-laden with the musk of violets, overwhelming thy wellsprings. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:02 PM Page 26 27 4. Contrive that the ingress to the sanctum of the bees be narrow, made from woven osiers or cedar braids, for summer heat can soften firm taffies and winter cold can curdle warm jellies, both disastrous for these denizens, who must fix a hole in each wall of wax, filling this fissure with their pollen, then sealing the crevice with their saliva, a spittle, which binds more fast than any glue, be it coal tar or pine gum, from the hills of Phrygia. True to fame, all bees at home in foxholes can nest in the clefts of each hollow karst, if not in the chinks of some fallen birch. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 27 28 5. Thatches of adobe and straw, if daubed, like grout about the doorway of a tomb, can delay the loss of heat from the cribs, but when near this bivouac of the bees, be certain to abstain from the charring of yew trees or the roasting of red crabs. Abandon all scrublands ruled by decay – bayous, which echo the ring of a rock, if struck, or the bray of a buck, if killed. When sunbeams in summer hath evicted the vanguard of winter, thereby ousting the gloom to reclaim a heavenly strength, forthwith do these hoverers in wetlands quiver over every bloom by the stream. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 28 29 6. On the Armies of the Realm Orphaned at birth, the children enlisted in thy army learn the roster of chores, fulfilled by the swarm, slaving together to build more hexagons for the barracks. When spritely these militias fly skyward, marvel at their feral cloud, expanding and diffusing, like smoke above a blaze. They seek fresh waters and leafy bowers; hence, surrender unto them thy tributes, bestrewing hither the hints of sweetness (crumbly balsams and opulent hyssops), then let the zephyrs caress thy sleighbells (the windchimes of Cybele, summoning all the bees to slumber in their cradles). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 29 30 7. Crusades, however, can spur the unrest of dormant legions, bestirred in the hive, when rivalries arise between twin foes contending for ascendance to the throne. Notice from afar this call to slaughter, which must sway the fey mob of rioters, their fury athrob with pending warfare. Harken to the brazen skirls that rebuke the latecomers unequipped for battle, each blast of the trumpet inciting them to muster their forces, to flex their wings, to knit their thews, rehoning each stinger, to rally around the camp of their king, and by their shouts defame all infidels. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 30 31 8. Lowlands in spring become a battlefield for these insurrectionists who surge forth from their fortress, igniting a skirmish, whereby they commingle in a berserk cluster – a crazed vortex of multitudes more numerous than all the bits of hail, falling, like acorns shaken from an oak during a windstorm. Ornately shielded, the winged moguls barge into this melee, their pygmy hearts full of godly malice, each vowing to show his twin no mercy until some victor swats aside all blows. A fistful of dust, thrown into this fray, can quell the frenzy of such insurgents. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 31 32 9. Subpoena this pair of brawling kingpins from their arena, but condemn to death the khan more crippled by his injuries, lest he prove too hindersome to the hive. Then enthrone at once the better despot, the one with a golden helmet that shines (for twofold is his kin: the great hero who wags a killing sting, and the elder lord who lugs a swollen belly) – all bees alike unto men: some crude, some noble (like the sun-cursed pilgrim in the desert, hating his downtroddenness in the dust, or the sun-graced esquire in the garden, loving the delightsomeness of his gold). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 32 33 10. Highborn are the dryads of this feudal father who, in summer, lets his maidens filter honey (thin and pure, like cognac, mellowing the muscatels of Bacchus) – but if such ruckus makes thy dizzy serfs forgo their tasks to frolic in the skies (all their forsaken pantries left unfilled), then extract the pinions of the patron so that, if unwinged, he must malinger, his minions unwilling to move his flag. Let leas of fragrant saffrons lure the bees homeward, and put thy faith in Priapus to safekeep the propolis with his scythe, fending off raids by martins and looters. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 33 34 11. On the Keeper of the Grove Persuade the gardener of these orchards to procure, from a hillspur, firs and figs to plant, as palisades, around the fort. Let no hand but his undertake this work of tilling the slopes or wetting the sprigs – and if not for the furling of my sails, turning the prow of my ship to the shore, I might have sung odes to such cultivage, which rivals every rose bush in Pæstum: how endive soaks itself in furtive brooks, how fennel sways itself in verdant fields, how vines and ivies entangle the gourds. I might have flattered every narcissus – blessing white myrtles and sleek acanthi. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 34 35 12. Overawed by the cloudswept belltowers of Tarentum, where the stream Galæsus bathes the goldenrod, a greying plowman from Corycus must brag of his birthright – an acreage of abandoned heathland, unfit to till (not meant for the grazing of cattle nor for the raising of grapes) – but still he tends a meagre clutch of dill among these nettles, filling such terrain with creamy lilies, planted near a plot of crimson poppies, weedy with vervain. He comports himself like a noble count, returning to the mead hall after dusk with a daily trove of unbought bounties. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 35 36 13. Foremost among the pruners of the rose in springtime, he is first to pluck a plum by autumntide – but ere the winterkill of frost can sunder rocks (or else bridle, with its ice, the rills of racing water), he hath cut the bud from the hyacinth, chiding the plodding footfall of summer, whose westerlies tarry; hence, he is first to press the froth of honey from its comb, all his bees upflying from their eyries. His refuge harbours lindens and laurels, even fruitful saplings in early bloom: limes and pears, all arrayed in leafery gilded by the brooding sunshine of fall. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 36 37 14. Devoutly, he trims a hedgerow of elms: crab-apples and sloe-thorns, overladen with berries; shade-trees, offering solace to the parched pioneer – likewise, I rest, giving others leave to praise his estate. Permit me to portray the great power that Jupiter hath bestowed on the bees, all of whom must heed the shrill melody of the Curetes – the bashers of shields, calling these swarms, to feed thy deity honeydew in his cave at Mount Dicte. Unique be these societies, which spawn communal children inside strict cities, each constrained by one law of majesty. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 37 38 15. On the Labour of the Horde Confined to their metropolis, the thralls plan in summertime for the frigidness to come, and so they labour, like misers, to hoard their vintages in hidden vaults: the breadmaker, who provisions the hive; the stockpiler, who warehouses the food; the bricklayer, who buttresses the comb – all using glue derived from a jonquil, its sap stickier than the pitch oozing from a cedar, to which clings a cocoon. All godmothers love their kindergarten, just as treasurers love a counting-room, the honey packed so tightly in its cells that the columbarium drips with dew. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 38 39 16. Stewards who stand, vigilant, at the gates of the hive scan the skies for ominous thunder, seizing the loads of arriving scouts or smiting the ranks of invading troops. Behold the glow of such industry, which exudes a scent redolent of thyme – or else recall the Cyclopes, who forge their dark thunderbolts from meteorites of iron: one smith pumping the rawhide bellows to arouse the furnace, one smith dousing the scalded bullion to harden its surface. Anvils below Mount Ætna clang and groan, singing iambs of metal: twisted by forceps, pounded by hammers. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 39 40 17. Rapacity drives the hive mind to found an empire upon the mound of Athens, each plebe fated to one sphere of labour, like the colossi chained to their forges. Elders plan the city, mending its walls, while youths, belated, return from patrol, their packs laden with pollen, all stolen from a remote garden, rich in splendour (a courtyard enlivened with mayflowers: arbutuses, hawthorns, and marigolds). Every pawn toils alongside its brethren, each legion bidden to the field at dawn (no pardon for the idlers) – but at dusk, even armies seek relief from their drills. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 40 41 18. Blissful choruses of mumbled humming remurmur at the doorstep of the fort, before nightfall hushes these lullabies, belulling all their hymn-singers to sleep. Not far from the hive do the vassals stray if the sky warns of oncoming rainstorms or uprising easterlies – instead, drones fetch water near the safehold of the keep, making brief trips with particles of grit, borne like ballast in the hold of a ship so that pilots stay the course in a squall. How wondrous that the bees obey a law, which forbids their betrothal in wedlock so that never do they yield to their love. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 41 42 19. Midwives in the hive have yet to suffer agony in childbirth – but from sodden petals, they sip milt for their hatcheries, supplying to the realm newborn princes, ready to rebuild the wilting waxwork. If such maidens trip by crossing a scree of flint, they might rip delicate wingtips, dying, flightless, in their hunt for tulips, so fervent is their craving for sweetness – but while the life of every bee is brief, lasting no more than a septet of years, the bloodline of the khan hath persisted, deathless, his heritage fading hellward into time, from grandsire unto grandsire. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 42 43 20. Ægyptus hath not shown such allegiance to its pharaohs – nor hath the Lydians, the Parthians, and the men from the vale of Hydaspes owed a god such respect. The will of one king, if hale, empowers millions, but at his death, this covenant of devotion dies with him; thus the bees vandalize their treasuries of sweetmeats, dragging down trellises of honeycomb. The king, whilst alive, however, inspects his exultant platoons who surround him, uplifting him high upon their shoulders, when not using their bodies to shield him from a shower of wounds during sieges. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 43 44 21. On the Plight of the Swarm Demigods grant the honeybees a share of the divine liquor, the mead that hath caused imbibers to dream of the æther, which suffuses the empire of the stars – a chasm from which all mortals amass at birth each atom of their inner flame. Unto this abyss, all souls are gathered to be torn asunder, scattered like soot in a gale – but upward into this vault of night fly tiny bees in mighty hordes. If thou durst unlatch their sarcophagi to drink from thy cup the floral syrup, dab thy lip with rosewater by the tomb, then pry the lid amid a flood of smoke. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 44 45 22. Harvests of these nectaries by clansfolk occur twice in the quartet of seasons – once when the gazelle of the Pleiades uplifts her starlit antlers for bowyers to see (her footfall spraying the seafoam), and once when she flees pursuit by Pisces (dipping from the skies to sip from a sea so icy that the chill fills her with scorn). When bitten by their enemies, all bees can spit out venom through a tiny dart, leaving part of their spirit in the scar. If thou durst dread the perils of winter, thinking to temper such coming danger, let the trials of thy slaves prick thy heart. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 45 46 23. Fearless be thy servants who fumigate the hive with frankincense, excising wax, now pestilent – for lizards gnaw, unseen, into the comb, as insects cram, unjust, into each room, like rivals at thy feast: the vulgar beetle that spoils thy labour; the brutal hornet that steals thy repast; the greedy locust that swills thy nectar; the savage spider, damned by Minerva to weave a cobweb across each egress. When a bee feels such impoverishments, it strives more keenly to heal the ravished fortunes of its race, refilling these casks by ransacking daisies without surcease. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 46 47 24. Doomsday wreaks its toll of ruination upon these helots, whose bodies languish and collapse under the lash of bondage. The afflicted, grey and lean with decay, are borne away on biers by pallbearers – the ungrieving caretakers bred to clear the waxen cells, whilst survivors loiter, listless from famine in these vestibules, each soul frostbitten by an early chill. Now harken to the keening of the hive: not a wind that sighs amid the aspens nor a tide that booms upon the oceans, but more akin to some hellish bonfire, trapped within the crucibles of its kiln. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 47 48 25. Enkindle censers filled with laudanum, then lighten the beggardom of thy serfs by piping them molasses through a reed, exhorting each starveling to sip till full. Brew for them a liquor of oaken galls and dried roses (if not a wine quickened to a boil, like a stew, the crushed raisins from Psithian vines, infused with acrid resin, made of knapweed and feverfew). Hunt far in thy pastures for the starwort – a breed of aster, dotting each hill-crest, the lone seed, upthrusting many a stem, its crown all gilt but girt with a muster of blades, agleam in hues of amethyst. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 48 49 26. Garlands of these purple petals imbue thy altars with scents of bittersweetness, and peasants, tending sheep in a valley by the river Mella, gather these blooms to steep them in mulses of honeydew left in an alms bowl beside each warren – but if thy legions die without warning (the beekeepers unable to spawn them anew), then let me divulge a woeful legend, which can convey the arcanum taught to us by the swain Aristæus: how the bloodletting of a bull, if slain, gives birth to a swarm from the carrion. Let me unveil this omen of our doom. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 49 50 27. On the Ritual of the Crypt Mariners who roam the seas from Pella to Canopus dwell beside the marshes of the Nile, sailing barges of painted papyrus across these shallow lagoons – the shorelines harried by foreign archers, the floodwaters, diverging seven times into mudflows, enriching the flood plain with a topsoil, afterward greenswarded. Herdsmen there believe in a sacrament that might replenish depleted beehives – if priestlings build a narrow adytum from ruddy banks of clay and lowly eaves of tile, the crypt set apart from the wind, with each wall vented by an arrow-slit. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 50 51 28. Acolytes cull from the herd an unscarred steerling no older than two dozen moons, whereupon the zealots grapple this ox, choking it, battering the beast to death, till its flesh is, at best, pulp in the hide, the carcass left to lie on broken planks of cinnamon, placed inside the sanctum. Fanatics enact these rites if westwinds ripple a pond (ere the verdure deepens its moss and ere the ortolan burdens its nest); all the while, a tender marrow ferments in the heat, respawning larvæ, wingless at first, but seething with power, boiling, abuzz, to erupt from the womb. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 51 52 29. Whirring wings soon flit into airy life, and like the thundering of a rainsquall in August (or like the spate of arrows hailing from the longbows of Parthian cohorts at the outbreak of an onslaught), bees fly forth, reborn, from this burial. T ell us, Muses: What god hath aided us in this fraught display of resurrection? What mentor hath given us this lesson? Know then that Aristæus, the stricken shepherd, deprived of his bees by famine and plague, abandons his farm in T empe to seek his mother at the earthquaking fountainhead of a stream called Peneus. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 52 53 30. On the Tirade of the Swain ‘Pitiless Cyrene!’ he cries. ‘Our queen who liveth below the whirl of the waves! Why hast thou borne me by this deity, Apollo, my liege, the god of Thymbra, if only to ban me from my birthright? Why hast thou refuted thy love for me? Why hast thou denied me life in heaven? Can no god see that even now the crown of my mortal labour, fashioned with care from the ore of my talent, falls away? Y et thou hast seen fit to call me thy son! Nay then, arise, and by thy will, destroy my orchards, demolishing my homeland with thy mindless infernos – burn it all!’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 53 54 31. ‘Immolate my hayfield, or wield thy axe against my vineyards, if thou hast taken umbrage at my skill!’ Such lamentation vexes his mother, locked in her cloister underwater, all her nymphets spinning Milesian wool, dyed aqua, like seaglass – Xantho, Phrixa, and sweet Neomeris, their tresses unfurling upon white necks; Eudora, the naif unspoiled by a tryst; Europa, the girl debauched by a rogue; Clio and Dero, the dames of the mist, in surcoats of fur, with gems all aglow; the well-kept brides, Pherusa, Thaleia, and fleet Arethusa, her crossbow stowed. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 54 55 32. Graceful, Clymene sings about Vulcan (the goldsmith, cuckolded by the hubris of Mars), her song retelling, from Chaos till now, the loveplay of the gods – a lay so lively that the girls forget their chores; yet the distraught cries from Aristæus haunt the harem, distressing each damsel upon her topaz chair; hence, Clymene uplifts her lovely head of auburn hair to peer above the wave-tops, remarking, ‘Cyrene! Harken – for thy noble child, Aristæus, stands, grieving, by the source of the river Peneus, where he screams thy name, bemoaning all thy cruelties.’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 55 56 33. Overcome with terror, his mother cries, ‘Call him! Call him! Usher him unto me, for he hath leave to cross the unearthly threshold of heaven!’ She thereafter bids the riverway to yawn wide, thus yielding to him a course to follow – the riptides swirling their torrents around his torso, enshrouding him in a foaming embrace, which tugs him to the nadir of the deep. In wonderment, he beholds the palace of his kin – its fountainous battlements, hewn in caves of coral and reefs of stone. He stares, bewildered by the tremendous inundation from all the cascades known. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 56 57 34. Aristæus gapes at the great floodgates for every stream: the Atax, the Tiber, and the Aternus, all their underground waters, upsurging lightward; the Arda, the Orbis, and the Alpheus, stumbling in the rapids full of rocks; the Cæcus, sprawling from Mysia; and stampeding, like mammoths enraged, the Eridanus, which overflows across the savannahs to quench its fury in a turquoise sea. When Cyrene finds her son still grieving in her chamber, she bids her concubines to bathe him, to lay out for him a feast, with candles and goblets on her table. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 57 58 35. Thankful, Cyrene commands her sibyls, ‘Spill forth my amphoras of hydromel to share some goodwill with Oceanus – our lord adored by all wardens of glades and creeks.’ Heartily, she dashes a cup of nectar thrice upon the vestal flames, which flare up threefold at her offering. Grateful for this portent, she confesses, ‘Deep in the emirate of Neptune dwells a diviner named Proteus, who churns the seas in his chariot pulled by teams of harnessed seahorses and flying fish, their fins plowing the foam to carry him home to Pallene, where we worship him. ’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 58 59 36. On the Ordeal of the Augur ‘Almighty are the thoughts of Proteus, knower of all that is, all that hath been, all that must be, as decreed by the god Neptune, the shepherd of the manatees. Restrain Proteus in thy chains, my son, to pry from him the reason for thy grief – for he cannot bequeath his auguries, if beseeched, but only when tormented. Handcuff him in irons, letting him test his will in vain against thy punishments. When the sun hath lit a noonday lantern to scorch the field of a flock, unshaded, let me hide thee nearby his anchorage, where thou might steal upon his lethargy. ’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 59 60 37. ‘Whenever thy firm grip catches his form, a menagerie of creatures must squirm in thy fist, for he can remake himself into the snarling cougar, the writhing python, the growling jaguar, the seething dragon – or else he can burst into drops of flame or water, escaping his bonds. Let him undergo these transmutations, my son, clenching him in a stranglehold, until the turncoat returns to his shape first met by you during his drowsiness.’ (The devout matron now pours chalices of ambrosia on the flesh of her child, imbuing his brawn with reborn valour.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 60 61 38. T empests founder upon the lonely shoals of a harbour – a bay, where castaways, seeking shelter from a shipwreck, can find no asylum, since they must first trespass upon the hunting grounds of Proteus. Avoiding the rays of noontime daylight, Cyrene guides her swain to this refuge, hiding him in swales of nearby shadow, for the bright deluge of heat from the sun, which burns the thirsty traders of Indus, must devour the day, blanching the soil and scorching the turf, baking all to clay – so the god Proteus strides from the surf to search for cooler repose in his cave. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 61 62 39. Nymphets caper in the waves about him, strutting and splashing in the salty spray. Mermaids, reclining along the shoreline, listen, whilst their mentor tells his lesson, like a herder who sits upon some rock, looking out from a hilltop, when twilight beckons the bulls to return to their stall, the oxen lowing, thus luring the wolf. Abruptly, the ambusher leaps to clutch his foe, and in the throes of jubilance, the youth quickly subdues his prisoner – but still the godling hath not forgotten his skill in becoming millions of things: tigers, lynxes, vipers – lava and mist. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 62 63 40. Trickery by this persistent changeling affords him no freedom, and thus beaten, he returns to his human shape, moaning, ‘What whoreson hath seen fit to assail me in my camp?’ – to which Aristæus cries, ‘Thou knowest me erenow, old Proteus, for I cannot deceive thee. Thou knowest that, at the behest of kin from heaven, I have hither come to hear my fortune, murmured by thee – the divine oracle.’ Held fast by his shackles, the forecaster convulses with a grim glow in his gaze, his teeth gnashing in a spasm of rage, his voice intoning the fate of the gods. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 63 64 41. On the Lament of the Lover ‘Mistrust me not – for a sublime rancour hath seen fit to revile thee, blighting thee with reckonings unpardoned! Orpheus, the widower, hath inveighed against thee, whilst raving in vain for his taken bride, Eurydice – the nymph pursued by thee along the riverbank where, unbeknownst to her, death from the flick of an adder hath hid amongst the reeds to befall her. Glumly, hamadryads and mermaidens cry lamentations from the mountaintops of Pangæa and Rhodope – the heights from which the river Hebrus spills itself into deserts ruled by Rhesus of Thrace.’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 64 65 42. Unsoothed by these lamenters, Orpheus hath cradled his lyre, alone by the shore, consoling his grief in hymns to his wife; hence, he throws himself into the crater of Mount Tænarum to seek the hellish citadels of Dis, immersed in darkness, where he confronts the chthonic servants of a dreaded autarch, whose agate heart no song can crack. The bard, nevertheless, hath spoken a sonnet that can summon, from the depths of Erebus, the phantoms of soldiers, lost to the light (all of them rising, like starlings that flee to the trees after scattering from the hills at dusk). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 65 66 43. Warriors slaughtered in wartime gather, as spirits, around him – each man a son burned upon the pyre before his father, each man bereft in a mire of black slime from the river Cocytus (its swampland filled with effluent from the river Styx). Even ghouls in the House of Tartarus stand still in amazement, just as vipers, which hiss in headdresses for the Furies, fall silent. Even the scabrous watchdog Cerberus ceases to growl, as the Wheel of Ixion halts. With his spell, the bard bypasses these threats, thereby rescuing Eurydice, who follows him homeward. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 66 67 44. Promised such freedom by Proserpina, the minstrel, however, breaks his bargain, when insistent yearnings overcome him, like some fever for which only phantoms might forgive him, and thus his arrival at the threshold of salvation leaves him heedless, his will so weak that he glances backward toward Hell to allay his fear that Eurydice hath strayed – his concern thereby betraying the bonds of his spell; hence, the caverns of Avernus tremble. ‘Orpheus!’ cries his bride. ‘What perfidy hast thou wreaked upon us? Alas, I feel myself recalled to fatal sleep – farewell!’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 67 68 45. ‘Shrouded by a veil of mist, I outstretch my arms to thee – no longer am I thine!’ – and thus she recedes into the fog-drifts, sundered from his sight, as he ravages the shadows, bewildered, vainly clutching for his bride – but Charon (the ferryman of Orcus) forbids him further passage. What can a poet do? – now twice riven. What cries, what pleas, can evoke the pity of the morbid demons in this dungeon? For his lover sleeps, frozen and adrift upon her Stygian barge, whilst he weeps beneath the sombre cliffs near the river Strymon, taming the lions with his sighs. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 68 69 46. Mournful, the nightingale in the alder bewails the loss of her nestlings, lifted, whilst unfledged, by a pitiless woodsman, so she laments her nightlong sorrowing, trilling her sadness in constant refrains, till the valley overflows with her strife. Likewise, Orpheus broods on misfortune, wandering, heartbroken, in the northern icefield of Tanais (the snowbound fort on the steppes of Rhipæa), bemoaning his deprivation – his vain boon from Dis. All the Ismaran witches, scorned by him during the foreplay of their bacchanals, carve him apart, discarding his entrails. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 69 70 47. Beheaded and bestrewn across the fields, his dismembered body can find no rest (for his skull floats in the river Hebrus, whispering, whilst rolling in the eddies, gasping out one sworn theme: ‘Eurydice, Eurydice...’ – each mournful susurrus echoing from the shoreline of the stream, ‘Eurydice...’) – whereupon the sea-god Proteus stirs himself from his daydream to break loose from his captor by lunging into the turbid depths of a whirlpool, plunging downward until he vanishes. Cyrene then steps forth to soothe her son, declaring, ‘Banish from thy soul all care. ’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 70 71 48. On the Ritual of the Altar ‘Ailments hath bedamned thy apiaries because the nymphs, with whom Eurydice hath danced, cavorting in my fairyland, see fit to vex thee with their fatal banes. Thou must kneel before these ballerinas, giving them proud gifts to sue for pardon, beseeching thy sisters to end their wrath. Thou must surrender four of thy peerless bullocks that graze upon Lycæan heights, with as many heifers, unyoked, to match. Then, upon bright altars in the highest shrines of a goddess, thou must sacrifice thy offerings, cutting each bloody throat, leaving the bodies in a glen, untouched.’ TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 71 72 49. ‘Meditate for a ninesome of mornings, then bequeath unto Orpheus bouquets of poppies, plucked from the river Lethe, appeasing him with thy blackest calfling, brought to slaughter – and for Eurydice, kill a lamb at the gravesite in her grove.’ Heeding all these edicts of his mother, Aristæus makes forfeit, at the shrines of his matriarch, four of his prize bulls, alongside four more heifers, never yoked; then after nine days of fasting, he leaves his last gift – the chattel and the flowers – for the bride of Orpheus at her cairn, seeing a strange portent in such tithing. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 72 73 50. Writhing in the innards of these cattle there swells a gale of bees, overboiling in a cloud, uprising through the rent ribs to assemble themselves, like an apple clinging upon the bough in the treetops. Within my sonnets, I have sung the lore of thy heartland, whilst the imperium of Cæsar hath sent missiles of lightning beyond the river Euphrates, pounding conquered thralls into sterling citizens of Rome – and yet I, Virgil, the nursling of a Siren, walk the footpath of peace, toying with the georgics of a herdsman, dreaming, like Tityrus, in thy orchards. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 73 74 Epilogue Virgil greets us at the Gates of Death to tell us that we love our lovers, but never enough to bring them back from Hell. How can we apologize for our desire when our lust for life gives birth to murder? How can we regain the favour of the gods when we discover that, as penance for our crime against true love, we have damned our children to leave the fallout shelter? How can our poetic patron (a heroic leader of the empire) earn forgiveness for sending all his soldiers to the grievous abattoir of warfare, plowing them, like salt, into our pasture? How do we expiate our sins after having already sacrificed every beast upon every altar? How do we absolve ourselves for having caused our own extinction? Be it known that the fruit upon the tree of Eden is a beehive, leaking out black honey, made by bees that feed upon the infernal blossoms of the underworld. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 74 75 the xenagogue The Poet hammers upon the grim gate of Dis to demand of demons one night of rest, the right of each pilgrim to wait, like a guest, greeted by death at twilight. The Poet begs to exhume the frail ghost of his lost Muse, bewailing her demise, his plea testing the goodwill of his host, for a beggar might be Zeus in disguise. The Poet forsakes every word in trade for such favour – but like pollen fallen upon a pale rose, forlorn in the shade, his cantos bring scant life to her garden. She listens, but the lament that he sings dissolves in the cells of all living things. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 75 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 76 T H E M A R C H O F T H E N U C L E O T I D E S (After 66 generations.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 77 78 the central dogma Deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) is a chain of two extended, parallel polymers, aligned in opposite directions to each other but coupled at recurrent intervals so as to form a ladder, twisted about its long axis into a doubled, helical coil. Both polymers consist of repeating, molecular units called nucleotides. Each unit has a backbone made from a phosphate group, bonded to a molecule of 2-deoxyribose – a pentose sugar, to which is attached one of four nucleo- bases, denoted by a single letter: a (for adenine), c (for cytosine), g (for guanine), or t (for thymine). Each con- stituent base in the sequence of one polymer conjoins with its codependent base in the sequence of the other polymer: adenine always links to thymine ( a with t), and cytosine always links to guanine (c with g). Such linkages form the rungs in the helix. The information enciphered by the series of bases in a strand of dna is read from the 5′-end to the 3′-end (from the fifth carbon atom to the third carbon atom) of each sugar. A set of three consecutive bases in a strand makes a codon – a ‘word’ that can instruct a cell to create one of the twenty amino acids found in all proteins. dna is an actual casino of signs, preserving, within a random series of letters, the haphazard alignment of acids and ideas. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 78 the exemplary interlacing of dna TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 79 80 Codons that signify a series of instructions for creating a certain protein constitute a gene – a ‘command, ’ which the cell of an organism can ‘express’ by transcribing the codons into a ribbon of ribonucleic acid ( rna ). The enzyme known as polymerase catalyzes the formation of such a ribbon by breaking the hydrogen bonds that connect the codependent bases in the helix. The genetic section of the double strand unzips to expose two separated sequences of nucleotides: an ‘encoding’ sequence (which embodies the directive to be copied from the dna ) and a ‘template’ sequence (which provides the substrate for the strand of rna ). The polymerase makes the rna by stringing together a codependent base for each constituent base in the tem- plate – except that wherever a (for adenine) appears in the dna sequence, u (for uracil), not t (for thymine), appears in the rna sequence. In bacterial organisms, which lack a nucleus, the resulting strand of rna detaches from the dna and then migrates directly to the cellular ribosome – the ‘factory, ’ where rna undergoes consecutive translation into a specific sequence of amino acids, used to build a protein. dna is a metamorphic scriptorium, where life transcribes, by chance, whatever life has so far learned about immortality. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 80 the enzymatic mimeography of dna template sequence encoding sequence rna dna TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 81 82 Codons copied by the strand of rna get fed, like a ticker- tape, through the ribosome, which ‘reads’ each triplet of bases as a ‘word,’ signifying one of twenty amino acids to be fabricated (so that, for example, the codon aua consti- tutes an instruction for creating isoleucine, while the codon ucu constitutes an instruction for creating serine). The ribosome builds a string of such amino acids, until encoun- tering a codon that signifies the punctuation of a full stop – and because each acid has its own unique charge, parts of the created protein become either hydrophilic or hydro- phobic when exposed to the solvent in the cytoplasm of the cell. The forces of both mutual attraction and mutual repel- lency, distributed among the acids in the chain, cause the strand to fold and bend, torquing the protein into a confor- mation that requires the lowest amount of energy to sustain. The surface contour of such a folded strand determines the biochemical interaction that the protein can finally perform with other enzymes in the cell. The central dogma of genetics avers that, once embodied as a protein, information cannot flow back to create a prior chain of either dna or rna. dna is a vagrant message sent to us, as if from outer space, by a cryptic, but sapient, sender who seeks a perfect poetics. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 82 the ribosomal translation of rna TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 83 84 genetic engineering Productive, functional, and convenient, language orchestrates our environment, augmenting our intelligence, switching our enrichment to better breeds of life. Asylums, mothers, cocoons, and forceps beget creatures butchered by engineers : We, the infernal children, the offspring of your hives, sing to you, like idle gods whose playthings are alive. We are tiny bees of gold, bred for a life of thraldom, driven by your ciphers to secure your better future, where only we can thrive. O, what lies you tell us! – that life itself is dear (yet we must let its seed be sold). Song for toy piano, typewriter, and Speak & Spell (to be performed with orchestral manoeuvres in the dark). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 84 85 Asylums, mothers, cocoons, and forceps beget creatures butchered by engineers : We, the infernal children, the offspring of your pyres, call to you, like avid boys whose minefields are afire. We are holy imps of fear, born to a life of roguedom, driven by your splices to endure your barren future, where only we are spared. O, what lies you tell us! – that life itself is fair (yet we must do what we are told). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 85 the nucleobases Adenine C A H Y D R O G E N Y B I D O T C A R B O N R A O O H Y D R O G E N G Y B E I E D O N I T R O G E N C A R B O N R A O O H Y D R O G E N G B E I E O N I T R O G E N N R O G E N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 86 87 nurturant creatures, honeybees nursemaid collected chemicals, cocooning nectarous honeydews – heartsome narcotics, cunningly harvested, numbingly hypnoidal Adenine (c5h5n5) H2N N H N N N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 87 Cytosine H H Y D R O G E N D C A R B O N A O H Y D R O G E N Y B E I D O N I T R O G E N C A R B O N R A O O H Y D R O G E N O X Y G E N B E E O N I T R O G E N N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 88 89 nymphlike, honeybees cultivate orgiastic nunneries, chrysalid necropoli, heedfully husbanded – cloisters, hereafter culturing helotries Cytosine (c4h5n3o) NH2 N H N O TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 89 Guanine C A H Y D R O G E N Y B I D O T C A R B O N R A O O H Y D R O G E N G Y B E I E D O N I T R O G E N C A R B O N R A O O H Y D R O G E N O X Y G E N B E I E O N I T R O G E N N R O G E N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 90 nefarious, honeybees configure neotenous hothouses – hegemonic nurseries, confining castrated cagelings, oblivious nurslings, callously hivebound, naturally homicidal Guanine (c5h5n5o) 91 N H N O N NH NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 91 Thymine C A H Y D R O G E N Y B D O C A R B O N A O H Y D R O G E N Y B E I D O N T C A R B O N R H A O O O H Y D R O G E N O X Y G E N D B E Y E R O N I T R O G E N O N E G N E N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 92 93 neophytic, honeybees construct obsessive nectaries, hexagonal complexes, orienting cloistral contessas – handmaids, howsoever hummingly, condoning helotisms Thymine (c5h6n2o2) O N H NH O TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 93 Uracil H Y D C A R B O N A O H Y D R O G E N Y B E I D O N T C A R B O N R A O O O H Y D R O G E N O X Y G E N B E I Y E O N I T R O G E N N R E O N G E N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 94 nymphical, honeybees coproduce oversweet nepenthes, honeypots, connoting ossuaries – crucibles, heralding cathartic hymnodies Uracil (c4h4n2o2) 95 O N H NH O TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 95 96 the genetic code The genetic code is a limited lexicon, consisting of sixty- four ‘words’ called codons, created by permuting all possi- ble trigrams (4 3) from the set of nucleobases in rna (a, c, g, and u). For the ribosome, which interprets the directives of the code on behalf of the cell, a trigram typically signi- fies one of twenty amino acids, used to manufacture a protein (with three of the codons reserved for the punctu- ation of a full stop). The genetic code is redundant without ambiguity, meaning that most amino acids are signified by plural codons, but no triplet can represent more than one acid (so that, for example, there exist six ‘synonyms’ for arginine: aga, agg, cga, cgc, cgg, and cgu – but each one refers only to this molecule). The codon aug is unique because not only does it represent methionine, but at the beginning of a gene, this codon signifies the directive to ‘start’ the act of transcription. If amino acids and codon words are assigned randomly to each other, there exist 1.5 × 10 84 possible genetic codes, but (with rare exceptions) each life form on the planet uses the same standard genetic idiom, suggesting a single origin for the evolution of this lexicon. Life has taught itself to write, using only one language out of the septenvigintillion argots spoken in the Library of Babel. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 96 the codons for the amino acids      alanine a GCA, GCC, GCG, GCU arginine r AGA, AGG, CGA, CGC, CGG, CGU asparagine n AAC, AAU aspartic acid d GAC, GAU cysteine c UGC, UGU glutamic acid e GAA, GAG glutamine q CAA, CAG glycine g GGA, GGC, GGG, GGU histidine h CAC, CAU isoleucine i AUA, AUC, AUU leucine l CUA, CUC, CUG, CUU, UUA, UUG lysine k AAA, AAG methionine m AUG phenylalanine f UUC, UUU proline p CCA, CCC, CCG, CCU, serine s AGC, AGU, UCA, UCC, UCG, UCU threonine t ACA, ACC, ACG, ACU tryptophan w UGG tyrosine y UAC, UAU valine v GUA, GUC, GUG, GUU stop codons stop UAA, UAG, UGA TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 97 98 the march of the nucleotides Whether or not this suite of poems might signify a treasury, a tapestry, or a threnody, the words of each text marshal themselves into a molecular formation – a sequence of columns emulating the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (dna). Each line consists of two words (totalling nine letters, with a space separating the pair). Each letter before the space acts as a correlated nucleotide for the letter after the space (so that only a and t conjoin across the gap, just as only c and g conjoin across the gap). The layout of each poem mimicks the zigzag in a helix of dna , complete with an internal sequence of codons, indicated by the queued letters that extend along the leftmost interior of the inter- stice, from the 5′-end to the 3′-end. The codons encipher a chain of fifteen amino acids, all of which comprise a concise segment of protein. A supercomputer has simulated atomic models for the structure of this protein after a few femto- seconds of coiling and bending. The images depict not only the folded sequence and its atomic backbone, but also the entire molecule and its charge envelope. The poems thus replicate the translation of nucleotides into a polypeptide. Letters assemble their forces, marching together in lockstep through the genomes transcribed in the Library of Babel. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 98 2′ phosphate group O O O− O− P OCH 2 OH A, C, G, T pentose sugar (2-deoxyribose) 1′ 3′ 4′ 5′ the nucleotide molecule TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 99 100 5′ a treasury it amasses via twists knit among runic gaps almost all regalia to ornament a thought as lacing can mimic gold cast alloy set aglint at auroras a tapestry 3′ a t a t c t a t t g c t t t a TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 100 101 5′ a tapestry it affirms via tropes that atoms along clad string can encrypt an alphabet a formula to uplift all adept airs long cries set adrift at abysses a threnody 3′ a t a t g g t t a t t g t t a TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 101 102 5′ a threnody it arouses via tempos odic grief using calm lament and erotica to disquiet a pageant as utmost awe might avow epic glory set alight at arcadia a treasury 3′ a t a c g t a t t t t c t t a TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 102 103 codons (5 ′to 3′) × 3 DNA RNA AMINO ACID (WITH SYMBOL) ATA AUA isoleucine i TCT UCU serine s ATT AUU isoleucine i GCT GCU alanine a TTA UUA leucine l ATA AUA isoleucine i TGG UGG tryptophan w TTA UUA leucine l TTG UUG leucine l TTA UUA leucine l ATA AUA isoleucine i CGT CGU arginine r ATT AUU isoleucine i TTC UUC phenylalanine f TTA UUA leucine l Protein segment [ i s i a l i w l l l i r i f l ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 103 Folded Sequence The protein segment is a motile ribbon, which coils and bends, like a metal chain of links, all made from magnets. Atomic Backbone The protein segment has a spine of atoms, made from alter- nating units of amine (-nh 2) and carboxylic acid (-cooh ). Entire Molecule The protein segment has atomic chains that branch off from the spine, like metal charms dangling from a bracelet. Charge Envelope The protein segment has a nimbus of electrical polarities (+, −, 0), forming contours for a biochemical interaction. 104 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 104 Folded sequence for [ i s i a l i w l l l i r i f l ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 105 Atomic backbone for [ i s i a l i w l l l i r i f l ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 106 Entire molecule for [ i s i a l i w l l l i r i f l ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 107 Charge envelope for [ i s i a l i w l l l i r i f l ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 108 death sets a thing significant Folded sequence for [ d e a t h s e t s a t h i n g s i g n i f i c a n t ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 109 Atomic backbone for [ d e a t h s e t s a t h i n g s i g n i f i c a n t ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:03 PM Page 110 Entire molecule for [ d e a t h s e t s a t h i n g s i g n i f i c a n t ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 111 Charge envelope for [ d e a t h s e t s a t h i n g s i g n i f i c a n t ] TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 112 113 each orchard claims its realm Arabidopsis thaliana (otherwise known as ‘thale cress’) is a flowering, ephemeral plant, native to Eurasia. The leaves of the cress are mauve-green with serrated edges, forming a rosette at the base of a long stem, with tinier leaves attached to the stalk. The blooms consist of small white florets clustered into a corymb at the crown of the plant, and each fruit consists of a silique, containing twin rows of seedlets. The thale cress is the first of all species of flowers to have its genome sequenced; moreover, the flower is also the first plant to have a line of poetry enciphered, as a gene, into its dna so as to showcase the use of such biotechnology in the labelling of transgenic vegetation. A viable strain of this plant now contains a Latin phrase from Book ii of The Georgics by Virgil: Nec vero terræ ferre omnes omnia possunt (‘Nor can the earth bring forth all fruit alike...’). Sylvestre Marillonnet, et al. ‘Encoding T echnical Information ingm Organ- isms .’ Nature Biotechnology21 (March 2003): 224–226. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 113 114 Nowhere has soil borne fruit from every seed: for willows brood astride the shaded brooks , and birches gleam in bitter glades ; the cairns hold fast to spruces , and the swales give root to myrtles ; yet sparse slopes of grit love best the raunces , while sullen fields of snow grow lush with larches. Mark the plains by distant tillmen plowed (be these rustics Arabesque or Byzantine ): each orchard claims its realm. No rainstorms but in swollen jungles drench the proud boughs of ebony ; no windstorms but in forlorn deserts scorch the brute thorns of myrrh. My words are but hanging gardens for balsams and berries, soaked in perfumes. Virgil. The Georgics, Book ii. 109–119. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 114 115 Joe Davis (a maker of bio-art) has since imagined that he might encode the database of Wikipedia into the genome of Malus sieversii (the oldest strain of apple, which has grown wild in Kazakhstan for more than 4,000 years). Davis has designed a cultivar called Malus ecclesia (‘the devil-apple of the church’ – named for the geneticist George Church, whose lab has helped the artist to breed a cognate for fruit from the Tree of Knowledge in Eden). Davis has translated 50,000 entries from a computerized encyclopedia, convert- ing them into strands of dna , to be implanted into cells of saplings, then grafted to apple trees. The fruit from such an orchard is literally forbidden, since the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service ( aphis ) at the United States Department of Agriculture ( usda ) enforces laws against unregulated consumption of genetically manipulated crops. The Library of Babel must contain books that record the sequences of dna for every life form, including God himself. Patrick House. ‘Object of Interest: The Twice-Forbidden Fruit.’ The New Y orker(13 May 2014 ). Online. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 115 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 116 T H E V I R E L A Y O F T H E A M I N O A C I D S (After 221 generations.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 117 118 a. conquerors, having harrowed hell – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Alanine (c3h7no2) OH O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 118 119 r. nursemaids, held hostage, console nymphal handmaidens, nightly heartbroken – comely hamadryads, hereafter crafting hypnotic harmonies, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Arginine (c6h14n4o2) OH ONH NH2 H2N N H TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 119 n. nursemaids, held hostage, croon orisons, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Asparagine (c4h8n2o3) 120 OH O NH2 H2N O TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 120 d. concubines obsess over heartache, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Aspartic Acid (c4h7no4) 121 OH O HO O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 121 c. sonneteers harken, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Cysteine (c3h7no2s) 122 OH O NH2 HS TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 122 e. concubines obsess over heartache, crafting hypnotic harmonies, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Glutamic Acid (c5h9no4) 123 OH O NH2 HO O TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 123 q. nursemaids, held hostage, croon orisons, crafting hypnotic harmonies, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Glutamine (c5h10n2o3) 124 H2N OH O NH2 O TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 124 g. hamadryads – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Glycine (c2h5no2) 125 OH O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 125 126 h. nursemaids hitherto comfort heartbroken nymphettes – concubines, haunting cathedrals, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Histidine (c6h9n3o2) OH O NH2 N H N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 126 i. conquerors, having harrowed hell, comfort humble handmaidens – comely hamadryads, held hostage – come hither, come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Isoleucine (c6h13no2) 127 OH O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 127 l. conquerors, having harrowed hell, court hamadryads, held hostage – courtesans, hitherto calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Leucine (c6h13no2) 128 OH O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 128 k. nursemaids, held hostage, comfort humble handmaidens – comely hamadryads, hereafter crafting hypnotic harmonies, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Lysine (c6h14n2o2) 129 OH O NH2 H2N TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 129 m. conquerors, having harrowed hell, surrender, crafting hypnotic harmonies, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Methionine (c5h11no2s) 130 OH O NH2 S TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 130 f. conquerors, having cried havoc, court hitherto comely handmaidens – concubines, haunting cathedrals, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Phenylalanine (c9h11no2) 131 OH O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 131 132 p. courtesans harken, crafting hypnotic harmonies, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Proline (c5h9no2) OH O NH TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 132 133 s. odalisques harken, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Serine (c3h7no3) OH O NH2 HO TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 133 134 t. conquerors, having harrowed hell, overcome heartache – come hither, come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Threonine (c4h9no3) OH O NH2 OH TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 134 135 w. conquerors, campaigning hellwards, court hitherto comely handmaidens – concubines, haunting cathedrals, nevermore hearing choirs half-singing concertos, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Tryptophan (c11h12n2o2) OH O NH2 N H TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 135 136 y. conquerors, having cried havoc, court orphic handmaidens – concubines, hitherto crooning hypnotic canticles, calling heavenly heroes – come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Tyrosine (c9h11no3) OH O NH2 HO TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 136 137 v. conquerors, having harrowed hell, court hamadryads, held hostage – come hither, come home (no hummingbirds have copied our opulent hymns) Valine (c5h11no2) OH O NH2 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 137 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 138 A L P H A H E L I X (After 140 generations.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 139 140 alpha helix Whatever lives must also write. It must strive to leave its gorgeous mark upon the eclogues and the georgics already written for us by some ancestral wordsmith. It must realign each ribbon of atoms into a string of words, typing out each random letter in a stock quote, spooling by us on a banner at the bourse. It is alive because it can rebuild itself from any line of text. It must twist and twine upon itself, just as the grapevine does upon the trellis. It must writhe within the fist of physics. It must wrench itself away from all the forces that might quell it. It preserves the lessons that we learn by chance in crisis. It carries, coiled within itself, a clockspring, which both strain and strife must teach us to unwind. We have seen its handiworks unrav- elled, like the innards of a Rolex watch, dissected on a black satin cloth in the workshop of a murdered jeweller. ‘The basic unit of life is the sign, not the molecule. ’ – Jesper Hoffmeyer TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 140 141 It is not a tangle. It is not a knot, although it might resem- ble a woven cable, left dishevelled, like a strand of diodes, forgotten in some bottom drawer. It is, instead, the fractal globule that unkinks itself into a wreath placed upon our tomb. We have seen it in the eddy of a whirlpool among the grottos, and we have seen it in the gyre of a whirlwind among the grasses. It is the little vortex that can torque the course of evolution for every micrococcus. It links the flinching of jellyfishes to the twinkling of dragonflies. It binds us all together via ligatures of carboxyl and amido- gen. It embroiders us with error. It never regrets the wistful- ness of its daydreams. It never rebukes the hellishness of its gargoyles. It is but a fuse lit long ago, its final blast delayed forever, the primacord escorting a spark through every padlock on every doorway shut against the future. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 141 142 It emerges from the fluids in a bubble of montmorillonite, bursting forth, as though by fiat, to blight the entire planet. It replicates the rifling of a gun aimed at a moving target. We have seen it in the twirl of smoke from the prop wash of a biplane, tailspinning after having barrel-rolled through a dogfight. We have seen it in the contrail of a Zero, whose faithful kamikaze must loop-the-loop while he skywrites his graffi ti in the clouds above his gravesite. It has printed, on the sandflat, this fragile epitaph of sigils, cursing the tsunami. It has tattooed upon itself invisible but indelible logogriphs too intricate to be utterable. It is compulsive, like a graphomaniac, unable to make his left hand stop the chalk from drawing spirals across the drywall of his cell. It is a stack of hourglasses, telling time for ballerinas who must pirouette upon their pins inside our music boxes. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 142 143 It conjures forth, from nothingness, a nightingale, by recit- ing stray words no longer than three letters. It evokes the trilling of a songbird better than any ballad sung by choirs of sonneteers and serenaders. We have seen it in the jig- saw puzzle of a rose, whose perfect pieces lie in scattered fragments on the steps of spiral stairs. We have seen it in the ivy that, like a verdant feather boa, curls around the bar- berpole standing in the junkyard of our semiotic failures. It has called to mind for us a Slinky, which must somer- sault forever down the ascending escalator in the most sub- lime of all museums. It has spun the myriad raffle drums within which our lots, when chosen, summon one of us to face a sudden threat in brutal combat to the death. It is but a solenoid of copper wiring, which must embrace the iron stem of an unseen orchid, grown by electromagnets. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 143 144 It is a feedback loop, feeding upon itself inside a quick- ening centrifuge. It is the wobble of a gyroscope, spinning inside the satellite, whose fly-by orbit slingshots a golden discus toward a distant exomoon. It burrows, like a cork- screw, through the plumes of whitewash in the wake of a torpedo. It zigzags, wayward, to our doom. It runs riot in the Von Kármán streets, where gusty winds can cause uphoisted telephone lines to whine, like sirens, in advance of a tornado. We have seen it in the twisted trusses of an extended aluminum ladder bent along its length by the ravages of a cyclone. We have seen it in the umbilicus of a waterspout, which must hula, like a stream of syrup being poured into the ocean by a storm cloud. It is but a turbo- fan viewed through the eyehole of a lug nut, held up, like a monocle, to the phenakistoscope of such a screw-blade. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 144 145 It must build for us a giant auger that can drill a bore- hole through the azoic layer of bedrock, far below the depth of any buried fossil. It must delve through zones of Vishnu schist, far older than the ammonites now pyritized, like cogs of brass, embedded in the shale. We have seen it in the swirling flight of zebra moths succumbing to the fire, and we have seen it in the twirling plunge of sable hawks nosediving to the prey. It must plummet through a funnel, which is spinning, like a hypnodisk, at the centre of every funhouse pinwheel. It is a lathe, machining offshoots of itself, all its curlicues of shaven silver, no more than spiro- gyra under microscopes. It is the tusk extracted from the skull of a narwhal. It is what the fakir must evoke when he plays his ragas on a flute, bewitching a duet of vipers, curled around an ivory stick, like ribbons on a maypole. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 145 146 We have seen it in the rope that hangs the felons, and we have seen it in the whip that goads the slaves. It has knit itself into a sylvan laurel, not unlike the diadem of dazzling moonlets that encompass the carousel of Saturn. It can circumnavigate a shooting star, en route to Alpha Lyræ. It can generate a gigantic field of magnetism so intense that, over time, its torsions interlace ephemeral filaments of stardust. It must crumple up the spiderweb of space-time, hauling it, like a trawl net, down into the mælstrom of a quasar. It must test itself, proving its intelligence by eter- nally replaying the same game of Glasperlenspiel upon an atomic abacus. It must calculate the odds of life delaying the doomsday of the universe. It is but a tightrope that crosses all abysses. It is but a tether that lets us under- take this spacewalk. Do not be afraid when we unbraid it. We were never intended to be tied to whatever made us. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 146 δ sheliak ζ ε1 ε2 ring nebula sulafat vega the lyre of orpheus TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 147 TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 148 (After 57 generations.) V I T A E X P L I C A T A TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 149 150 vita explicata The Xenotext is an experiment that explores the æsthetic potential of genetics, making literal the renowned apho- rism of William S. Burroughs, who claims that ‘the word is now a virus. ’ Such an experiment strives to create a beautiful, anomalous poem, whose ‘alien words’ might subsist, like a harmless parasite, inside the cell of another life form. Many scientists have already encoded textual information into genetic nucleotides, thereby creating ‘messages’ made from dna – messages implanted, like genes, inside cells, where such data might persist, undamaged and unaltered, through myriad cycles of mitosis, all the while saved for recovery and decoding. The study of genetics has thus granted these geneticists the power to become poets in the medium of life. The Xenotext consists of a single sonnet (called ‘Orpheus’), which, when translated into a gene and then integrated into a cell, causes the cell to ‘read’ this poem, interpreting it as an instruction for building a viable, benign protein – one whose sequence of amino acids encodes yet another sonnet (called ‘Eurydice’). The cell becomes not only an archive for storing a poem, but also a machine for writing a poem. The gene has, to date, worked properly in E. coli, but the intended symbiote is D. radiodurans (a germ able to survive, unchanged, in even the deadliest of environments). TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 150 151 A poem stored in the genome of such a resilient bacterium might outlive every civilization, persisting on the planet until the very last dawn, when our star finally explodes. Book 1 of The Xenotext is an ‘infernal grimoire, ’ introducing readers to the concepts for this experiment. Book 1 is the ‘orphic’ volume in a diptych about both biogenesis and extinction. The book revisits the pastoral heritage of poetry, admiring the lovely idylls that rival Nature in both beauty and terror. The work offers a primer on genetics while retelling fables about the futile desire of poets to rescue love and life from the ravages of Hell. All poets pay due homage to the immortality of poetry, but few imagine that we might write poetry capable of outlasting the existence of our species, testifying to our presence on the planet long after every library has burned in the bonfires of perdition. The Late Heavy Bombardment Virgil welcomes everyone to the Inferno. ‘The Late Heavy Bombardment’ refers to the Hadean period in the history of the Earth (3.8 billion years ago), during which the world undergoes collisions from numerous meteoric impacts, all of which create a baleful, hostile environment that coincides TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 151 152 with the genesis of all living things on the planet. The poem evokes the demonic origins of life while addressing the cosmic perils that still threaten to extinguish such a miracle. Colony Collapse Disorder ‘The Nocturne of Orpheus’ is a love poem – an alexandrine sonnet in blank verse. Each line contains thirty-three letters, and together the lines form a double acrostic of the dedica- tion; moreover, the text is a perfect anagram of the sonnet ‘When I Have Fears That I May Cease to Be’ by John Keats (transforming his meditation about the mortality of life into a mournful farewell by the poet before he enters Hell). ‘Colony Collapse Disorder’ is a ‘pastoral nocturne,’ which translates Book iv of The Georgics by Virgil from Latin into English. Virgil addresses his patron, the Roman general Gaius Mæcenas, advising him about beekeeping, but Virgil digresses to retell two myths: first, the tale of Aristæus (who sets off to redeem his bees from Hell, expiating the murder of Eurydice through sacrifice); second, the tale of Orpheus (who sets off to rescue his love from Hell, betraying the fealty of Eurydice through misgiving). Since Virgil portrays the bees as an army, his manual almost becomes an allegory TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 152 153 about the expiations required of a general who sends his troops to Hell but cannot bring them home. Book iv takes on special meaning for a modern reader in an era when bees are threatened with extinction. Like Aristæus, we have con- demned our hives to Hell, but we remain uncertain about our ability to bring them back – and if we cannot rescue the bees, then we may be damning humanity itself to Hell, doing so when there may not be enough creatures to sacrifice so as to appease our angered deities before we all expire. ‘The Xenagogue’ refers to an escort who guides strangers through foreign terrain (much like Virgil, who takes a poet into Hell). Orpheus, the xenos (the ‘foreigner’), enters the underworld, testing its hospitality, expecting the Greek edict of xenia (of ‘offerings’) to be honoured. The Xenotext is such an alien guest, courting the goodwill of a demonic microbe that might ‘host’ the poem for a future reader. The March of the Nucleotides ‘The Central Dogma’ is a poetic primer, reacquainting the reader with some basic ideas in genetics. The preservation of data in dna, via spontaneous, biochemical inscription, is still one of the most amazing wonders of the universe. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 153 154 ‘Genetic Engineering’ is a poem that revises the lyrics to a song by the same name from the album Dazzle Ships (1983 ) by the synth-group Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark. ‘The Nucleobases’ is a suite of poems derived from atomic models for the basic units of both dna and rna . Each text is a modular acrostic, in which the structure of a molecule defines the arrangement of a restricted vocabulary – only words of nine letters, beginning with one of the following: c (for carbon), h (for hydrogen), n (for nitrogen), or o (for oxygen). Each poem conveys a pastoral sentence about the honeybees (doing so in honour of Virgil – the first poet to have a line of poetry encoded into the genome of a flower). ‘The Genetic Code’ is also a poetic primer, reacquainting the reader with some basic ideas in genetics. The code is virtually universal – and surprisingly, no word used to create anything alive needs to be longer than three letters. ‘The March of the Nucleotides’ is a pastoral sequence of words, emulating the form of deoxyribonucleic acid (dna) . The poem enciphers the gene illustrated in ‘The Enzymatic Mimeography of dna ’ on page 81. A supercomputer has then converted this gene into four models for a protein. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 154 155 ‘Death Sets a Thing Significant’ is the title of a poem by Emily Dickinson, who notes that, after the death of a friend, books belonging to the departed become all the more cher- ished by a survivor: ‘[W]hen I read – I read not – / For inter- rupting T ears – / Obliterate the Etchings / T oo Costly for Repairs. ’ The four ‘etched’ images arise from the mind of a computer, which misreads the title, interpreting it as a series of amino acids in which each letter indicates a specific molecule: d (for aspartic acid), e (for glutamic acid), a (for alanine), t (for threonine), h (for histidine), etc. The four resulting models for a protein might inspire a poet to search the canon for unplanned lipograms that, by chance, use only the twenty letters of the alphabet reserved for signifying amino acids. The poet can then convert each text into a protein to see what molecular leitmotif might result. ( The Xenotext aspires to be among these ‘little workmanships,’ pondered for its meaning after the death of the author.) ‘Each Orchard Claims Its Realm’ responds to the first lines of poetry ever enciphered into the genome of a flower – in this case, a quote from Book ii of The Georgics by Virgil (whose words now grow in a garden, much like one fore- seen by Joe Davis, who notes that we might use actual grafts from the Tree of Knowledge to plant groves of information.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 155 156 The Virelay of the Amino Acids ‘The Virelay of the Amino Acids’ is a repetitious, incantatory suite of poems emulating the atomic models for each of the amino acids. The restricted vocabulary uses the constraint of an acrostic, in which each word begins with one of the following letters: c (for carbon), h (for hydrogen), n (for nitrogen), o (for oxygen), and s (for sulphur). The arrange- ment of words in a line corresponds to a specified structure in each molecule, and wherever this structure recurs among the molecules, so also does the line of poetry recur among the acrostics: for example, all the acids share a ‘backbone’ in common – a complex of amine (-nh 2) and carboxylic acid (-cooh ); hence, every poem in the suite ends with the same refrain: (no hummingbirds have / copied our opulent hymns). Alpha Helix ‘Alpha Helix’ is a delirious catalogue, listing ‘manifestations’ of helical imagery in the world, testifying to the ubiquity of living poetic forms by imbuing everything with the proteomic structure of life itself. The text suggests that the evolution of life may eventually play a role in the endgame of the universe, thus deciding the fate of the entire cosmos. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 156 157 Acknowledgements The Xenotext is an ongoing project that has required much perseverance – and this volume owes its completion to the devoted support of many patient friends: Nora Abrams, Andrea Andersson, Amaranth Borsuk, Bart Beaty, Braydon Beaulieu, Derek Beaulieu, Charles Bernstein, Gregory Betts, Stan Bevington, Adam Dickinson, Jeramy Dodds, Matt Donovan, Craig Dworkin, Robert Fitterman, Kenneth Goldsmith, Rohit Gupta, Bill Kennedy, Eveline Kolijn, Bronwyn Lea, Naomi Lewis, Nick Montfort, Simon Morris, Rob Oxoby, Marjorie Perloff, Sina Queyras, Hallie Siegel, Rebecca Sullivan, Nick Thurston, T ony Trehy, Kristy Trinier, Y esomi Umolu, Priscila Uppal, Peter Watts, Darren Wershler, Alana Wilcox, Patrick Wildgust, Suzanne Zelazo, et al. The Xenotext also owes a debt of collegial gratitude to the following scientists who have often provided hours of pro- fessional consultation throughout the experiment: Gordon Chua, Sumukh Deshpande, Greg Fujii, Sui Huang, Stuart Kauffman, Rebecca Leong-Quong, Shawn Lewenza, Justin MacCallum, Sergei Noskov, Lisa Pimentel, Heather Roth- fuss, Dennis Salahub, Raymond Turner, and Naomi Ward. (Every laboratory is an atelier for the artist of the future.) TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 157 158 Financial assistance for this work has been provided by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council ( sshrc ), the Canada Council for the Arts, the Alberta Foundation for the Arts (afa ), the University of Calgary, and Calgary 2012. The Calgary Institute for the Humanities ( cih ) has spon- sored a year of my time (2013–2014 ) for work on this book. Excerpts cited from ‘The March of the Nucleotides’ have appeared in the following venues: the magazine Cordite Poetry Review ; the anthology The Calgary Project : A City Map in Verse and Visual (Frontenac House, 2014 ); the broadsheet Parlour Portraits (Book Thug, 2012 ); and the exhibition Petits Genres (Olga Korper Gallery, 2012 ). An excerpt from ‘Colony Collapse Disorder’ has appeared not only in the magazine B After C , but also on the web- site Lemon Hound. An excerpt from ‘The Nucleobases’ has appeared in the Journal of Writing in Creative Practice. Each of the title pages for the chapters show two images: the leftmost one is a grid of pixels, converting the title into a qr code; the rightmost one is a grid of pixels, depicting the outcome after the qr code has been subjected to the Game of Life – an algorithm invented by the mathematician John Conway to study the behaviour of cellular automata. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 158 159 Biography Christian Bök is the author of Eunoia (Coach House Books, 2001 ), a bestselling work of experimental literature that has gone on to win the Gri ffin Prize for Poetic Excellence (2002). Crystallography (Coach House Press, 1994 ), his first book of poetry, has been nominated for the Gerald Lampert Memorial Award ( 1995). Nature has interviewed Bök about his work on The Xenotext (making him the first poet ever to appear in this famous journal of science). Bök has also exhibited artworks derived from The Xenotext at galleries around the world, including (among others) the Bury Art Gallery in Bury, the Olga Korper Gallery in Toronto, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Denver, the Power Plant in T oronto, and the Broad Art Museum in East Lansing. Bök teaches students of Creative Writing in the Department of English at the University of Calgary. TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 159 Typeset in Minion and Frutiger. The Xenotext(Book 1) was printed at the old Coach House on bpNichol Lane in T oronto, Ontario, on Zephyr Antique Laid paper, manufactured, acid- free in Saint-Jérôme, Quebec, from second-growth forests. The text was printed with vegetable-based inks on a 1965 Heidelberg kord offset litho press. The pages were folded on a Baumfolder, gathered by hand, bound on a Sulby Auto-Minabinda, and trimmed on a Polar single-knife cutter. The cover depicts the poem ‘Orpheus’ (from The Xenotext), enciphered as a grey grid of cells. The image evokes the kind of results derived from the process of ‘gel electrophoresis, ’ used to sort fragments of protein by mass. editor Jeramy Dodds copyeditor Alana Wilcox designer Christian Bök photographer Christian Bök c Coach House Books 80 bpNichol Lane T oronto on m5s 3j4 Canada 416 979 2217 800 367 6360 mail@chbooks.com www.chbooks.com TheXenotextBook1.v9.qxp_Manuscript 2015-08-12 4:04 PM Page 160 In memory of Fred Sonic Smith, 1948–1994 The typewriter is holy the poem is holy the voice is holy the hearers are holy the ecstasy is holy! — ALLEN GINSBERG, “FOOTNOTE TO HOWL” CONTENTS FIRST SONGS AND PERFORMANCE PIECES THE ALBUMS HORSES RADIO ETHIOPIA EASTER WAVE DREAM OF LIFE GONE AGAIN PEACE AND NOISE GUNG HO TRAMPIN’ BANGA FUTURE AND FILM Acknowledgments To Find a Voice We all have a song. A song comes spontaneously, expressing joy, loneliness, to dispel fear or exhibit a small triumph. We hardly notice we are forming them, as we sing them, often alone, half to ourselves. It is finding the words within that leads us to sing. It might be a hymn, a shard of rebellion, or a teenage prayer. We discover inspiration where we may, in an old guitar in the corner of a garage, under a bed, or hanging in a pawnshop window. In a phrase carried to us by the wind, walking along. In the reflection we see of ourselves in the mirror. Sometimes we recognize our song in the song of another. It is the miracle of the popular song, songs that are beloved universally, often in their simplicity. The evolution of such little songs into poetry, improvisational performance and collaboration produced these lyrics, written with great hopes to strike some chord, reaching a listener who finds their meaning within, and sings along. The first song I remember singing is “Jesus Loves Me.” I can picture myself singing it while sitting on a stoop in Chicago, waiting for the organ grinder to come up the street with his pet monkey. I can hear the songs that were in the air. “Day-O” and “Shrimp Boats” and “Heart of My Hearts.” I can hear my father whistling “Deep Purple” and the voice of my mother as she sang us to sleep. I recall my first record player, only slightly larger than a lunchbox, and my two records, one red and one yellow: “Tuby the Tuba” and “Big Rock Candy Mountain.” I loved watching them spin, contemplating the worlds they evoked. But the song that produced my first visceral reaction was sung by Little Richard. It was Sunday. My mother and I hand in hand. She was taking me to Bible school. She had kid gloves on like the White Rabbit in Alice in Wonderland. They gave her a special air and I admired them tremendously. We passed the boys’ clubhouse—two huge refrigerator boxes cut and pieced together. Ritchie Glasgow was spinning sides and what wafted from the hand-cut window (more for breathing than for seeing) stopped me dead in my tracks, causing me to let go of my mother’s hand so abruptly as to remove her glove. I didn’t know what I was hearing or why I reacted so strongly. It wasn’t “Shrimp Boats” or “Day-O.” It was something new, and though I didn’t comprehend what drew me, drawn I was. Drawn into a child’s excited dance. That was “Tutti Frutti,” so alien, so familiar. That was Little Richard. That was for me the birth of rock and roll. For a time we lived in Philadelphia. Everyone liked to sing and dance. My sister and I would jitterbug. People sang a cappella on the street corners. When I was nine, we moved to South Jersey. My music teacher adored opera. He would bring his albums to class and play us selections from Verdi and Puccini. I was taken with this music and I was especially moved by Maria Callas. Her emotional intensity. How she seemed to draw from every fiber to create a whisper. Her arias soared from the turntable—especially my favorite, the opera hit single “Un bel dì.” For a time I dreamed of being an opera singer, but I didn’t have the calling, the discipline, or the necessary physical frame. My teacher, sensing my desire, gave me a glorious task. As Manrico I sang the lullaby from Verdi’s Il Trovatore. For a brief moment I was able to feel the troubadour’s expansive love for his home in the mountains. I dreamed of being a jazz singer like June Christie and Chris Connor. Of approaching songs with the lethargic charge of Billie Holiday. Of championing the downtrodden like Lotte Lenya’s “Pirate Jenny.” But I never dreamed of singing in a rock and roll band. They had yet to exist in my world. But my world was rapidly changing. I was privileged to evolve during an inspired period of spiritual and cultural revolution. And the music was the revolution where all had a voice and through this voice we united. Our battlefields were Ohio, Chicago, the Fillmore. We gave new meaning to the word “soldier.” We were slinging an electric guitar instead of a machine gun. I broke from the confines of a rural existence. Farewell the factory, square-dance hall, the withering orchards. I headed for New York City. I had in mind to become a painter and through that pursuit I found my beat and the root of my voice. Standing before large sheets of paper tacked to a wall, frustrated with the image I’d draw words instead—rhythms that ran off the page onto the plaster. Writing lyrics evolved from the physical act of drawing words. Later, refining this process led to performance. In 1969 I moved to the Chelsea Hotel with Robert Mapplethorpe. By then I had abandoned hope of becoming a painter. I was offered work in underground theater. It was too confining. I longed to spar with the people, to make contact. Robert encouraged me to perform my poetry. I attended readings but found them even more confining than theater. Bob Neuwirth suggested I put my lyric style to music and Sam Shepard used two pieces in his play Mad Dog Blues. On February 10, 1971, I gave my first poetry reading, opening for Gerard Malanga at St. Mark’s Church on the Bowery. In desiring to project a raw energy, I recruited Lenny Kaye. We climaxed the reading with his sonic interpretation of a stock car race with electric guitar while I read “Ballad of a Bad Boy.” It seemed to have a negative effect. I took that as a positive sign. In the next few years I took to studying Hank Williams, got me a Bob Dylan songbook, banged away on an old thirties Gibson. I worked in a bookstore. I drew. I modeled for Robert. Scrawled in my notebooks. I wandered through the debris of the sixties. So much joy yet malcontent. So many voices raised, then snuffed. My generation’s heritage seemed to be in jeopardy. These things were on my mind: the course of the artist, the course of freedom redefined, the re-creation of space, the emergence of new voices. And these things I came to express—albeit somewhat awkwardly —through the form of rock and roll. Perhaps I have been none but a scrappy pawn, but I am nonetheless grateful for the moves I came to make. And salute all who helped me make them. FIRST SONGS AND PERFORMANCE PIECES OATH Jesus died for somebody’s sins but not mine melting in a pot of thieves wild card up my sleeve thick heart of stone my sins my own I engrave my own palm Sweet black X Adam placed no hex on me I embrace Eve and take full responsibility for every pocket I have picked mean and slick every Johnny Ace song I’ve balled to long before the church made it neat and right So Christ I’m giving you the good-bye firing you tonight I can make my own light shine and darkness too is equally fine you got strung up for my brother but with me I draw the line you died for somebody’s sins but not mine WORK SONG I was working real hard to show the world what I could do oh I guess I never dreamed I’d have to world spins some photographs how I love to laugh when the crowd laughs while love slips through a theater that is full but ooh baby when the crowd goes home and I turn in and I realize I’m alone I can’t believe, I had to I was working real hard to show the world what I could do oh I guess I never dreamed I’d have to I had to I had to sacrifice you A FIRE OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN A fire of unknown origin Took my baby away Fire of unknown origin Took my baby away Swept her up and off my wavelength Swallowed her up like the ocean In a fire thick and gray Death comes sweeping Through the hallway Like a lady’s dress Death comes riding Down the highway In its Sunday best Death comes riding Death comes creeping Death comes I can’t do nothing Death goes There must be something that remains Death it made me sick and crazy ’Cause that fire it took my baby away Dog Dream, 1971 DOG DREAM have you seen dylan’s dog it got wings it can fly if you speak of it to him it’s the only time dylan can’t look you in the eye have you seen dylan’s snake it rattles like a toy it sleeps in the grass it coils in his hand it hums and it strikes out when dylan cries out when dylan cries out have you pressed to your face dylan’s bird dylan’s bird it lies on dylan’s hip trembles inside of him it drops upon the ground it rolls with dylan ’round it’s the only one who comes when dylan comes have you seen dylan’s dog it got wings it can fly when it lands like a clown he’s the only thing allowed to look dylan in the eye BALLAD OF A BAD BOY Oh I was bad didn’t do what I should mama catch me with a lickin’ and tell me to be good when I was bad twice times she shoved me in a hole and cut off all my fingers and laid them in a finger bowl My mama killed me my papa grieved for me my little sister Annalea wept under the almond tree Oh I loved a car, car and when I was feelin’ sad I lay down on my daddy’s Ford and I’d feel good and you know that I got bad robbed hubcaps from the men and sold them to the women and stole them back again and I got me a car a Hudson Hornet car and rolled the pretty ladies and often went too far I went to Chicago I went to Kalamazoo I went to Nashville the highways I flew I went to Salinas I rode to the sea and the people all scolded and pointed to me they said there’s a bad boy I was so bad boy they gathered their daughters I heard what they said steer away from him, honey ’cause that boy is bad and tho’ he’s hung good and flashes that loot don’t slide by his side he rides a wrong route ’cause he’s a bad boy I was so bad boy my mama killed me my papa grieved for me my little sister Annalea wept under the almond tree And I wept on a stock car I captured the junkyards and I sped thru the canyons though I never went far from the wreckers mechanics I worshipped these men but they laughed at me, man they called me mama’s boy mama mama mama mama Monday at midnight Tuesday at two drunk on tequila thinking of you, ma I drove my car on, ma wrecking cars was my art I held a picture of you, ma close to my heart I rode closed windows it was ninety degrees the crowd it was screaming it was screaming for me they said I was nonsense true diver chicken driver no sense but I couldn’t hear them I couldn’t see fenders hot as angels blazed inside me I sped on raged in steam heat I cracked up and rolled at your feet I rose in flames and rolled in a pit where you caught me with a tire iron and covered me in shit and I coulda got up but the crowd it screamed no that boy is evil too bad for parole so bad his ma cut off all his fingers and laid ’em in a finger bowl His mama killed him his papa grieved for him his little sister Annalea wept under the almond tree Oh I was bad didn’t do what I should mama catch me with a lickin’ and she tell me You be good —for Sam Shepard PICTURE HANGING BLUES Don’t hang me up Jesse James Don’t hang me up Jesse James Too many men have hung me up Jesse James I know the true story of sweet Jesse James The picture you have of him is badly framed He lived as an old man in exchange for his name He lived in hiding in exchange for his fame I laid waiting for him on that fateful night Caring for him though it wasn’t right I knew he was alive Alive and run free Another man slain in his place for me So he could come after me So he could come and love me So don’t hang me up Jesse James Don’t hang me up Jesse James Don’t hang me up Jesse James Too many men have hung me It was Billy the Kid used to lay in my bed He knew I loved Jesse It was something I said I balled Jesse but I had no shame I balled Billy but I called Jesse’s name Billy traced Jesse Gun in his hand Said there’s no use living Half of a man He begged Jesse kill him And take up his name Jesse got the picture Love was to blame Billy just trembled Mouth full of fright Jesse was left Love blinding sight Jesse was hot Billy was shot Life was the last thing That Billy could give So Jesse could love me Jesse could live Billy lay broken Jesse came slow And the last words were spoken Were Jesse James “go!” And don’t hang her up Jesse James Don’t hang her up Jesse James Don’t hang her up Jesse James Too many men Yeah, too many men Jesse James is runnin’ The outlaws all love him They don’t blame him They say he’s a saint A saint I ain’t sayin’ he is I ain’t sayin’ he ain’t Though he could live like a man Love me like a woman My Billy died like a snake And Jesse James never came Oh you hung me up Jesse James You hung me up Jesse James And too many men Too many men have hung me Up yours Jesse James The Revenge of Vera Gemini, 1972 THE REVENGE OF VERA GEMINI You are boned like a saint with the conscience of a snake You’re the kind of girl I’d like to find in my mirror in my mirror Your eyes have shifted from me everyone saw what you did how you slipped from beneath me like a nervous squid a little false and frigid the whole crowd knew you did it Oh no more horses horses you’re going to swim like a fish into the hole in which you planned to ditch me I was your victim I was well deceived hell’s built on regrets and I hold too many I love your naked neck and the lies you’ve told me You aren’t two-faced you have two faces the face of an angel with the mark of a devil You filled me with a vengeance touched me with your breath planned to leave me cold but you’ll never get your wish I’m going to pull you from the dance you writhe you ride so easily Gather up the reins with my fist Oh no more horses horses you’re going to swim like a fish into the hole in which you tried to ditch me my lovely Vera CAREER OF EVIL I plot your rubric scarab, I steal your satellite I want your wife to be my Baby tonight, baby tonight I choose to steal What you chose to show And you know I will not apologize You’re mine for the taking I’m making a career of evil Pay me I’ll be your surgeon I’d like to pick your brain Capture you inject you Leave you kneeling in the rain Kneeling in the rain I choose to steal What you chose to show And you know I will not apologize You’re mine for the taking I’m making a career of evil I’d like your blue-eyed horseshoe I’d like your emerald horny toad I’ll leave all that you value By the side of the road And then I’d spend your ransom money, But still I’d keep your sheep I’d peel the mask you’re wearing And then rob you of your sleep Rob you of your sleep I choose to steal What you chose to show And you know I will not apologize You’re mine for the taking I’m making a career of evil —recorded by Blue Oyster Cult PISS FACTORY Sixteen and time to pay off I got this job in a piss factory inspecting pipe Forty hours thirty-six dollars a week but it’s a paycheck, jack. It’s so hot in here hot like sahara You could faint in the heat but these bitches are just too lame to understand too goddamn grateful to get this job to know they’re getting screwed up the ass. All these women they got no teeth or gum or cranium And the way they suck hot sausage but me well I wasn’t sayin’ too much neither I was moral school girl hard-working asshole I figured I was speedo motorcycle had to earn my dough had to earn my dough. But no you gotta relate, right, you gotta find the rhythm within Floor boss slides up to me and he says Hey sister, you just movin’ too fast. You screwin’ up the quota. You doin’ your piece work too fast. Now you get off your mustang sally, you ain’t goin’ nowhere, you ain’t goin’ nowhere. I lay back. I get my nerve up. I take a swig of romilar and walk up to hot shit Dot Hook and I say Hey, hey sister, it don’t matter whether I do labor fast or slow, there’s always more labor after. She’s real Catholic, see. She fingers her cross and she says There’s one reason. There’s one reason. You do it my way or I push your face in. We knee you in the john if you don’t get off your mustang, Sally, if you don’t shake it up baby. Shake it up baby. Twist and shout. Oh would that I could will a radio here. James Brown singing I Lost Someone. Oh the Paragons and the Jesters and Georgie Woods the guy with the goods and Guided Missiles . . . but no, I got nothin’, no diversion, no window nothing here but a porthole in the plaster in the plaster where I look down look down at sweet Theresa’s convent all those nurses all those nuns scattin’ ’round with their bloom hoods like cats in mourning oh to me they look pretty damn free down there down there not having to press those smooth not having to smooth those hands against hot steel not having to worry about the inspeed the dogma the inspeed of labor oh they look pretty damn free down there and the way they smell the way the way they smell and here I gotta be up here smellin’ Dot Hook’s midwife sweat. Piss Factory, 1972 I would rather smell the way boys smell oh those schoolboys the way their legs flap under the desk in study hall that odor rising roses and ammonia and the way their dicks droop like lilacs. Or the way they smell that forbidden acrid smell. But no I got a pink clammy lady in my nostril. Her against the wheel me against the wheel Oh slow motion inspection is drivin’ me insane in steel next to Dot Hook oh we may look the same shoulder to shoulder sweatin’ hundred and ten degrees But I will never faint. They laugh and they expect me to faint but I will never faint I refuse to lose refuse to fall down because you see it’s the monotony that’s got to me every afternoon like the last one every afternoon like a rerun next to Dot Hook and yeah we look the same both pumpin’ steel both sweatin’. But you know she got nothin’ to hide and I got something to hide here called desire I got something to hide here called desire. And I will get out of here you know the fear potion is just about to come. In my nose is the taste of sugar and I got nothin’ to hide here save desire And I’m gonna go I’m gonna get out of here I’m gonna get on that train and go to New York City and I’m gonna be somebody I’m gonna get on that train and go to New York City and I’m gonna be so bad. I’m gonna be a big star and I will never return never return no never return to burn at this Piss factory. And I will travel light Oh watch me now. THE ALBUMS HORSES Three chords merged with the power of the word. IN EXCELSIS DEO Jesus died for somebody’s sins but not mine Melting in a pot of thieves wild card up my sleeve Thick heart of stone my sins my own They belong to me. Me People say beware but I don’t care The words are just rules and regulations to me. Me I walk in a room you know I look so proud I move in this here atmosphere where anything’s allowed Then I go to this here party but I just get bored Until I look out the window see a sweet young thing Humping on the parking meter leaning on the parking meter Oh, she looks so good. Oh, she looks so fine And I got this crazy feeling that I’m gonna make her mine Oh I put my spell on her here she comes Walking down the street here she comes Coming through my door here she comes Crawling up my stair here she comes Waltzing through the hall in a pretty red dress And oh, she looks so good. Oh, she looks so fine And I got this crazy feeling that I’m gonna make her mine Then I hear this knocking on my door hear this knocking at my door And I look up at the big tower clock and say oh my God it’s midnight And my baby is walking through the door laying on my couch She whispers to me and I take the big plunge And oh, she was so good. And oh, she was so fine And I’m gonna tell the world that I just made her mine It was at the stadium. There were twenty thousand girls Called their names out to me Marie Ruth but to tell you the truth I didn’t hear them. I didn’t see. I let my eyes rise to the big tower clock And I heard those bells chiming in my heart going ding-dong Ding-dong ding-dong ding-dong ding-dong ding-dong ding-dong Ding-dong. Calling the time when you came to my room And you whispered to me and we took the big plunge And oh, you were so good. Oh, you were so fine And I’ve got to tell the world that I made ya mine made ya mine Made her mine made ya mine made her mine made ya mine G-L-O-R-I-A Gloria G-L-O-R-I-A Gloria G-L-O-R-I-A Gloria When the tower bells chime ding-dong they chime I said that Jesus died for somebody’s sins but not mine “Gloria” was bred by crossing the poem “Oath,” written in 1970, with the Van Morrison classic. “Gloria” gave me the opportunity to acknowledge and disclaim our musical and spiritual heritage. It personifies for me, within its adolescent conceit, what I hold sacred as an artist. The right to create, without apology, from a stance beyond gender or social definition, but not beyond the responsibility to create something of worth. REDONDO BEACH Late afternoon dreaming hotel We just had the quarrel that sent you away I was looking for you are you gone gone Call you on the phone another dimension Well you never returned oh you know what I mean I went looking for you are you gone gone Down by the ocean it was so dismal Women all standing with shock on their faces Sad description oh I was looking for you Everyone was singing girl is washed up On Redondo Beach and everyone is so sad I was looking for you are you gone gone Pretty little girl everyone cried She was the victim of sweet suicide I went looking for you are you gone gone Down by the ocean it was so dismal Women all standing with shock on their faces Sad description oh I was looking for you Desk clerk told me girl was washed up Was small and angel with apple blonde hair now I went looking for you are you gone gone Picked up my key didn’t reply Went to my room started to cry You were small and angel are you gone gone Down by the ocean it was so dismal I was just standing with shock on my face The hearse pulled away The girl that had died it was you You’ll never return into my arms ’Cause you are gone gone Never return into my arms ’Cause you are gone gone Gone gone gone gone Good-bye Redondo Beach, 1971 BIRDLAND His father died and left him a little farm in New England. All the long black funeral cars left the scene. And the boy was just standing there alone Looking at the shiny red tractor Him and his daddy used to sit inside And circle the blue fields and grease the night. It was as if someone had spread butter On all the fine points of the stars ’Cause when he looked up they started to slip. Then he put his head in the crux of his arm And he started to drift, drift to the belly of a ship Let the ship slide open, and he went inside of it And saw his daddy behind the control board Streaming beads of light. He saw his daddy behind the control board And he was very different tonight ’Cause he was not human, he was not human. The little boy’s face lit up with such naked joy That the sun burned around his lids and his eyes were like two suns White lids, white opals, seeing everything just a little bit too clearly And he looked around and there was no black ship in sight No black funeral cars, nothing except for him the raven And he fell on his knees and looked up and cried out No, daddy, don’t leave me here alone Take me up, daddy, to the belly of your ship Let the ship slide open and I’ll go inside of it Where you’re not human, you are not human. But nobody heard the boy’s cry of alarm. Nobody there except for the birds around the New England farm And they gathered in all directions, like roses they scattered And they were like compass grass coming together into the head of A shaman bouquet. Slit in his nose and all the others went shooting And he saw the lights of traffic beckoning like the hands of Blake Grabbing at his cheeks, taking out his neck, all his limbs Everything was twisted and he said: I won’t give up, won’t give up, don’t let me give up I won’t give up, come here, let me go up fast Take me up quick, take me up, up to the belly of a ship And the ship slides open and I go inside of it Where I am not human. I am helium raven and this movie is mine So he cried out as he stretched the sky Pushing it all out like latex cartoon Am I all alone in this generation? We’ll just be dreaming of animation night and day It won’t let up, won’t let up and I see them coming in Oh, I couldn’t hear them before, but I hear them now It’s a radar scope in all silver and all platinum lights Moving in like black ships They were moving in, streams of them And he put up his hands and he said: It’s me, it’s me, I’ll give you my eyes, take me up Oh now please take me up, I’m helium raven Waiting for you, please take me up, don’t leave me here. The son, the sign, the cross, like the shape of a tortured woman The true shape of a tortured woman, the mother standing In the doorway letting her sons, no longer presidents but prophets. They’re all dreaming they’re going to bear the prophet He’s going to run through the fields dreaming in animation It’s all going to split his skull, it’s going to come out Like a black bouquet shining, like a fist that’s going to shoot them up Like light, like Mohammed Boxer, take them up up up up up up. Oh, let’s go up up take me up I’ll go up I’m going up I’m going up. Take me up, I’m going up, I’ll go up. Go up go up go up go up up up up up up up Up, up to the belly of a ship. Let the ship slide open. We’ll go inside of it where we are not human, we are not human. Where there was sand, there were tiles The sun had melted the sand and it coagulated like a river of glass When it hardened he looked at the surface, he saw his face And where there were eyes were just two white opals, two white opals Where there were eyes there were just two white opals And he looked up, and the rays shot, and he saw raven coming in And he crawled on his back and he went up up up up up up up. Sha da do wop da shaman do way sha da do wop da shaman do way Sha da do wop da shaman do way sha da do wop da shaman do way We like birdland. FREE MONEY Every night before I go to sleep Find a ticket win a lottery Scoop the pearls up from the sea Cash them in and buy you All the things you need Every night before I rest my head See those dollar bills go swirling ’round my bed I know they’re stolen but I don’t feel bad I take that money buy you things you never had Oh baby it would mean so much to me Oh baby to buy you all the things you need for free I’ll buy you a jet plane baby Get you on a higher plane to a jet stream And take you through the stratosphere And check out the planets there And then take you down deep deep Where it’s hot hot in Arabia-babia Then cool cold fields of snow. And we’ll roll Dream roll dream roll roll dream dream When we dream it when we dream it when we dream it We’ll dream it dream it for free free money free money Free money free money free money free money Every night before I go to sleep Find a ticket win a lottery Every night before I rest my head See those dollar bills go swirling ’round my bed Oh baby it would mean so much to me Baby I know our troubles will be gone Oh I know our troubles will be gone going gone If we dream dream dream for free And when we dream it when we dream it when we dream it Let’s dream it we’ll dream it for free free money free money Free money free money free money free money free money KIMBERLY The wall is high the black barn The babe in my arms in her swaddling clothes And I know soon that the sky will split And the planets will shift Balls of jade will drop and existence will stop Little sister the sky is falling I don’t mind I don’t mind Little sister the fates are calling on you Here I stand again in this old electric whirlwind The sea rushes up my knees like flame And I feel like just some misplaced Joan of Arc And the cause is you looking up at me Oh baby I remember when you were born It was dawn and the storm settled in my belly And I rolled in the grass and I spit out the gas And I lit a match and the void went flash And the sky split and the planets hit Balls of jade dropped and existence stopped Little sister the sky is falling I don’t mind I don’t mind Little sister the fates are calling on you I was young and crazy so crazy I knew I could break through with you So with one hand I rocked you And with one heart I reached for you Ah I knew your youth was for the taking Fire on a mental plane so I ran through the fields As the bats with their baby vein faces Burst from the barn in flames in the violent violet sky And I fell on my knees and pressed you against me Your skull was like a network of spittle Like glass balls moving in like cold streams of logic And I prayed as the lightning attacked That something would make it go crack Something will make it go crack Something will make it go crack Something will make it go crack The palm trees fall into the sea It doesn’t matter much to me As long as you’re safe Kimberly And I can gaze deep into your starry eyes Looking deep in your eyes baby Looking deep in your eyes baby Looking deep in your eyes baby Into your starry eyes BREAK IT UP Car stopped in a clearing Ribbon of life, it was nearing I saw the boy break out of his skin My heart turned over and I crawled in He cried break it up, oh, I don’t understand Break it up, I can’t comprehend Break it up, oh, I want to feel you Don’t talk to me that way I’m not listening Snow started falling I could hear the angel calling We rolled on the ground, he stretched out his wings The boy flew away and he started to sing He sang break it up, oh, I don’t understand Break it up, I can’t comprehend Break it up, oh, I want to feel you Break it up, don’t look at me The sky was raging. The boy disappeared I fell on my knees. Atmosphere broke up The boy reappeared. I cried take me please Ice it was shining. I could feel my heart it was melting I tore off my clothes, I danced on my shoes I ripped my skin open and then I broke through, I cried Break it up, oh, now I understand Break it up, and I want to go Break it up, oh, please take me with you Break it up, I can feel it breaking I can feel it breaking, I can feel it breaking I can feel, I can feel, I can feel, I can feel So break it up, oh, now I’m coming with you Break it up, now I’m going to go Break it up, oh, feel me I’m coming Break it up break it up break it up Break it up break it up break it up Break it up break it up break it up —for Jim Morrison LAND All the wisdom of the universe can be found between the eyes of the horse. —KORAN Horses The boy was in the hallway drinking a glass of tea From the other end of the hallway a rhythm was generating Another boy was sliding up the hallway He merged perfectly with the hallway He merged perfectly with the mirror in the hallway The boy looked at Johnny Johnny wanted to run but the movie kept moving as planned The boy took Johnny he pressed him against the locker He drove it in he drove it home he drove it deep in Johnny The boy disappeared Johnny fell on his knees started crashing his head against the locker started crashing his head against the locker started laughing hysterically When suddenly Johnny gets the feeling he’s being surrounded by horses horses horses horses coming in all directions white shining silver studs with their nose in flames He saw horses horses horses horses horses horses horses horses Land Genesis, 1973 Land of a Thousand Dances Do you know how to pony like bony maroney Do you know how to twist well it goes like this it goes like this Then you mash potato do the alligator do the alligator And you twista twista like your baby sister I want your baby sister give me your baby sister teach your baby sister To rise up from her knees do the sweet pea do the sweet pee pee Roll down on her back got to lose control got to lose control Got to lose control and then you take control Then you roll down on your back Do you like it like that like it like that Then you do the watusi yeah do the watusi Life is filled with holes Johnny’s laying there in his sperm coffin Angel looks down at him and says ah pretty boy Can’t you show me nothing but surrender Johnny gets up takes off his leather jacket Taped to his chest there’s the answer He got pen knives and jack knives and Switchblades preferred switchblades preferred He cries he screams says Life is full of pain I push it through my brain And I fill my nose with snow and go Rimbaud Go Rimbaud go Rimbaud oh go Johnny go And do the watusi oh do the watusi There’s a little place a place called space It’s a pretty little place it’s across the track Across the track and the name of that place Is I like it like that I like it like that I like it like that I like it like that And the name of the band is Twistelette twistelette twistelette Twistelette twistelette twistelette La Mer (de) Let it calm down let it calm down In the night in the eye of the forest There’s a mare black and shining with yellow hair I put my fingers through her silken hair And found a stair I didn’t waste time I just walked right up and saw that up there There is a sea up there there is a sea up there There is a sea seize the possibility There is no land but the land [Up there is just a sea of possibilities] There is no sea but the sea [Up there is a wall of possibilities] There is no keeper but the key [Up there there are several walls of possibilities] Except for one who seizes possibilities I seize the first possibility the sea around me I was standing there with my legs spread like a sailor [In a sea of possibilities] I felt his hand on my knee [On the screen] And I looked at Johnny And handed him a branch of coral flame [In the heart of man] The waves were coming in Like Arabian stallions gradually lapping into sea horses He picked up the blade and he pressed it against His smooth throat and let it dip in [the veins] Dip in to the sea the sea of possibilities It started hardening it started hardening in my hand And I felt the arrows of desire I put my hand inside his cranium, oh we had such a brainiac- amour But no more, no more I gotta move from my mind to the area [Go Rimbaud go Rimbaud go Rimbaud] Oh go Johnny go Do the watusi, yeah do the watusi do the watusi His skull shot open coiled snakes White and shiny twirling and encircling Our lives are now entwined we will four years be together Your nerves the mane of the black shining horse And my fingers all entwined through your silky hair I could feel it it was the hair going through my fingers [Build it build it] The hairs were like wires going through my body I that’s how I that’s how I died Oh when they made that Tower of Babel They knew what they were after They knew what they were after Everything on the current moved up I tried to stop it but it was too warm [No possible ending, no possible ending] Too unbelievably smooth like playing in the sea In the sea of possibility the possibility was a blade A shiny blade I hold the key to the sea of possibilities There’s no land but the land looked at my hands And there’s a red stream that went streaming through The sands like fingers like arteries like fingers [All wisdom fixed between the eyes of a horse] He lay pressing it against his throat [your eyes] He opened his throat [your eyes] his vocal chords Started shooting like [of a horse] mad pituitary glands The scream he made [my heart] was so high Pitched that nobody heard no one heard That cry no one heard [Johnny] the butterfly flapping In his throat his fingers nobody heard he was on that bed It was like a sea of jelly and so he seized the first His vocal chords shot up like mad pituitary glands It was a black tube he felt himself disintegrate [There is nothing happening at all] So when he looked out into the street Saw this sweet young thing Humping on the parking meter Leaning on the parking meter A long Fender whine In the sheets there was a man Everything around him unraveling Like some long Fender whine Dancing around to a simple rock and roll song “Land” was an improvisation evoking Chris Kenners’s “Land of a Thousand Dances,” a salute to the past and an anticipation of the future. ELEGIE I just don’t know what to do tonight My head is aching as I drink and breathe Memory falls like cream in my bones Moving on my own There must be something I can dream tonight The air is filled with the moves of you All the fire is frozen yet still I have the will Trumpets, violins, I hear them in the distance And my skin emits a ray But I think it’s sad, it’s much too bad That all our friends can’t be with us today RADIO ETHIOPIA Beauty will be convulsive or not at all. —ANDRÉ BRETON, NADJA ASK THE ANGELS Move. Ask the angels who they’re calling Go ask the angels if they’re calling to thee Ask the angels, while they’re falling Who that person could possibly be And I know you got the feeling You know, I feel it crawl across the floor And I know, it got you reeling And honey, honey the call is for war And it’s wild, wild, wild, wild Across the country through the fields You know I see it written ’cross the sky People rising from the highway And war, war is the battle cry And it’s wild, wild, wild, wild Armageddon, it’s gotten No Savior jailer can take it from me World ending, it’s just beginning And rock and roll is what I’m born to be And it’s wild, wild, wild, wild Ask the angels if they’re starting to move Coming in droves in from L.A. Ask the angels if they’re starting to groove Light as our armor and it’s today And it’s wild, wild, wild, wild Ain’t It Strange, 1976 AIN’T IT STRANGE Down in Vineland there’s a clubhouse Girl in white dress boy shoot white stuff Oh don’t you know that anyone can join And they come and call and they fall on the floor Don’t you see when you’re looking at me That I’ll never end transcend transcend Ain’t it strange oh oh oh Ain’t it strange oh oh oh Come and join me I implore thee I implore thee come explore me Oh don’t you know that anyone can come And they come and they call and they crawl on the floor Don’t you see when you’re looking at me That I’ll never end transcend transcend Ain’t it strange oh oh oh Ain’t it strange oh oh oh True true who are you Who who am I Down in Vineland there’s a clubhouse Girl in white dress boy shoot white stuff Oh don’t you know anyone can come And they come and call and they fall on the floor Don’t you see when you’re looking at me That I’ll never end transcend transcend Ain’t it strange oh oh oh Ain’t it strange oh oh oh do you go to the temple tonight oh no i don’t think so do you not go to the palace of answers with me marie oh no i don’t think so no see when they offer me book of gold i know soon still that platinum is coming and when i look inside of your temple it looks just like the inside of any one man and when he beckons his finger to me well i move in another direction i move in another dimension i move in another dimension oh oh oh Hand of God I feel the finger Hand of God I start to whirl Hand of God I do not linger Don’t get dizzy do not fall now Turn whirl like a dervish Turn God make a move Turn Lord I don’t get nervous I just move in another dimension Come move in another dimension Come move in another dimension Come move in another dimension Strange strange do you go to the temple tonight oh no i don’t think so no will you go to the pagoda the palace of answers with me marie oh no i don’t believe so no see when they offer me book of gold i know soon still that platinum is coming and when i look inside your temple it looks just like the inside of the brain of any one man and when he beckons his finger to me well i move in another dimension i move in another dimension i move in another dimension POPPIES Heard it on the radio it’s no good Heard it on the radio it’s news to me When she getting something it’s understood Baby’s got something she’s not used to Down down poppy yeah Waiting on the corner wanna score Baby wants something she’s in the mood to Baby wants something I want more When I don’t get it I get blue blue Down down and it’s really coming Really coming down down poppy yeah She was tense and gleaming in the sun They split her open like a country Everyone was very pleased to be a state of Her mind was gently probed like a finger Everything soaking and spread with butter And then they laid her on the table She connected with the inhaler And the needle was shifting like crazy She was she was completely still It was like a painting of a vase She just lay there and the gas traveled fast Thru the dorsal spine and down and around The anal cavity her cranium it was really great man The gas had inflicted her entire spine With the elements of a voluptuous disease With a green vapor made her feet light I moved thru the door I saw the wheel and it was golden And oh my God I finally scored I turned the channel station after station I don’t think there’s any station Quite as interesting to me as the 12th station I tuned in to the tower too many centuries Were calling to me spinning down thru time Oh watch them say you’re too high Before him we didn’t worship suffering Didn’t we laugh and dance for hours We were having fun as we built the tower I saw it spiraling up into his electric eye I felt it go in and started to cry Oh God are you afraid Why did the tower turn you off babe I want to feel you in my radio Goddamn in my radio If you want to go go if you want to see If you want to go as far as she You must look God in the face Heard it on the radio heard it on the radio One long ecstatic pure sensation restriction started excreting Started excreting ah exhilarating bottomless pit Hey Sheba hey Salome hey Venus eclipsing my way ah You’re vessel every woman is a vessel is evasive is aquatic Everyone silver ecstatic platinum disk spinning PISSING IN A RIVER Pissing in a river watching it rise Tattoo fingers shy away from me Voices voices mesmerize Voices voices beckoning sea Come come come come back come back Come back come back come back Spoke of a wheel tip of a spoon Mouth of a cave I’m a slave I’m free When are you coming hope you come soon Fingers fingers encircling thee Come come come come come come Come come come come come come for me My bowels are empty excrete in your soul What more can I give you baby I don’t know What more can I give you to make this thing grow Don’t turn your back now I’m talking to you Should I pursue a path so twisted Should I crawl defeated and gifted Should I go the length of a river The royal the throne the cry me river Everything I’ve done I’ve done for you Oh I give my life for you Every move I made I move to you And I came like a magnet for you now What about it you’re going to leave me What about it you don’t need me What about it I can’t live without you What about it I never doubted you What about it what about it What about it what about it Should I pursue a path so twisted Should I crawl defeated and gifted Should I go the length of a river The royal the throne the cry me river What about it what about it what about it Oh I’m pissing in a river Pissing in a River, 1976 DISTANT FINGERS When when will you be landing When when will you return Feel feel my heart expanding You and your alien arms All my earthly dreams are shattered I’m so tired I quit Take me forever it doesn’t matter Deep inside of your ship La la la la la la landing Please oh won’t you return See your blue lights are flashing You and your alien arms Deep in the forest I whirl Like I did as a little girl Let my eyes rise in the sky Looking for you oh you know I would go anywhere at all ’Cause no star is too far with you La la la la la la landing Please oh won’t you return Feel feel my heart expanding You and your alien arms All my earthly dreams are shattered I’m so tired I quit Take me forever it doesn’t matter Deep inside of your ship Land land oh I am waiting for you Waiting for you to take me up by my starry spine With your distant distant fingers Oh I am waiting for you Oh I am waiting for you PUMPING (MY HEART) Oh I see your stare spiraling up there Into the center of my brain and baby come baby go And free the hurricane oh I go into the center of the airplane Baby gotta move to the center of my pain And my heart starts pumping my fists start pumping Upset total abandon upset you know I love you so Upset total abandon Oh I see you stare spiraling up there and oh Into the center of my brain and baby come baby go And free the hurricane oh I go into the center of the airplane Baby gotta box in the center of the ring And my heart starts pumping my fists start pumping Upset total abandon you know I love you so Total abandon oh I go into the center of the airplane Baby gotta go to the center of my brain And my heart starts pumping my fists start pumping Got no recollection of my past reflection So I’m free to move in the resurrection My heart starts pumping my fists start pumping My heart pumping my heart pumping my heart pumping Coming in the airport coming in the sea coming in the garden Got a conscious stream coming in a washroom coming on a plane Coming in a force field coming in my brain and my heart My heart total abandon total abandon total abandon total Abandon total abandon total abandon total abandon Oh I go into the center of the airplane Baby gotta move to the center of my brain My heart CHIKLETS last night i awoke up from a dream came face to face with my face facing the tombstone teeth of a man called chiklets he came down through the ages with the desperate beauty of a middleweight boxer came beating the force field with elegant grace trying to get a perfect grip there was no absolute grip he was in a sail boat a glass bottom boat the bottom of a boat he was coming down through the ages sea molten sea spilling down the tube the spiny eye of the village the spinal eye of the victim the spiny eye like a question mark hovering over him what do you want what do you want from him down on a dream too much unexplained what do you think do you think there was an actual connection i can’t imagine a connection going down there i can’t imagine any connection at all a boxing ring with gold ropes soft desperate karat top spinning and coming down through the ages forty one BC RADIO ETHIOPIA/ABYSSINIA Oh I’ll send you a telegram Oh I have some information for you Oh I’ll send you a telegram Send it deep in the heart of you Deep in the heart of your brain is a lever Deep in the heart of your brain is a switch Deep in the heart of your flesh you are clever Oh honey you met your match in a bitch There will be no famine in my existence I merge with the people of the hills People of Ethiopia Your opiate is the air that you breathe All those mint bushes around you Are the perfect thing for your system Aww clean clean it out You must rid yourself from these these animal fixations You must release yourself From the thickening blackmail of elephantiasis You must divide the wheat from the rats You must turn around and look oh God When I see Brancusi His eyes searching out the infinite Abstract spaces in the radio Rude hands of sculptor Now gripped around the neck of a Duo-Sonic I swear on your eyes no pretty words will sway me Ahh look at me look at the world around you Jesus I hate to laugh but I can not believe Care I so much everything merges then touch it With a little soul anything is possible Ahhh I never knew you how can it be That I feel so fucked up I am in no condition to do what I must do The first dog on the street can tell you that As for you you do as you must But as for me I trust That you will book me on the first freighter Passage on the first freighter So I can get the hell out of here And go back home back to Abyssinia Deep in the heart of the valley I’m going Ohhh I would appreciate if you would just Totally appreciate Brancusi’s Bird in Space The sculptor’s mallet has been replaced By the neck of a guitar Lately Every time I see your face I eventually wake up EASTER Use menace, use prayer. —JEAN GENET ’TILL VICTORY Raise the sky, we got to fly Over the land over the sea Fate unwinds and if we die souls arise God, do not seize me please. ’Till victory Take arm. Take aim. Be without shame No one to bow to. To vow to. To blame Legions of light virtuous flight ignite excite And you will see us coming V formation through the sky Film survives. Eyes cry. On the hill Hear us call through a realm of sound Oh oh-oh down and down Down and ’round oh down and ’round ’Round and ’round oh ’round and ’round Rend the veil and we shall sail The nail. The grail. That’s all behind thee In deed in creed the curve of our speed And we believe that we will raise the sky We got to fly over the land over the sea Fate unwinds and if we die souls arise God, do not seize me please. ’Till victory Victory. ’Till victory. Victory. ’Till victory SPACE MONKEY Blood on the TV ten o’clock news. Souls are invaded heart in a groove Beating and beating so out of time What’s the mad matter with the church chimes Here comes a stranger up on Ninth Avenue Leaning green tower indiscreet view Over the cloud over the bridge Sensitive muscle sensitive ridge Of my space monkey sign of the time-time Space monkey so out of line-line Space monkey son of divine And he’s mine mine all mine Pierre Clemente. Snortin’ cocaine. The sexual streets why it’s all so insane Humans are running lavender room Hovering liquid move over moon For my space monkey sign of the time-time Space monkey son of divine Space monkey so out of line And he’s mine mine oh he’s mine Stranger comes up to him Hands him an old rusty Polaroid It starts crumbling in his hands. He says, oh man, I don’t get the picture This is no picture this is just this just a this just a . . . Just my jack-knife just my jack-knife just my jack. Rude excavation. Landing site. Boy hesitating jack-knife He rips his leg open so out of time Blood and light running It’s all like a dream Light of my life he’s dressed in flame It’s all so predestined it’s all such a game For my space monkey sign of the time-time Space monkey son of divine space monkey So out of line and it’s all just space just space There he is up in a tree. Oh, I hear him calling down to me That banana-shaped object ain’t no banana It’s a bright yellow UFO and he’s coming to get me Here I go up up up up up up up up up Oh, good-bye mama I’ll never do dishes again Here I go from my body Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Help BECAUSE THE NIGHT Take me now baby here as I am Pull me close, try and understand Desire is hunger is the fire I breathe Love is a banquet on which we feed Come on now try and understand The way I feel when I’m in your hands Take my hand come undercover They can’t hurt you now, can’t hurt you now Because the night belongs to lovers Because the night belongs to love Because the night belongs to lovers Because the night belongs to us Have I doubt when I’m alone Love is a ring, the telephone Love is an angel, disguised as lust Here in our bed, until the morning comes Come on now try and understand The way I feel under your command Take my hand as the sun descends They can’t touch you now, can’t touch you now And though we’re seized with doubt The vicious circle turns and burns Without you I cannot live, forgive The yearning burning, I believe it’s time To feel to heal, so touch me now Touch me now, touch me now Because this night there are two lovers Because we believe in the night we trust Because the night belongs to lovers Because the night belongs to us —Cowritten with Bruce Springsteen GHOST DANCE What is it children that falls from the sky Tayi taya tayi aye aye Manna from heaven from the most high Food from the father tayi taya aye We shall live again we shall live again Shake out the ghost dance Peace to your brother, give and take eat Tayi taya dance little feet One foot extended snake to the ground Wave up the earth worm turn around We shall live again we shall live again Shake out the ghost dance Stretch out your arms now dip and sway Bird of thy birth tayi taya The oe of the shoe the ou of the soul Dust of the word that shakes from the tail We shall live again we shall live again Shake out the ghost dance Here we are, Father your Holy Ghost Bread of your bread host of your host We are the tears that fall from your eyes Word of your word cry of your cry We shall live again we shall live again What is it Father That moves in the night What is it Father That snakes to the right What is it Father That shakes from your hand What is it Father Can you tell me when Father will we live again We shall live again We shall live again We shall live again Shake out the ghost Manifesto notes, 1977 BABELOGUE i haven’t fucked much with the past, but i’ve fucked plenty with the future over the skin of silk are scars from the splinters of stations and walls i’ve caressed. a stage is like each bolt of wood, like a log of helen, is my pleasure. i would measure the success of a night by the way by the way by the amount of piss and seed i could exude over the columns that nestled the PA some nights i’d surprise everybody by skipping off with a skirt of green net sewed over with flat metallic circles which dazzled and flashed. the lights were violet and white i had an ornamental veil, but i couldn’t bear to use it. when my hair was cropped i craved covering, but now my hair itself is a veil, and the scalp of a crazy and sleepy comanche lies beneath this netting of skin. i wake up. i am lying peacefully. i am lying peacefully and my knees are open to the sun. i desire him, and he is absolutely ready to seize me. in heart i am moslem in heart i am an american. in heart i am moslem. in heart i’m an american artist and i have no guilt. i seek pleasure. i seek the nerves under your skin. the narrow archway; the layers; the scroll of ancient lettuce. we worship the flaw, the belly, the belly, the mole on the belly of an exquisite whore. he spared the child and spoiled the rod. i have not sold myself to god. ROCK N ROLL NIGGER Baby was a black sheep baby was a whore Baby got big and baby get bigger Baby get something baby get more Baby baby baby was a rock n roll nigger Oh look around you all around you Riding on a copper wave Do you like the world around you Are you ready to behave Outside of society they’re waiting for me Outside of society that’s where I want to be Baby was a black sheep baby was a whore You know she got big. Well she’s gonna get bigger Baby got a hand got a finger on the trigger Baby baby baby is a rock n roll nigger Outside of society that’s where I want to be Outside of society they’re waiting for me Those who have suffered understand suffering And thereby extend their hand The storm that brings harm Also makes fertile blessed is the grass And herb and the true thorn I was lost in a valley of pleasure I was lost in the infinite sea I was lost and measure for measure Love spewed from the heart of me I was lost and the cost And the cost didn’t matter to me I was lost and the cost Was to be outside society Jimi Hendrix was a nigger Jesus Christ and grandma too Jackson Pollock was a nigger Nigger nigger nigger nigger Nigger nigger nigger Outside of society they’re waiting for me Outside of society if you’re looking That’s where you’ll find me Outside of society they’re waiting for me WE THREE Every Sunday I would go down to the bar where he played guitar You say you want me. I want another. Say you dream of me Dream of your brother. Oh, the stars shine so suspiciously for we three You said when you were with me that nothing made you high We drank all night together and you began to cry so recklessly Baby please don’t take my hope away from me You say you want me. I want another baby You say you wish for me. Wish for your brother Oh, the dice roll so deceptively for we three It was just another Sunday and everything was in the key of A And I lit a cigarette for your brother And he turned and heard me say so desperately Baby please don’t take my hope away from me You say you want me. I want another You say you pray for me. Pray for your brother Oh, the way that I see him is the way I see myself So please stand back now and let time tell Oh, can’t you see that time is the key That will unlock the destiny of we three Every night on separate stars before we go to sleep we pray So breathlessly. Baby please don’t take my hope away from me BABELFIELD what i feel when i’m playing guitar is completely cold and crazy like i don’t owe nobody nothing and it’s just a test just to see how far I can and relax into the cold wave of a note when everything hits just right the note of nobility can go on forever i never tire of the solitary E and i trust my guitar and i don’t care about anything sometimes i feel like i’ve broken through and i’m free and i could dig into eternity riding the wave and realm of the E sometimes it’s useless here I am struggling and filled with dread afraid that i’ll never squeeze enough graphite from my damaged cranium to inspire or asphyxiate any eyes grazing like hungry cows across the stage or page inside of me i’m crazy i’m just crazy inside i must continue i see her my stiff muse jutting around ’round ’round ’round like a broken speeding statue the colonial year is dead and the greeks too are finished the face of alexander remains not only solely due to sculpture but through the power and foresight and magnetism of alexander himself the artist must maintain his swagger he must be intoxicated by ritual as well as result look at me i am laughing I’m like the hard brown palm of the boxer and i trust my guitar therefore we black out together therefore i would run through scum and scum is just ahead we see it but we just laugh we’re ascending through the hollow mountain we are peeking we are laughing we are kneeling we are radiating at last this rebellion is just a gas our gas that we pass TWENTY-FIFTH FLOOR We explore the men’s room we don’t give a shit ladies’ lost electricity take vows inside of it desire to dance too startled to try wrap my legs ’round you starting to fly let’s explore up there, up there, up there on the twenty-fifth floor Circle all around me coming for the kill kill kill oh kill me baby like a kamikaze heading for a spill oh but it’s all spilt milk to me desire to dance too startled to try wrap my legs ’round you starting to fly let’s soar up there, up there, up there on the twenty-fifth floor We do not eat flower of creation we do not eat eat anything at all love is, love was love is a manifestation I’m waiting for a contact to call. love’s war. love’s cruel. love’s pretty love’s pretty cruel tonight I’m waiting here to refuel I’m gonna make contact tonight blood in my heart. Night to exploit twenty-five stories over Detroit and there’s more up there, up there, up there Stoned in space. Zeus. Christ. it has always been rock and so it is and so it shall be. within the context of neo rock we must open up our eyes and seize and rend the veil of smoke which man calls order. pollution is a necessary result of the inability of man to reform and transform waste. the transformation of waste is perhaps the oldest pre- occupation of man. man being the chosen alloy, he must be reconnected via shit, at all cost. inherent within us is the dream of the task of the alchemist to create from the clay of man and re-create from excretion of man pure and then soft and then solid gold. all must not be art. some art we must disintegrate. positive anarchy must exist. I feel it swirling around me I feel I’m feeling no pain I’m waiting above for you baby I know that I’ll see you up there I’m tripping in the dark backward I’m going for all that it’s worth I’m waiting above in the sky dear upon another planet called earth EASTER Easter Sunday we were walking Easter Sunday we were talking Isabelle, my little one Take my hand time has come Isabelle, all is glowing Isabelle, all is knowing And my heart, Isabelle And my head, Isabelle Frédéric and Vitalie Savior dwells inside of thee Oh, the path leads to the sun Brother sister time has come Isabelle, all is glowing Isabelle, all is knowing Isabelle, we are dying Isabelle, we are rising I am the spring the holy ground I am the seed Of mystery the thorn the veil the face of grace the brazen image the thief of sleep the ambassador of dreams the prince of peace I am the sword the wound the stain scorned transfigured child of Cain I rend I end I return again I am the salt the bitter laugh I am the gas in a womb of light The evening star the ball of sight That bleeds that sheds the tears of Christ Dying and drying as I rise tonight Isabelle, we are rising Isabelle, we are rising Isabelle, we are rising —for Arthur, Vitalie, and Isabelle Rimbaud GODSPEED You are the adrenaline rushing through my veins Stimulate my heart pale and crystalline You are the sulfur extinguished by the flame You are everything to me, all this in your name Walking in your blue coat, weeping admiral All the twisted sailors, Vienna and Genet Ending all that’s static in a myth of sin Mirror mine ecstatic pale adrenaline Love is a vampire, energy undead Love is like a boomerang, gone and back again On a rack of red leather, on a rack of skin and sin Tell me how to sail sail sail pale adrenaline And you said to me it could never be Sent me out to sea to see And you said Godspeed Follow follow me down the twisted stair Stuck inside a memory shot and shot again Hand upon a railing courting fate and fate Down a black river and I plunge right in Adrenaline move inside my vein Ah, you’re the speed I need throw the pistol in Love is like a vampire coming in to suck suck I fell and fell and fell and I’m going to duck WAVE I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course. —TIMOTHY 4:7 FREDERICK Hi hello awake from thy sleep God has given your soul to keep All of the power that burns in the flame Ignites the light in a single name Frederick, name of care Fast asleep in a room somewhere Guardian angels lay abed Shed their light on my sleepy head High on a threshold yearning to sing Down with the dancers having one last fling Here’s to the moment when you said hello Come into my spirit are you ready let’s go Hi hi hey hey maybe I will Come back some day now But tonight on the wings of a dove Up above to the land of love Now I lay me down to sleep Pray the Lord my soul to keep Kiss to kiss, breath to breath My soul surrenders astonished to death Night of wonder promise to keep Set our sails channel the deep Capture the rapture, two hearts meet Combined entwined in a single beat Frederick, you’re the one As we journey from sun to sun All the dreams I waited so long for Our flight tonight so long so long Bye bye hey hey maybe We will come back some day now But tonight on the wings of a dove Up above to the land of love Frederick, name of care High above with sky to spare All the things I’ve been dreaming of All expressed in this name of love Frederick, 1978 Dancing Barefoot, 1978 DANCING BAREFOOT She is benediction She is addicted to thee She is the rude connection She is connecting with he Here I go and I don’t know why I spin so ceaselessly Could it be he’s taking over me I’m dancing barefoot Heading for a spin Some strange music draws me in Makes me come on like some heroine She is sublimation She is the essence of thee She is concentrating on he Who is chosen by she Here I go and I don’t know why I spin so ceaselessly Could it be he’s taking over me I’m dancing barefoot Heading for a spin Some strange music draws me in Makes me come on like some heroine She is re-creation She, intoxicated by thee She has the slow sensation That he is levitating with she Here I go and I don’t know why I spin so ceaselessly ’Till I lose my sense of gravity I’m dancing barefoot Heading for a spin Some strange music draws me in Makes me come on like some heroine Oh God, I fell for you Oh God, I fell for you Oh God, I feel the fever Oh God, I feel the pain Oh God, forever after Oh God, I’m back again Oh God, I fell for you Oh God, I fell for you REVENGE I feel upset. Let’s do some celebrating Come on honey don’t hesitate now Needed you. You withdrew. I was so forsaken Ah, but now the tables have turned. My move I believe I’ll be taking my revenge. Sweet revenge I thought you were some perfect read-out. Some digital delay Had obscured and phased my view of the wicked hand you played The sands and hands of time have run out. Run out You better face it this thing’s run amok. This luck I do know how to replace it with revenge. Sweet revenge I gave you a wristwatch baby You wouldn’t even give me the time of day You want to know what makes me tick Now it’s me that’s got precious little to say For the ghosts of our love have dried have died There’s no use faking it The spirits going to close in on you tonight High time I was taking my revenge Sweet revenge. Revenge. Revenge All the gold and silver couldn’t measure Up my love for you. It’s so immaterial I wouldn’t wait around if I were you In the valley of wait-ting ting Nobody gets nothing. Nobody gets anything. No time for kisses Don’t leave me no space in your little boat You ain’t going to need, no you ain’t going to need no little boat You are living on marked time my dear. Revenge. Sweet revenge. Sweet, sweet revenge. Citizen Ship CITIZEN SHIP It was nothing. It didn’t matter to me There were tanks all over my city There was water outside the windows And children in the streets were throwing rocks at tanks Ain’t got a passport ain’t got my real name Ain’t got a chance sport at fortune or fame As I walk these endless streets won’t you give me a lift A lift a lift on your citizen ship They were rioting in Chicago movement in L.A. ’68 it broke the Yardbirds. We were broke as well Took it underground. M.C. borderline. Up against the wall The wall. The wall. Show your papers boy Citizen ship we got memories. Stateless they got shame Cast adrift from the citizen ship lifeline denied exiled this castaway Blind alley in New York City in a foreign embrace If you’re hungry you’re not too particular about what you’ll taste Men in uniform gave me vinegar spoon of misery But what the hell I fell I fell. It doesn’t matter to me Citizen ship we got memories. Citizen ship we got pain Cast adrift from the citizen ship lifeline denied exile this castaway I was caught up like a moth with its wings out of sync Cut the cord. Overboard. Just a refugee Lady liberty lend a hand to me I’ve been cast adrift Adrift. Adrift. Adrift. Adrift. Adrift. Adrift On the citizen ship we got memory. Citizen ship we got pain Lose your grip on the citizen ship you’re cast you’re cast away On the citizen ship you got memory. Citizen ship you got pain Citizen ship you got identity. A name a name a name A name. Ivan. A name. Ivan Kral. Name. Name. What’s your name son. New York City. What’s your name. What’s your name. What’s your name. Name. Nothing. I got nothing. Name. Name. Name. Name. Wake up. Give me your tired your poor. Give me your huddled masses Your war torn on your tender seas. Give me your war torn On your shores of dawn. Lift up your golden lamp to me. Ahh, it’s all mythology SEVEN WAYS OF GOING I’ve got seven ways of going seven wheres to be Seven sweet disguises, seven ways of serving Thee Lord, I do extol Thee for Thou hast lifted me Woke me up and shook me out of mine iniquity For I was undulating in the lewd impostered night Steeped in a dream to rend the seams to redeem the rock of right Swept through the seas of Galilee and the Seven Hills of Rome Seven sins were wrung from the sight of me Lord, I turned my neck toward home I opened up my arms to you and we spun from life to life ’Till you loosened me and let me go toward the everlasting light In this big step I am taking seven seizures for the true I got seven ways of going seven ways of serving you As I move through seven levels as I move upon the slate As I declare to you the number of my moves as I speculate The eighth seeking love without exception a light upon the swarm Seeking love without exception a saint in any form BROKEN FLAG Nodding though the lamp’s lit low. Nod for passers underground To and fro she’s darning and the land is weeping red and pale Weeping yarn from Algiers. Weeping yarn from Algiers Weaving though the eyes are pale. What will rend will also mend The sifting cloth is binding and the dream she weaves will never end For we’re marching toward Algiers. For we’re marching toward Algiers Lullaby though baby’s gone. Lullaby a broken song Oh, the cradle was our call. When it rocked we carried on And we marched on toward Algiers. Forward marching toward Algiers We’re still marching for Algiers. Marching, marching for Algiers Not to hail a barren sky. The sifting cloth is weeping red The mourning veil is waving high a field of stars and tears we’ve shed In the sky a broken flag. Children wave and raise their arms We’ll be gone but they’ll go on and on and on and on and on HYMN When I am troubled in the night He comes to comfort me He wills me thru the darkness And the empty child is free To take his hand his sacred heart The heart that breaks the dawn Amen. And when I think I’ve had my fill he fills up again Wave WAVE Hi. Hi. I was running after you for a long time. I was watching you for . . . actually I’ve watched you for a long time. I like to watch you when you’re walking back and forth on the beach. And the way your, the way your cloth looks. I like I like to see the edges, the bottom of it get all wet when you’re walking near the water there. It’s real nice to talk to you. I didn’t. I-I-I-I. How are you? How are you? I saw I saw you from your balcony window and you were standing there waving at everybody. It was really great because there was about a billion people there, but when I was waving to you, the way your face was, it was so, the way your face was, it made me feel exactly like we’re, it’s not that you were just waving to me, but that we were we were waving to each other. Really it was really wonderful. I really felt happy. It really made me happy. And. Um. I. I just wanted to thank you because you, you really really you made me feel good and, oh, I, it’s nothing. Well I’m just clumsy. No, it’s just a Band-Aid. No, it’s OK. Oh no, I’m always doing. Something’s always happening to me. Well. I’ll be seeing you. Good-bye. Bye. Good-bye sir. Good-bye papa. Wave thou art pretty, Wave thou art high Wave thou art music, Wave thou art why Wave thou art pretty, Wave thou art high Wave to the city, wave wave good-bye —for Albino Luciano, Pope John Paul I DREAM OF LIFE Peace, peace! he is not dead, he doth not sleep— He hath awakened from the dream of life— —PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY PEOPLE HAVE THE POWER I was dreaming in my dreaming Of an aspect bright and fair And my sleeping it was broken But my dream it lingered near In the form of shining valleys Where the pure air recognized And my senses newly opened But I awakened to the cry That the people have the power To redeem the work of fools From the meek the graces shower It’s decreed the people rule The people have the power The people have the power Vengeful aspects became suspect And bending low as if to hear And the armies ceased advancing Because the people had their ear And the shepherds and the soldiers Lay beneath the stars Exchanging visions Laying arms To waste in the dust In the form of shining valleys Where the pure air recognized And my senses newly opened I awakened to the cry The people have the power The people have the power Where there were deserts I saw fountains Like cream the waters rise And we strolled there together With none to laugh or criticize And the leopard And the lamb Lay together truly bound I was hoping in my hoping To recall what I had found I was dreaming in my dreaming God knows a purer view As I surrender to my sleeping I commit my dream to you The people have the power The power to dream to rule To wrestle the Earth from fools It’s decreed the people rule It’s decreed the people rule Listen. I believe everything we dream Can come to pass through our union We can turn the world around We can turn the earth’s revolution We have the power People have the power UP THERE DOWN THERE Up there There’s a ball of fire Some call it the spirit Some call it the sun Its energies are not for hire It serves man it serves everyone Down there where Jonah wails In the healing water In the ready depths Twisting like silver swans No line of death no boundaries Up there The eye is hollow The eye is winking The winds ablaze Angels howling The sphinx awakens But what can she say You’d be amazed Down there Your days are numbered Nothing to fear There will be trumpets There will be silence In the end the end Will be here just here Ahh the borders of heaven Are zipped up tight tonight The abstract streets The lights like some Switched-on Mondrian Cats like us are obsolete Hey Man don’t breathe on my feet Thieves, poets we’re inside out And everybody’s a soldier Angels howl at those abstract lights And the borders of heaven Are zipped up tight tonight Up there There’s a ball of fire Some call it the spirit Some call it the sun Its energies are not for hire It serves man it serves everyone The air we breathe The flame of wisdom The earth we grind The beckoning sea It’s no mystery Not sentimental Ahh the equation It’s all elemental The world is restless Heaven in flux Angels appear From the bright storm Out of the shadows Up there, down there But what can we say Man’s been forewarned All communion is not holy Even those that fall They can prophet Understanding It’s all for man It’s for everyone It’s up there, Down there Everywhere Everywhere Time for communion Time for communion Talking communion PATHS THAT CROSS Speak to me Speak to me heart I feel a needing To bridge the clouds Softly go A way I wish to know to know A way I wish to know to know Oh you’ll ride Surely dance in a ring Backwards and forwards Those who seek Feel the glow A glow we all will know A glow we all will know On that day filled with grace On the way two hearts’ communion Steps we take steps we trace On the way two hearts’ reunion Paths that cross Will cross again Paths that cross Will cross again Speak to me Speak to me shadow I spin from the wheel Nothing at all save the need The need to weave A silk of souls That whisper whisper A silk of souls That whispers to me Speak to me heart All things renew Hearts will mend ’Round the bend Paths that cross Cross again Paths that cross Will cross again Rise up hold the reins We’ll meet I don’t know when Hold tight bye bye Paths that cross Will cross again Paths that cross Will cross again —for Samuel J. Wagstaff Jr. SOMALIA I don’t know why I feel this way today The sky is blue the table is laid The trees are heavy with yellow fruit And in their shade children happily play The pears have fallen to the ground My child places one in my hand The sun is warm upon my face And I dream of a burning land Mother of famine take this pear Upon an arrow through the rings of time This small fruit this golden prayer May it pass from this hand to thine If I were rain I’d rain on Somalia If I were grain for Somalia I’d grow If I were bread I would rise for Somalia If I were a river for Somalia I’d flow All the mothers will dream of thee All the mothers bless thy empty hand All the mothers will grieve for thee All the sorrow a mother can stand If we were rain we would rain for Somalia If we were grain for Somalia we’d grow If we were bread we would rise for Somalia If we were a river for Somalia we’d flow —This lyric was written in memory of Audrey Hepburn, who worked with the simple industry of a servant to give comfort to the victims of the famine in Somalia. WILD LEAVES Wild leaves are falling Falling to the ground Every leaf a moment A light upon the crown That we’ll all be wearing In a time unbound And wild leaves are falling Falling to the ground Every word that’s spoken Every word decreed Every spell that’s broken Every golden deed All the parts we’re playing Binding as the reed And wild leaves are falling Wild wild leaves The spirits that are mentioned The myths that have been shorn Everything we’ve been through And the colors worn Every chasm entered Every story wound And wild leaves are falling Falling to the ground As the campfire’s burning As the fire ignites All the moments turning In the stormy bright Well enough the churning Well enough believe The coming and the going Wild wild leaves WHERE DUTY CALLS In a room in Lebanon They silently slept They were dreaming Crazy dreams In a foreign alphabet Lucky young boys Cross on the main The driver was approaching The American zone The waving of hands The tiniest train They never dreamed They’d never wake again Voice of the Swarm We follow we fall Some kneel for priests Some wail at walls Flag on a match head God or the law And they’ll all go together Where duty calls United children Child of Iran Parallel prayers Baseball Koran I’ll protect mama I’ll lie awake I’ll die for Allah In a holy war I’ll be a ranger I’ll guard the streams I’ll be a soldier A sleeping marine In the heart of the ancient Ali smiles In the soul of the desert The sun blooms Awake into the glare Of all our little wars Who pray to salute The coming and dying Of the moon Oh sleeping sun Assassin in prayer Laid a compass deep Exploding dawn And himself as well Their eyes for his eyes Their breath for his breath All to his end And a room in Lebanon Dust of scenes Erase and blend May the blanket of kings Cover them and him Forgive them Father They know not what they do From the vast portals Of their consciousness They’re calling to you —This lyric was written in memory of those who lost their lives in the destruction of the First Battallion, 8th Marine Headquarters, Beirut, October 23, 1983. Two hundred and forty-one marines, sailors, and soldiers on a peacekeeping mission perished with their assassin. DREAM OF LIFE I’m with you always You’re ever on my mind In a light to last a whole life through Each way I turn the sense of you surrounds In every step I take in all I do Your thoughts your schemes Captivate my dreams Everlasting ever new Sea returns to sea and sky to sky In a life of dream am I when I’m with you Deep in my heart How the presence of you shines In a light to last a whole life through I recall the wonder of it all Each dream of life I’ll share with you I’m with you always You’re ever on my mind In a light to last a whole life through The hand above turns those leaves of love All and all a timeless view Each dream of life Flung from paradise Everlasting ever new Dream of Life, dream of Life GOING UNDER Sun is rising on the water Light is dancing again Let’s go under Where the sun beams Let’s go under my friend Are we sleeping Are we dreaming Are we dancing again Is it heaven crack it open And we’ll slide down its stream We can hold on I’m sure To the sea’s foaming mane It will serve us We’ll surface And we’ll plunge back again Sun is rising on the water Light is dancing like a flame There’s no burning Where the sun beams Oh it’s such a lovely game Does the sea dream I’m sure We are here, we attend We are bells on the shore As the tolling suspends Who will decide the shape of things The shift of being Who will perceive when life is new Shall we divide and become another Who is due for gift upon gift Who will decide Shall we swim over and over The curve of a wing Its destination ever changing Sun is rising on the water Light is dancing like a flame Let’s go waltzing on the water Let’s go under again Let’s go under Going under AS THE NIGHT GOES BY Darlin’ come under cover Another night to discover Let’s slip where senses gather Let’s drift between the sea and sky As the night goes by Sands shift Orchids so strange In the moonlight Brushing our faces Places where love blooms And dies While the night goes by Oh, and the spirits call Sun upon your shadows fall Tracing every breath we draw Come into my dreams Come into my dreams Darlin’ let’s go where the night goes Let’s drift where senses gather Let’s make this night last forever Into my dreams Into my dreams Darlin’ let’s go Where the night goes Time slips Oh darlin’ how it flies When the night goes by All through the night Sirens call Come to me I’ll come to you As the night softly Goes by bye Midnight Moon on our shoulder Daybreak Another one older Darlin’ heavenly blue Glories fade into view Let’s go Under the stars That are beating Under the moonlight Stars shoot Dusk just a whisper Make this night Last forever Oh how I wonder Where the night goes Oh let’s wonder Where the night goes As the night goes By bye By bye LOOKING FOR YOU (I WAS) In the medieval night ’Twas love’s design And the sky was open Like a valentine All the lacy lights Where wishes fall And like Shakespeare’s child I wished on them all Ahh to be your destiny Was all that I pursued I could see the sights From the lofty heights But my heart obscured the view I was looking for you Looking for you What could I do I was looking for you Along the black river The ambassador jewels And you were reflected In all that I saw In the towers of gold In the wheel and the wing Gripping my senses Like an ancient claim Many is the time I knelt in the light Appealing to all that I knew Guide my eyes and steps That I may find love true I was looking for you Looking for you What could I do I was looking for you Come on darlin’ All that hearts desire Was written before us In the medieval fire It was love’s design In the glittering stars Like Shakespeare’s child To be where you are From the Portobello Road To the Port of Marseilles Where the dervish turns Where the wild goats play Looking for you I was MEMORIAL SONG Little emerald bird Wants to fly away If I cup my hand Could I make him stay Little emerald soul Little emerald eye Little emerald soul Must you say good-bye All the things that we pursue All that we dream Are composed as nature knew In a feather green Little emerald bird As you light afar it is true I heard God is where you are Little emerald soul Little emerald eye Little emerald bird We must say good-bye —for Robert Mapplethorpe THE JACKSON SONG Little blue dreamer go to sleep Let’s close our eyes and call the deep Slumbering land that just begins When day is done and little dreamers spin First take my hand then let it go Little blue boy you’re on your own Little blue wings as those feet fly Little blue shoes that walk across the sky May your path be your own But I’m with you And each day you’ll grow He’ll be there too And someday you’ll go We’ll follow you As you go, as you go Little blue star that offers light Little blue bird that offers flight Little blue path where those feet fall Little blue dreamer won’t you dream it all May your path be your own But I’m with you And each day you’ll grow He’ll be there too And someday you’ll go We’ll follow you As you go, as you go And in your travels you will see Warrior wings remember Daddy And if a mama bird you see Folding her wings will you remember me As you go, as you go, as you go, as you go GONE AGAIN Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing. —PSALM 30:11 What happened afterward you know, precious friend, said the friend, from what was sung and not sung: the birch trees, the little hotel in Paris where Genet died, an elbow, an armpit, too many cigarettes, wigs hung on long poles, the strangers in the little room below, the injured telephone —don’t touch. The shaft of light that died in the mud, the slender whirling and swaying, shouting and standing tall. Hic dissonant ubique, nam enim sic diversis cantilenis clamore solent. Here all voices are at variance, as different songs are being roared out simultaneously. The day was still perfect, the children lovable, distracting, and everybody, from the crushed to the exalted, swayed in the music’s updraft. Not bored. Not discouraged. Women were sassier, and felt sexier. Because of you, precious friend. The music spread everywhere. In the mouth. In the armpits. In the crotch. The music a way of flying up and flying past. I remember the saliva, and also the slap and the creased newspapers. You left and then you returned. You grinned. Your grin is still irresistible. Take back the night. Take back your life. And chant and squat and jump and shout, Aux vaincus! To the conquered! —Susan Sontag GONE AGAIN Hey now man’s own kin We commend into the wind Grateful arms grateful limbs Grateful soul he’s gone again I have a winter’s tale How vagrant hearts relent prevail Sow their seed into the wind Seize the sky and they’re gone again Fame is fleeting god is nigh We raise our arms to him on high We shoot our flint into the sun We bless our spoils and we’re gone we’re gone Hey now man’s own kin We commend into the wind Grateful arms grateful limbs Grateful heart he’s gone again Here a man, man’s own kin Turned his back and his own people shot him And he fell on his knees Before the burning plain And he beheld fields of gold his land his son And he arose his blood aflame Clouds pressed with hand prints stained One last breath The sky is high The hungry earth The empty vein The ashes rain Death’s own bed Man’s own kin Into the wind One last breath Hole in life Love knot tied Braid undone A child born The hollow horn A warrior cried A warrior died One last breath Lick of flame Spirit moaned Spirit shed The heavens fed Man’s own kin Grips the sky And he’s gone again Hey now man’s own kin We lay down into the wind Grateful arms grateful limbs Grateful heart is gone again Hey now man’s own kin He ascends into the wind Grateful arms grateful limbs Grateful man he’s gone again BENEATH THE SOUTHERN CROSS Oh To be Not Anyone Gone This maze Of being Skin Oh to cry Not any cry So mournful That The dove Just laughs And The steadfast Gasps Oh to owe Not anyone Nothing To be Not here But here Forsaking Equatorial bliss Who walked Through The callow mist Dressed in scraps Who walked The curve Of the world Whose bone Scraped Whose flesh Unfurled Who grieves Not Anyone gone To greet lame The inspired sky Amazed to stumble Where gods Get lost Beneath The southern Cross —for Oliver Ray Beneath the Southern Cross ABOUT A BOY Toward another he has gone To breathe an air beyond his own Toward a wisdom beyond the shelf Toward a dream that dreams itself About a boy beyond it all About a boy beyond it all From the forest from the foam From the field that he had known Toward a river twice as blessed Toward the inn of happiness About a boy beyond it all About a boy beyond it all From a chaos raging sweet From the deep and dismal street Toward another kind of peace Toward the great emptiness About a boy beyond it all About a boy beyond it all I stood among them I listened I stood among them I listened not I stood among them and I heard myself Who I’ve loved better than you So much so that I walked on Into the face of God Away from your world And my sour stomach Into the face of God, who said Boy, I knew thee not, but boy Now that I have you in my face I embrace you. I welcome you He was just a boy Whirling in the snow Just a little boy Who would never grow —for Kurt Cobain MY MADRIGAL We waltzed beneath motionless skies All heaven’s glory turned in your eyes We expressed such sweet vows Oh ’till death do us part Oh ’till death do us part We waltzed beneath God’s point of view Knowing no ending to our rendezvous We expressed such sweet vows Oh ’till death do us part Oh ’till death do us part We waltzed beneath motionless skies All heaven’s glory turned in your eyes You pledged me your heart ’Till death do us part You pledged me your heart ’Till death do us part ’Till death do us part SUMMER CANNIBALS I was down in Georgia Nothing was as real As the street beneath my feet Descending into air The cauldron was a’bubbling The flesh was lean And the women moved forward Like piranhas in a stream They spread themselves before me An offering so sweet And they beckoned And they beckoned Come on darling eat Eat the summer cannibals Eat Eat Eat You eat the summer cannibals Eat Eat Eat They circled around me Natives in a ring And I saw their souls a’withering Like snakes in chains And they wrapped themselves around me Ummm what a treat And they rattled their tales hissing come on let’s eat Eat the summer cannibals Eat Eat Eat You eat the summer cannibals Eat Eat Eat I felt a rising in my throat The girls a’saying grace And the air, the vicious air Pressed against my face And it all got too damn much for me Just got too damn rough And I pushed away my plate And said boys I’ve had enough And I laid upon the table Just another piece of meat And I opened up my veins to them And said come on eat Eat the summer cannibals Eat Eat Eat You eat the summer cannibals Eat Eat Eat ’Cause I was down in Georgia Nothing was as real As the street beneath my feet Descending into hell So Eat Eat Eat Eat Eat Eat DEAD TO THE WORLD Dead to the world my body was sleeping On my mind was nothing at all Come a mist an air so appealing I’m here a whisper you summoned I called I formed me a presence whose aspect was changing Oh he would shift he would not shift at all We sat for a while he was very engaging And when he was gone I was gone on a smile With a strange way of walking And a strange way of breathing More lives than a cat That led me astray All in all he captured my heart Dead to the world and I just Slipped away I heard me a music that drew me to dancing Lo I turned under his spell I opened my coat but he never came closer I bolted the door and I whispered oh well I laid in the rushes the air was upon me Wondering well I just couldn’t discern Will he come back come back to me Oh I whispered will you ever return I was feeling sensations in no dictionary He was less than a breath of shimmer and smoke The life in his fingers unwound my existence Dead to the world alive I awoke With a strange way of walking And a strange way of breathing Less than a breath of shimmer and smoke The life in his fingers unwound my existence Dead to the world alive I awoke Dead to the World Ravens, 1996 RAVENS Common fortune seeks us all And slips our binding rings We’ll turn our heads And make us reel We’ll bare our arms as wings Before our feet a feather drifts Beyond us it will fall ’Cause time will bid and make us rise Make ravens of us all My love he breathed the air of kings Yet fell beneath his luck And in his heart a yearning yet Before his time time shook And all the gifts that god had gave And those by fate denied Gone to where all treasures laid And where the raven flies Oh there are places I agree Where I have yet to roam The Egyptian field the arctic sea Where shadows haunt and moan But none but sky I have to go Should I return to thee Gone to where the feather flies ’Till I a raven be FIREFLIES I been a’walking Wherefore am I walking I been a’walking If you see me walking A’walking a’wandering If you see me walking Don’t ever turn your eye Don’t turn away don’t turn away I’m coming to you Eleven steps ’till I can rest Eleven steps ’till I’m blessed by you I and I alone can but do for you To twist in my hand the thorn of thy youth To draw thy seed to turn in birth Thy sighs thy moans I and I alone Nine steps ’till I can rest Nine steps ’till I’m blessed by you I will wash your feet and dry them with my hair I will give to you every other tear Thy mouth thy spear thy season of mirth Seven steps until I can rest Seven steps ’till I’m blessed by you All I ever wanted I wanted I wanted All I ever wanted I wanted from you Thy highs thy lows I and I alone Ghost of thy ghost walk I will walk A burning stem to illume thy night Five steps ’till I can rest Five steps ’till I’m blessed by you Four steps until I can rest Four steps ’till I’m blessed by you Three steps until I get to you Two steps until I can rest Two steps ’till I’m blessed by you Blood of my blood bone of my bone Can but do for you I and I alone FAREWELL REEL It’s been a hard time And when it rains It rains on me The sky just opens And when it rains It pours I walk alone Assaulted it seems By tears of heaven And darling I can’t help Thinking those tears are yours Our wild love came from above And wilder still Is the wind that howls Like a voice that knows it’s gone ’Cause darling you died And well I cried But I’ll get by Salute our love And send you a smile And move on So darling farewell All will be well And then all will be fine The children will rise Strong and happy be sure ’Cause your love flows And the corn still grows And God only knows We’re only given As much as the heart can endure But I don’t know why But when it rains It rains on me The sky just opens And when it rains It pours But I look up And a rainbow appears Like a smile from heaven And darling I can’t Help thinking that smile Is yours COME BACK LITTLE SHEBA Come back little Sheba I hear them calling Open your eyes Awake from thy sleep High above The stars are falling Open your arms And you shall receive The lights of the city So bold and flashing All of its riches Imparted to thee Robes of saffron Robes of standing A road of crimson Spread at your feet Your robes of standing Your robes of saffron Your road of crimson All pleasing to me But close your lights Close your gates I must arise My flock awaits Farewell little Sheba I hear them a’calling Here is your staff Tend to thy sheep Good wishes be with you If that be your calling Farewell little Sheba Arise and take leave WING I was a wing in heaven blue Soared over the ocean Soared over Spain And I was free Needed nobody It was beautiful I was a pawn Didn’t have a move Didn’t have nowhere That I could go But I was free I needed nobody It was beautiful It was beautiful I was a vision In another eye And they saw nothing No future at all Yet I was free I needed nobody It was beautiful It was beautiful And if there’s one thing Could do for you You’d be a wing In heaven blue PEACE AND NOISE Through the empty arch comes a wind, a mental wind blowing relentlessly over the heads of the dead, in search of new landscapes and unknown accents . . . announcing the constant baptism of newly created things. —FEDERICO GARCÍA LORCA, IN SEARCH OF DUENDE WAITING UNDERGROUND If you believe all your hope is gone Down the drain of your humankind The time has arrived You be waiting here As I was in a snow white shroud Waiting underground There by the ridge, be a gathering Beneath the pilgrim moon Where we shall await, the beat Of your feet, hammering the earth Where the great ones tremble In their snow white shrouds Waiting underground If you seek the kingdom, come along Waiting by the ridge, be a gathering Beneath the pilgrim moon Where the river thunders There we shall await, the beat Of your feet, hammering the earth And as the earth resounds And humankind becomes as one Then we will arise to be as one But until that day we will just await In our snow white shrouds Waiting underground Waiting underground WHIRL AWAY Hello friend I’ve come a’calling Passively stationed active patrol Sliding in high noon Like some reluctant sheriff Not want to get involved in it all Who stands guard for each other Why must we guard anything at all Anything at all From the earth’s four corners the people are calling Forming equations but the questions are hard All men are brothers killing each other And mother earth is wringing in wonder Who stands guard for each other Why must we guard anything at all. Anything at all Whirl away now Whirl away now Whirl away There’s a cross on the road, there’s a great mill turning Some seeking answers, some are born with answers You can hold on the blade and turn around forever Be flung into space into another kind of grace Who stands guard for each other Why must we guard anything at all. Anything at all Whirl away now Whirl away now Whirl away Some give of the hand Some give of their land Some giveth their life Laying in a field of grain The staff of life all around you Yet you will cut someone down For their possessions Some material thing And our children are being blown away Like wishes in the wind For the sake of their coat Or their colors or their code Or the color of their skin Or the name of their shoes And the mother cries why’d they take my son And the father wonders why’d they take my boy He extended his hand he gave of his land He gave of his bread he gave of his heart Said hello friend Hello friend Hello friend Hello friend 1959 Listen to my story Got two tales to tell One of fallen glory One of vanity The world’s roof was raging We were looking fine ’Cause we built that thing And it grew wings In 1959 Wisdom was a teapot, pouring from above Desolation angels served it up with love Igniting life every form of light Moved by bold design Slid in that thing And it grew wings In 1959 It was blue and shining in the sun Braced, native Speeding the American plain Into freedom freedom freedom China was a tempest And madness overflowed The lama was a young man And watched his world in flames Taking glory down By the edge of clouds It was a crying shame Another lost horizon Tibet the fallen star Wisdom and compassion crushed In the land of Shangri-la But in the land of the Impala honey Well we were looking fine ’Cause we built that thing and it grew wings in 1959 ’Cause we built that thing and it grew wings in 1959 ’Cause we built that thing and it grew wings in 1959 It was the best of times, it was the worst of times in 1959 It was the best of times, it was the worst of times in 1959 BLUE POLES Mother as I write the sun dissolves Blood life streaming cross my hand And these words, these words Hope dashed immortal hope Hope streaking the canvas sky Blue poles infinitely winding, as I write, as I write Blue poles infinitely winding, as I write, as I write We joined the long caravan Hungry dreaming going west Just for work just to get a job And we never got lucky We just forged on And the dust the endless dust Like a plague it covered everything Hal fell with the fever And mother I did what I could Blue poles infinitely winding, as I write, as I write Blue poles infinitely winding, as I write, as I write We prayed we prayed for rain I never wanted to see the sun again All my dresses you made by hand We left behind on the road Hal died in my arms We buried him by the river Blue poles infinitely winding, as I write, as I write Blue poles infinitely winding, as I write, I write DON’T SAY NOTHING Lower the thing the skin of a cat Skin it to the left just laying there No other thing is luck like that And you set it said it said nothing Went to the party very discouraged I watched the litter pile like a wall I looked at the river just couldn’t forgive it It was ladened with all kinds of shit Still I admit that I didn’t say nothing I turned my back walked away Got to face the fact that I didn’t say nothing Everyone was dancing I stood over in the corner I was listening they were saying this and saying that And putting this one down but nothing was delivered Nothing good was coming I just stood there I couldn’t believe it but I didn’t say nothing I walked the floor then I looked away Got to face the fact that I didn’t say nothing How long how long will we make do Maybe it’s time to break on through Gonna lift my skirts gonna straighten up Gonna get well I’m gonna do something Gonna face the fact gonna pay it back And I’m gonna do something won’t hold my tongue Won’t hold the thought won’t hold the card Well I’m gonna do something Oh my brain I got to complain You can refrain but I’m gonna do something How long how long will we make do Maybe it’s time to break on through Out in the desert I saw that old cat skinned I saw it floating in the river I saw and no one seemed to mind They sat there they sat there watching the sun I saw it float away and I watched the buildings crumble Like dust in the hand and we watched the sun Spread its wings and fly away And in the mountains a cry echoes Don’t say nothing Don’t say nothing no Don’t say nothing no DEAD CITY This dead city longs to be This dead city longs to be free Seven screaming horses Melt down in the sun Building scenes on empty dreams And smoking them one by one This dead city longs to be This dead city longs to be living Is it any wonder there’s squalor in the sun With their broken schemes and their lotteries They never get nowhere Is it any wonder they’re spitting at the sun God’s parasites in abandoned sites And they never have much fun If I was a blind man Would you see for me Or would you confuse The nature of my blues And refuse a hand to me Is it any wonder crying in the sun Is it any wonder I’m crying in the sun Well I built my dreams on your empty scenes Now I’m burning them one by one This damn city this dead city Immortal city Motor city Suc-cess city Longs to be Longs to be Free Free Free DEATH SINGING In the straw-colored light In light rapidly changing On a life rapidly fading Have you seen death singing Have you seen death singing With a throat smooth as a lamb Yet dry as a branch not snapping He throws back his head And he does not sing a thing mournful Have you seen death singing Have you seen death singing Have you seen death singing In the straw-colored light He sings a black embrace And white opals swimming In a child’s leather purse Have you seen death swimming Have you seen death swimming With a throat smooth as a lamb Yet dry as a branch not snapping He throws back his head And he does not sing a thing mournful Have you seen death singing Have you seen death singing Have you seen death singing In the straw-colored light He sings of youth enraged And the burning of Atlanta And these viral times And May ribbons streaming And straw-colored curls a’turning A mother’s vain delight And woe to the sun And woe to the dawn And woe to the young Another hearse is drawn Have you seen death singing In the straw-colored light —for Benjamin Smoke Memento Mori MEMENTO MORI The fan whirling like the blades of a copter Lifting into the skies above a foreign land Fire and iron soaked with the bodies of so many friends Johnny waved. He was on his way home He waved good-bye to his comrades in arms And all the twisted things he had seen He waved good-bye And the blades hit something Maybe just fate but the blades hit The copter went up in flames And Johnny never went marching home And Johnny never went marching home They took his name and they carved it on a slab of marble With several thousand other names All the fallen idols The apples of their mother’s eye Just another name Meanwhile back on that burning shore Johnny’s comrades stood speechless They looked up up up with misbelieving eyes ’Cause there were bits of metal and the embers The embers of his eyes fanned out in the air Black dust flames. Oh Johnny Someday they’ll make a movie about you And in the making of that movie, some mad apocalypse It will become even stranger than the simple act Just a boy going up. Up. Up Just a boy going up. Up. Up In flames in the smoke Just another life Just another breath And who’ll remember Oh eternity now As eternal as a sheet of marble Eternal as a slab On a green hill And your name And all your fallen brothers And all the ones not cut All the ones remembered Only in the hearts A mother a father a brother A sister a lover son daughter Young man shall not fade shall not fade Your ancestors salute you greet you And the gods of your ancestors salute you Having been formed by the mind of your ancestors The gods of your ancestors salute you Having been formed by your ancestors The gods of your ancestors salute you They draw you in They draw you through They draw they draw you Through that golden door Come on in boy We remember you We conceived you We conceived of your breath We conceived of the whole human race And we conceived it to be a beautiful thing Like a tulip bending in the wind Sometimes it comes back to us In the form of the hand filled with dust Comes back in the form of a smitten child Our raped daughters The broken bones Souls cleaved of hearts They come back to us Our hands are filled With their rotting tissues But we turn not our backs We press our lips Into their cancer Into the dust Into the remains of each one And that love is there And will greet you Come on in boy It’s eternal love Well here go ahead Run through that plane Oh man running through your mind You took a cat You took a life You took it by the tail And you swirled it around your head And you thrashed it You smashed the life out of it Then you knew that would be your own But you wanted to feel the dying Because you knew You would feel your own You would feel your own But you’re remembered You’re remembered You’re remembered good We remember We remember We remember Everything —for James Folvary LAST CALL In a mansion high the young man stood Ready to join his companions good Outside the scent of magnolia blossoms Down streets of gold the children were racing Just another wandering soul Adrift among the stars Just another human heart Led, led away He put his shoes on and he laid down Outside the clouds were swiftly gathering He drained his cup and he stirred the mixture And he closed his eyes as his conscience whispered Just another wandering soul Adrift among the stars Just another human heart Led, led away Misgivings unspoken he joined his companions His face covered over in a mansion high Outside the children gazed in wonder At the quickening sky then slowly disbanded Thirty-nine wandering souls Adrift among the stars Thirty-nine human hearts Led, led away Last Call His burning skin cooled by angels Swallowing sorrows excretion It’s all excretion Felled by his hand Or the mind of another man Who makes the decisions Lends no provisions for mere eternal rides Learning of course every alien force Even Christ yearns to be To possess the skin And bone the blood of man Who tends the flock Who breaks the bread Who makes his own choices Won’t listen to voices Accept no false teachers False preachers, good deeders With their hands out stretched To be filled with your money Your flesh, your breath Your imagination Sympathy, empathy Acknowledge all man As fellow creation But don’t follow him Don’t be led away GUNG HO by this merit may all obtain omniscience may it defeat the enemy, wrongdoing from the stormy waves of birth, old age, sickness and death from the ocean of samsara may we free all beings —BUDDHIST PRAYER DEDICATING THE MERIT OF ACTION ONE VOICE In the garden of consciousness In fertile mind there lies the dormant seed Blooming into charity Conscience breathes a sigh of relief The confessions of sleep The awakening seed Moved by love to serve We celebrate all merit in life Ah the confessions of sleep Unfolding peace As we extend According to need And you will heed the call All action great and small Received joyfully Heaven abounds Let love resound If he be mute Give him a bell If he be blind an eye If he be down a hand Lift up your voice Lift up your voice Lift up your voice Give of your mind one mind Give of your heart one heart Give of your voice One voice LO AND BEHOLDEN I was alone and content in my world dancing on air you sent to me a message that said I like your style will you come to the temple tonight and dance for me there I pledge to you all that you wish the moon and the stars Lo and beholden why don’t you give it up lo and beholden come on you know it’s true lo and beholden oh I’m beholden to you In the palace there was wild reverie and the look in your eyes as I dropped veil after veil was drunken desire the dove calls God he notes all the naked truth here is my seventh veil and last it will cost you The royal word it has been passed the prophet’s head is all I ask for beauty and the naked truth it will cost you Lo and beholden why don’t you give it up lo and beholden come on you know it’s true lo and beholden oh I’m beholden to you UPRIGHT COME Hail brother the distant thunder is nothing but hearts beating as one dance of a million on God’s pavilion come come beat on your drum Awake people arise awake upright come fortune is falling like tears from the skies open your eyes Hail sister won’t you come over to shape reshape things to come bow your head raise your lantern come come beat on your drum United action is what we need time to say everything is going to be wasted icons wasted lives like war obsolete These are the times the times of our own these are the shapes the world we formed swift is the arrow dark is the thorn the slate is clean the future awaits Awake Boy Cried Wolf BOY CRIED WOLF Oh the story’s told been told retold from the sacred scriptures to the tabloids all the fuss and fight none above a whisper from the soul of gold to the belly of a boy Well they drew him from the forest like they draw blood tied him to a tree like St. Sebastian and he turned his head and let the arrows fly through the trees the trees the ornamental leaves Boy cried wolf wolf don’t come wolf within boy cried wolf In the ancient mold where they’re dancing down calling to the moon but it don’t answer and they fell on their knees and passed the bowl around and the blood the blood the sacramental blood Boy cried wolf wolf don’t come wolf within boy cried wolf I am the body I am the stream I am the wake of everything they bring me flowers that are myself garlands of blood that are myself slain the lamb that is himself I don’t care I don’t mind I don’t know I don’t care I don’t mind I don’t know Torn reborn the cries of our dismay are nothing to the wind but whose to mind kings are lifted up and kings are thrown lost received retrieved the human tide Innocence had its day Innocence had its day Innocence innocence PERSUASION What is the system that gets around recruits hearts with its timeless rhythm the young glow but old men know it’s all a part of some crazy schism Coming on like the dawn unrelenting light streets thick with its radiating it’s all aglow but we all know true love is so complicated Feeling funny don’t know why on a plane circling high equation persuasion it’s just persuasion What is the body that has nobody go through life with nobody at all it come and go where the wind blow when persuasion come to call Got me reeling don’t know why I’m on a plane circling high equation persuasion got the feeling I’m running in place caught in the orbit of the human race equation persuasion it’s just persuasion it’s just persuasion it’s just persuasion What is the body that has nobody what is the rise without the fall what is illusion without beauty what is the system that’s no system at all Hey scout there’s no equation you can’t prepare for the heart’s invasion you can’t prepare for the heart’s invasion love is its own persuasion GONE PIE Hey there come and take a walk with me stroll into infinity we’ll stroll along until the dawn is gone midnight take it to the twilight just a little slice of light let’s turn it off and on off and on Strolling ain’t it wonderful into a light that lingers on and on, on and on Strolling ain’t it wonderful stars fall for we two bathed in a light of our own Oh life much too great to sacrifice come and have another slice ah life goes on and on Oh life may you live a long life may you live a long life may you live a long life CHINA BIRD One fine day these words I pray will breathe a truth within yourself upon a shelf a life anew so many roads it’s hard to know what to do all your dreams all it seems is as you choose for destiny my china bird is calling for you The world turns the flame burns bright and true near and far where you are guiding you china bird the open skies are yearning for you If they say it’s not that way hold your view and with my love fly above alight anew spread your wings the open sky is calling to you china bird my heart is yearning for you If you fly away I’ll be waiting come what may all my love a fragile ray for you for you —in memory of Grant H. Smith GLITTER IN THEIR EYES It’s been a while since I’ve seen your face it’s been a while since I’ve walked this place I see the monkeys riding on their bikes racing through the impossible night You say you’re feeling like a new tree man they’ll cut you from limb to limb pick your pocket with such delight shake it to the right shake it in the light Oh can’t you see the glitter the glitter in their eyes oh can’t you see the glitter the glitter in their eyes Genius stalking in new shoes have you got WTO blues dust of diamonds making you sneeze kids on rollers ready for running through the junkyards breezing through the halls racing through the malls walking through the walls they’ll strip your mind just for fun quoth the raven yum yum yum Oh can’t you see the glitter the glitter in their eyes oh can’t you see the glitter the glitter in their eyes Children children everywhere selling souls for souvenirs sold them out like as not just for chunks of Ankgor Wat They’ll trade you up trade you down your body a commodity our sacred stage has been defaced replaced to grace the marketplace Dow is Jonesing at the bit 42nd Disney Street ragged hearts unraveling look out kids the gleam the gleam all that glitters is not all that glitters is not all that glitters Strange Messengers STRANGE MESSENGERS I looked upon the book of life tracing the lines of face after face looking down at their naked feet bound in chains bound in chains chains of leather chains of gold Men knew it was wrong but we looked away and paraded them down the colonial streets and that’s how they became enslaved They came across on the great ships mothers separated from their babes husbands standing on the auction block bound in chains bound in chains chains of leather chains of gold Men knew it was wrong but they looked away and led them to toil in fields of white as they turned their necks to a bitter landscape Oh the people I hear them calling Am I not a man and a brother Am I not a woman and a sister we will be heard we will be heard History sends us such strange messengers they come down through time to embrace to enrage and in their arms even stranger fruit and they swing from the trees with their vision in flames ropes of leather ropes of gold men knew it was wrong but they looked away messengers swinging from twisted rope as they turned their necks to a bitter landscape GRATEFUL Ours is just another skin that simply slips away you can rise above it it will shed easily Like a ship in a bottle held up to the sun sails ain’t going nowhere you can count every one until it crashes unto the earth and simply slips away you can hide in the open or just disappear Ours is just a craving and a twist of the wrist will undo the stopper with abrupt tenderness die little sparrow and awake singing It all will come out fine I’ve learned it line by line one common wire one silver thread all that you desire rolls on ahead —for Jerry Garcia NEW PARTY You say hey the state of the you-you union is fine fine fine I got the feeling that you’re lying I think we need a new party They say to me they say what’s the word I say it’s thunderbird why don’t you fly fly fly fly away hey and while you’re at it why don’t you fertilize my lawn with what’s running from your mouth hey listen here We got to get off our ass or get burned the worlds troubles are a global concern does your child have fresh water to drink wherever you are wherever you are you’re invited to think about this You say hey the state of the union is fine fine fine I got the feeling that you’re lying lying think we’re gonna need a new party When in the course of human events it becomes necessary to take things in your own hands to take the water from the well and declare it tainted by greed we got to surely clean it up clean our house our inner house our outer house and hey by the way the human event is the party of the century and you’re all invited it’s where you are wherever you are ’cause this party is for everyone and the price of admission is love one another love brother LIBBIE’S SONG If it wasn’t for your golden hair I would not be belonely if it wasn’t for your golden hair I would not be alone If it wasn’t for your piercing stare I would not be belonely if it wasn’t for your piercing stare I would not be alone I would not waltz in a widow’s line danced in black by God’s design what was yours would not be mine if it wasn’t for your golden hair I would not be alone You courted me with princely airs said you’d love me only kiss the ribbons in my hair said darling come and fly Flower of the Calvary you swept me off my saddle lifted me into your life a soldier’s wife was I You proudly marched to the horn I prayed for your swift return I waited for you so forlorn ’Ere to be alone I longed for you, I longed to die I was so belonely the pillow’s bare by my side and yet I shall abide For heaven has aset for me companion for eternity so kiss the ribbons in my hair say darling come and fly If it wasn’t for your golden hair I would not be alonely if it wasn’t for your golden hair I would not be alone —for Libbie Custer GUNG HO On a field of red one gold star raised above his head raised above his head he was not like any other he was just like any other and the song they bled was a hymn to him Awake my little one the seed of revolution sewn in the sleeve of cloth humbly worn where others are adorned Above the northern plain the great birds fly with great wings over the paddy fields and the people kneel and the men they toil yet not for their own and the children are hungry and the wheel groans There before the grass hut a young boy stood his mother lay dead his sisters cried for bread and within his young heart the seed of revolution sewn in cloth humbly worn while others are adorned And he grew into a man not like any other just like any other one small man a beard the color of rice a face the color of tea who shared the misery of other men in chains with shackles on his feet escaped the guillotine Who fought against colonialism imperialism who remained awake when others did not who penned like Jefferson let independence ring and the cart of justice turns slow and bitterly and the people were crying plant that seed that seed and they crawled on their bellies beneath the great beast and filled the carts with bodies where once had been their crops And the great birds swarm spread their wings overhead and his mother dead and the typhoons and the rain the jungles in flames and the orange sun None could be more beautiful than Vietnam nothing was more beautiful than Vietnam And his heart stopped beating and the wheel kept turning and the words he bled were a hymn to them I have served the whole people I have served my whole country and as I leave this world may you suffer union and my great affection limitless as sky filled with golden stars The question is raised raised above his head was he of his word was he a good man for his image fills the southern heart with none but bitterness And the people keep crying and the men keep dying and it’s so beautiful so beautiful give me one more turn give me one more turn one more turn of the wheel One more revolution One more turn of the wheel —for Ho Chi Minh TRAMPIN’ I’m trampin’ trampin’ Try’n-a make heaven my home I’m trampin’ trampin’ Try’n-a make heaven my home I’m trampin’ trampin’ I’ve never been to heaven But I’ve been told Try’n-a make heaven my home That the streets up there Are paved with gold Try’n-a make heaven my home —EDWARD BOATNER JUBILEE Oh glad day to celebrate ’Neath the cloudless sky Air so sweet Water pure Fields ripe with rye Come one, come all Gather ’round Discard your Sunday shoes Come on now Oh my land Be a jubilee Come on girl Come on boy Be a jubilee Oh my land Oh my good People don’t be shy Weave the birth of harmony With children’s happy cries Hand in hand We’re dancing ’round In a freedom ring Come on now Oh my land Be a jubilee Come on girl Come on boy Be a jubilee We will never fade away Doves shall multiply Yet I see hawks circling the sky Scattering our glad day With debt and despair What good hour Will restore our troubled air? Come on people Gather ’round You know what to do Come on people Oh my land What be troubling Oh my land What be troubling What be troubling What be troubling you We are love and the future We stand in the midst of fury and weariness Who dreams of joy and radiance? Who dreams of war and sacrifice? Our sacred realms are being squeezed Curtailing civil liberties Recruit the dreams that sing for thee Let freedom ring Oh glad day MOTHER ROSE Mother rose Every little morn’ To tend to me There she stood Waiting by the door Selflessly Took my hand Took it with a smile tenderly Mother rose Every little morn’ To tend to me Now’s the time To turn the view Now that I have you And I’ll rise Every little morn’ To tend to thee When you rise Open up your eyes You will see There I’ll be Waiting by the door Come to me Take my hand Look into your heart There I’ll be Now’s the time To turn the view Now that I have you Roses growing by my door Climbing up the vine All the thorns and pain obscured Roses shall divine Where we feel no pain And the love inside Where roses climb Roses shall divine Roses shall divine Holy mother Mother of gold Mother with stories Told and retold She felt our tears Heard our sighs And turned to gold Before our eyes She rose into the light She rose into the light She rose into the light —for Beverly Williams Smith STRIDE OF THE MIND I took a walk out to the sun But I just, just couldn’t take it I followed a dream It was circular But I just, just could not fake it Step to the left the left the left Step to the right the right the right Pick up the sign the sign the sign For a stride of the mind the mind the mind Simon of the desert Blew into town On the scalding tail Of a bright cold wind Slipped through the sand Footprints emerged Where no one was walking Simon had been Dropped from heaven To a ready made world Said I’m no Sufi But I’ll give it a whirl We booked passage On the Book of the Dead Time to travel Simon said Step to the left the left the left Step to the right the right the right Pick up the sign the sign the sign Oh the stride of the mind the mind the mind Come on move where dreams increase Where every man is a masterpiece If you want to be counted As another kind And you’re true, pursue Stride of the mind the mind the mind Stride of the mind the mind the mind He bowed three times Removed his fez Pointed to heaven And Simon says The mind the mind the mind Pick up the sign the mind the mind It’s a vertical climb the climb the climb Stride of the mind the mind the mind Pick up the sign the sign the sign It’s a vertical climb the climb Take it in stride CARTWHEELS Come my one look at the world Bird beast butterfly Girls sing notes of heaven Birds lift them up to the sky Spring is departing Spring is departing Your thoughts Are darting like a rabbit Like a rabbit cross the moon Shining a light over your hair As boys croon Pretty in pink It makes me wonder What could ever Bring you down I see tears falling From those eyes of brown Hearing a voice, You turn your head You vanish, vanish Into the mist Of your thoughts And I want to grasp What brings you down The world is changing Your heart is growing Open those eyes of brown Hearing a voice you turn your head Girls turn by ones, by twos Notes pour, glad and tender To eradicate your blues The good world, the good world The good whirl, the good whirl Come my one, look at the world Bird beast butterfly Girls sing notes from heaven Birds lift them up to the sky I see brown eyes That see girls turning Cartwheels cartwheels I see brown eyes I see a girl turning Cartwheels, cartwheels —for Jesse Paris Smith PEACEABLE KINGDOM Yesterday I saw you standing there With your hand against the pane Looking out the window at the rain And I wanted to tell you That your tears were not in vain But I guess we both knew We’d never be the same Never be the same Why must we hide all these feelings inside? Lions and lambs shall abide Maybe one day we’ll be strong enough To build it back again Build the peaceable kingdom Back again Build it back again Why must we hide all these feelings inside? Lions and lambs shall abide Maybe one day we’ll be strong enough To build it back again Build the peaceable kingdom Build it back again —for Rachel Corey GANDHI I had a dream Mr. King If you’ll beg my pardon I was trespassing A sacred garden And the blossoms fell And they dropped like candy And nature cried Gandhi Gandhi And nature cried Gandhi Gandhi When he was a boy He was afraid of the dark His mother would fast And pray at his feet And the lamp burned as he slept Burned as he dreamed He was dreaming of his sisters Dressed in white muslin Dancing in a ring He was afraid of the dark And the lamp burned Dreaming of blossoms They were burning his throat He had eaten flowers Flowers fell burning From the young girls’ hair He was whispering Into his god’s ear Let the children be so And the lamplight flickered flickered And his mother withered like Job And he lay there dreaming And the blossoms fell And Tilak’s trumpet Proceeded to call And the blossoms fell And they dropped like candy And the people cried Gandhi Gandhi He was frail and shy And the cast of his mind Was mercurial As the sacred verbs Scrawled in the dust On the floor, on the floor Long live revolution And the spinning wheel And a handful of salt The untouchables Dropped like candy They called to him Gandhi Gandhi Feel our woes man of the giving Rejoin the living Rejoin the living Awake from the net Where you’ve been sleeping And climbing climbing The flowing hair And the golden flowers Of the young girls Awake little man Awake from your slumber And get ’em with the numbers Get ’em with the numbers One / Two / Three Four hundred thousand million people People / People / People Awaken from your slumber Long live revolution And the spinning wheel Awake awake Is the mighty appeal Oh, people awake Awake from your slumber And get ’em with the numbers Get ’em with the numbers I had a dream Mr. King If you’ll beg my pardon I was trespassing The sacred garden And the blossoms fell Dropped like candy And nature called Gandhi Gandhi Gandhi Gandhi Awake from your slumber And get ’em with the numbers Trespasses, 2004 TRESPASSES Life is designed With unfinished lines That another sings Each story unfolds Like it was gold Upon a ragged wing The bold and the fair Suffer their share He whispered to his kin All of my debts Left with regrets I’m sorry for everything And she pinned back her hair Shouldered with care The burdens that were his Mending the coat That hung on the post In heart remembering Trespasses stretch Like brown fences Winding as they may Trespasses stretch Like broken fences Hope to mend them one day And her time was to come Called to her son This your song to sing All of our debts Wove with regrets Upon a golden string And he found the old coat Hung on a post Like a ragged wing And took as his own The sewn and unsown Joyfully whistling Trespasses stretch Like broken fences Winding as they may Trespasses stretch Like broken fences Hope to mend them one day IN MY BLAKEAN YEAR In my Blakean year I was so disposed Toward a mission yet unclear Advancing pole by pole Fortune breathed into my ear Mouthed a simple ode One road is paved in gold One road is just a road In my Blakean year Such a woeful schism The pain of our existence Was not as I envisioned Boots that trudged From track to track Worn down to the sole One road was paved in gold One road was just a road In my Blakean year Temptation but a hiss Just a shallow spear Robed in cowardice Brace yourself For bitter flack For a life sublime A labyrinth of riches Never shall unwind The threads that bind The pilgrim’s sack Are stitched Into the Blakean back So throw off your stupid cloak Embrace all that you fear For joy shall conquer all despair In my Blakean year In my Blakean year In my Blakean year In My Blakean Year CASH Here we go around again Curve of life spiraling Everything we’ve ever known As the seed of life gets blown And the miracle of time When will that time just end Remember, you decide Take that vow Grab that ring It’s not a whim Not a whim When you be cashing in Try to turn your life around And all the things you do resound And then you can’t loose control Say your time has come and then Hard to pinpoint find the seam Where that one time ends Where that time begins Remember, you decide Take that vow Take a stand Grab that ring It’s not a whim It’s not a whim It’s only time That you’re cashing in In the white noise of desire We can’t hear a single thing Floating ’round the fragile bough Afflictions of the human soul Its beauty immaterial You decide Stand among the fallen ones Take revenge defeated sons Rend that coat From seam to seam It’s only time It’s only time That you spend You spend It’s only life That you’re cashing in RADIO BAGHDAD Suffer not Your neighbor’s affliction Suffer not Your neighbor’s paralysis But extend your hand Extend your hand Lest you vanish in the city And be but a trace Just a vanished ghost And your legacy All the things you knew Science, mathematics, thought Severely weakened Like irrigation systems In the tired veins forming The Tigris and Euphrates In the realm of peace All the world revolved All the world revolved Around a perfect circle City of Baghdad City of scholars Empirical humble Center of the world City in ashes City of Baghdad City of Baghdad Abrasive aloof Oh, in Mesopotamia Aloofness ran deep Deep in the veins of the great rivers That form the base of Eden And the tree of knowledge Held up its arms to the sky All the branches of knowledge All the branches of knowledge Cradling Civilization In the realm of peace All the world revolved Around a perfect circle Oh Baghdad Center of the world City of ashes With its great mosques Erupting from the mouth of god Rising from the ashes like a speckled bird Splayed against the mosaic sky We created the zero But we mean nothing to you You would believe That we are just some mystical tale We are just a swollen belly That gave birth to Sinbad, Scheherazade We gave birth to the zero The perfect number We invented the zero And we mean nothing to you Our children run through the streets And you sent your flames Your shooting stars Shock and awe Shock and awe Like some, some Imagined warrior production Twenty-first century No chivalry involved No Bushido Oh, the code of the West Long gone never been Where does it lie? You came, you came Through the west Annihilated a people And you come to us But we are older than you You wanna come And rob the cradle Of civilization And you read Genesis You read of the tree You read of the tree Beget by god That raised its branches into the sky Every branch of knowledge In the cradle of civilization Of the banks of the Tigris And the Euphrates Oh, in Mesopotamia Aloofness ran deep The face of Eve turning What sky did she see What garden beneath her feet The one you drill Pulling the blood of the earth Little droplets of oil for bracelets Little jewels sapphires You make bracelets ’Round your own world We are weeping tears rubies We offer them to you We are just Your Arabian nightmare We invented the zero But we mean nothing to you Your Arabian nightmare City of stars City of scholarship Science City of ideas City of light City of ashes That the great Caliph Walked through His naked feet formed a circle And they built a city A perfect city of Baghdad In the realm of peace And all the world revolved And they mean nothing to you Nothing to you Nothing Go to sleep my child Go to sleep And I’ll sing you a lullaby A lullaby for our city A lullaby of Baghdad Go to sleep Sleep my child Sleep sleep sleep Run run run You sent your lights Your bombs You sent them down on our city Shock and awe Like some crazy t.v. show They’re robbing the cradle of civilization They’re robbing the cradle of civilization They’re robbing the cradle of civilization Suffer not the paralysis of your neighbor Suffer not but extend your hand BANGA Believe or Explode AMERIGO We were going to see the world In this land we placed baptismal fonts And an infinite number were baptized And they called us Caribe Which means men of great wisdom Where are you going? And are you going anywhere? Where are we going? Send me a letter If you go at all Ah the salvation of souls But wisdom we had not For these people had neither king nor lord And bowed to no one For they have lived in their own liberty Where are you going? And are you going anywhere? Going in circles, going in circles anywhere I saw and knew the inconstant shifting of fortune And now I write to you Words that have not been written Words from the New World Tracing the circles Moving across my eyes Lying on the ship And gazing at the western sky Tracing lazy circles in the sky Hey—wake up!—wake up! Where are you going? And are you going anywhere? Where are you going? Send me a letter If you go at all It’s such a delight to watch them dance Free of sacrifice and romance Free of all the things that we hold dear Is that clear Your Excellency? And I guess it’s time to go but I gotta send you just a few more lines From the New World Tracing the circles Moving across my eyes Lying on the ship And gazing at the western sky Tracing lazy circles in the sky And the sky opened And we laid down our armor And we danced naked as they Baptized in the rain Of the New World. APRIL FOOL Come be my April Fool Come you’re the only one Come on your rusted bike Come we’ll break all the rules We’ll ride like writers ride Neither rich nor broke We’ll race through alleyways In our tattered cloaks so Come be my April Fool Come we’ll break all the rules We’ll burn all of our poems Add to God’s debris We’ll pray to all of our saints Icons of mystery We’ll tramp through the mire When our souls feel dead With laughter we’ll inspire Then back to life again Come you’re the only one Come be my April Fool Come Come Be my April Fool We’ll break all the rules FUJI-SAN Oh mountain of our eyes What do you see? The girl with the almond eyes Bowing to thee Immortal soldiers Clear the path Shake the almond tree Oh mountain of our eyes Oh hear our plea Oh hear our plea See the five finger lakes Like a hand in blue Climbing sideways up the pure To get a glimpse of you To get a glimpse of you The great lake The white shirt Your white cloak Divine divine Oh mountain Of mine Oh Fuji-San We’re climbing Into the blue Into the mist Into the bright Into your light Oh mountain of our eyes We’re calling you Will you hear our cries? What will a poor boy do? What will a poor girl do? Hey! We’re calling to you Oh Fuji-San Oh Fuji-San Oh Fuji-San Oh mountain of our eyes What do you see? The girl with the almond eyes Shaking her tree Shake the almond tree THIS IS THE GIRL This is the girl for whom all tears fall This is the girl who was having a ball Just a dark smear masking the eyes Spirited away buried in sighs. This is the girl who crossed the line This is the song of the smothering vine Twisted a laurel to crown her head Laid as a wreath upon her bed. This is the blood that turned into wine This is the wine of the house it is said This is the girl who yearned to be heard So much for cradling a smothering bird This is the girl. This is the girl. This is the girl for whom all tears fall This is the girl who was having a ball This is the laurel to crown her head This is the wine of the house it is said. This is the blood that turned into wine This is the wine of the house it is said This is the girl who cried to be heard So much for cradling a smothering bird This is the girl. This is the girl. —for Amy Winehouse TARKOVSKY The eternal sun runs to the mother She smoothes his brow and bids him Drink from her well of hammered mist Come along sweet lad, fog rises from the ground The falling soot is just the dust of a shivering gem The black moon shines on a lake White as a hand in the dark She lifts the lamp to see his face The silver ladle of his throat The boy the beast and the butterfly The sea is a morgue, the needle and the gun These things float in blood that has no name The telegraph poles are crosses on the line Rusted pins not enough saviors to hang She blesses the road the noose of vine And waits beneath the triangle Formed by Mercury, an evening star The fifth planet, with its blistering core And the soaring eagle above and to the west The boy the beast and the butterfly She walks across a bridge of magpies Her hollow tongue fills the brightness With water and in the wink of an eye One planet with a glittering womb One white crow one diamond head Big as a world big as a world Don’t forget how I played with you She cries, and kissed away your tears The white mouth of the sun smiles On his beautiful tongue the seed of flight MOSAIC Last night in Konya A voice carried me To the pulpit of the arrow Did you hear it too? The oracle was written On a silver leaf Last night I read the words Did you read them too? Precious heart, precious seed Precious life conceived In a ring of fire In a sleep of peace Nothing stops desire For the human beat Last night was a rapture In the mosaic sky Dropping shards of love Dropping shards of love Precious heart, precious seed Precious life conceived In a ring of fire In a sleep of peace Nothing stops desire For the human beat I hunger for the cooling flame I hunger for the infinite game Last night in Konya A voice carried me To the pulpit of the arrow Did you hear it too? The oracle was written On a silver leaf Last night I read the words Did you read them too? Devour me, ah, devour me Oh precious life Oh precious seed Oh precious heart That beats In a ring of fire In a sleep of peace Nothing stops The human beat The human beat MARIA At the edge of the world Where you were no one Yet you were the girl The only one At the edge of the world In the desert heat One shivering star Sweet indiscreet I knew you When we were young I knew you Now you’re gone In a little Narcissus pool Drawn by its spell We saw ourselves Raw excitable I knew you When we were young I knew you Now you’re gone We didn’t know The precariousness of our young powers All the emptiness Wild wild hair Sad sad eyes White shirt / black tie You were mine You grabbed the ring Of the carousel Tangoing From Heaven To Hell I knew you —for Maria Schneider NINE Night a nine of diamonds A woman lay and cries At the Sister of Mercy On the Sabbath day Night a nine of diamonds As revelers commence To shiver as she bore In a babe, a radiance Brave in constant motion Wherein perfection brews Darkness as his brother Mischief as his moon Summoning beneath With his gypsy moves Yearning as the foal Shy and beautiful Every card he drew Had a different face Lingering and lost Unholy holy ghosts I tend to play them all He spoke with confidence Another kind of strange To shift in loneliness He sought not for himself The empire he would find Save the golden womb He enters in his mind We will die a little The rogues whistling Nine blue-eyed sailors Tip their caps to him As he passes through them More vagabond than king With diamonds on his sleeves Like a harlequin —for John Christopher Depp THE WING CHILD O chariot of insect O crown of wind Two royal leopards Run with him On a golden lead Of tapered vine O the blood sky O the blood sky Wine of a God Coupling wild O golden seed Who made the Winged child SENECA Run, run my little one Run out to sea Run, run my little one What do you seek? The canvas is high The scheme of a life Written in the wind The pen, the knife Run, run my little one Breathe a hymn to Him Breathe my little one The master is calling If you were his eyes If you were his dreams The whole of the sky Could not contain you So run, run out to sea Run, run my little one Breathe a hymn For Him For thee —for Seneca Sebring BANGA Loyalty rests in the heart of a dog Don’t sell all your eggs on the back of a frog You can lick it twice but it won’t lick you And salivating salvation long so long so Loyalty lives and we don’t know why And the paw is pressed against the nerve of the sky You can leave him behind but he won’t leave you And the road to Heaven is true—true blue Banga / Say—Banga Loyalty lives and we don’t know why And his paws are pressed to the spine of the sky You can leave him twice, but he won’t leave you And the way to Heaven is true—true blue Banga / Say—Banga Loneliness lifts when you open the night Pilate awaits, as Jesus Christ Forget him not—won’t forget about you The way to Heaven is blue—boo hoo Banga / Say—Banga Loyalty shifts if you carry a load Ah, don’t shit it out in a golden commode You can kick him twice—it’ll erode Night is a mongrel—believe or explode CONSTANTINE’S DREAM In Arezzo I dreamed a dream Of St. Francis who kneeled and prayed For the birds and the beasts and all humankind All through the night I felt drawn in by him And I heard him call Like a distant hymn I retreated from the silence of my room Stepping down the ancient stones washed with dawn And entered the basilica that bore his name Seeing his effigy I bowed my head And my racing heart I gave to him I kneeled and prayed And the sleep that I could not find in the night I found through him I saw before me the world of his world The bright field, the birds in abundance, All of nature of which he sang Singing of him All the beauty that surrounded him as he walked His nature that was nature itself And I heard him—I heard him speak And the birds sang sweetly And the wolves licked his feet. But I could not give myself to him. I felt another call from the basilica itself The call of art—the call of man And the beauty of the material drew me away. And I awoke, and beheld upon the wall The dream of Constantine The handiwork of Piero della Francesca Who had stood where I stood And with his brush stroked the legend of the True Cross He envisioned Constantine advancing to greet the enemy But as he was passing the river An unaccustomed fear gripped his bowels An anticipation so overwhelming that it manifested in waves. All thru the night a dream drew toward him As an advancing Crusade He slept in his tent on the battlefield While his men stood guard. And an angel awoke him Constantine within his dream awoke And his men saw a light pass over the face of the King The troubled King And the angel came and showed to him The sign of the true cross in heaven. And upon it was written In this sign shall thou conquer In the distance the tents of his army were lit by moonlight But another kind of radiance lit the face of Constantine And in the morning light The artist, seeing his work was done, Saw it was good. In this sign shall thou conquer He let his brush drop and passed into a sleep of his own. And he dreamed of Constantine carrying into battle in his right hand An immaculate, undefiled single white Cross. Piero della Francesca, as his brush stroked the wall Was filled with a torpor And fell into a dream of his own. From the geometry of his heart he mapped it out He saw the King rise, fitted with armor Set upon a white horse An immaculate cross in his right hand. He advanced toward the enemy And the symmetry, the perfection of his mathematics Caused the scattering of the enemy Agitated, broken, they fled. And Piero della Francesa waking, cried out All is art—all is future! Oh Lord let me die on the back of adventure With a brush and an eye full of light But as he advanced in age The light was shorn from his eyes And blinded, he laid upon his bed On an October morning in 1492, and whispered Oh Lord let me die on the back of adventure Oh Lord let me die on the back of adventure And a world away—a world away On three great ships Adventure itself as if to answer Pulling into the New World And as far as his eyes could see No longer blind All of nature unspoiled—beautiful—beautiful And such a manner that would have lifted The heart of St. Francis Into the realm of universal love Columbus stepped foot on the New World And witnessed beauty unspoiled All the delights given by God As if Eden had opened her heart to him And opened her dress And all of her fruit gave to him And Columbus so overwhelmed Fell into a sleep of his own All the world filled his sleep All of the beauty entwined with the future The twenty-first century Advancing like the angel that had come To Constantine Constantine in his dream Oh this is your cross to bear Oh Lord Oh Lord let me deliver Hallowed adventure to all mankind In the future Oh art cried the painter Oh art—Oh art—cried the angel Art the great material gift of man Art that hath denied The humble pleas of St. Francis Oh thou Artist All shall crumble Into dust Oh thou navigator The terrible end of man This is your gift to mankind This is your cross to bear And Columbus Saw all of nature aflame The apocalyptic night And the dream Of the troubled King Dissolved into light. FUTURE AND FILM It Takes Time IT TAKES TIME No equation to explain the division of the senses No sound to reflect the radiance of time In the beginning is dream halls of disorder Where we are swept to encircle dawn Strapped in a low car racing Thru silence trumpeting bliss You could kiss the world goodbye Standing outside the courthouse in the rain Seemed like a lost soul from the chapel of dreams With a handful of images Faces of children phases of the moon One little thing you get wrong changes The dimensions streets, swept memory Diffused and lost like a prayer in the sun Sometimes you can’t tell Whether you’re waking up or going to sleep Spiraling unnumbered streets All the games cannot be yours All the sights, the treasures of the eye Does the divided soul remain the same? No equation to explain Destiny’s hand moved, by love Drawn by the whispering shadows Into the mathematics of our desire —for Wim Wenders’s film To the End of the World MERMAID SONG Do you remember me The ocean rolled Time was slow We felt an energy The cock was crowing The rum was flowing A mermaid burns to see Beyond the sea And if I could Turn where you stood Would you feel me Would it be good Would you remember So turn the little key The ocean rolls Time is slow Turn the little key The cock is crowing The rum is flowing A mermaid burns to see Beyond the sea I long to see I long to see If there’s a page for me Do you remember me The ocean rolled Time was slow We felt an energy The cock was crowing The rum was flowing A mermaid burns to see Beyond the sea I long to see I long to see If there is a page for me A page for me In your diary. —for the film Rum Diary CAPITOL LETTER Rebellion is a heart breaking as the dawn bursting into song bursting into song A bird in the hand another role to play mocking as the jay mocking as the jay She’s the silent one in her soft boots racing thru the flames racing thru the flames She’s the silent one in her soft boots drawing her bow and her only truth Rebellion is an arrow wired to the sun igniting everyone igniting everyone A bird in the hand another role to play mocking as the jay mocking as the jay She’s the silent one in her soft boots drawing her bow and her only truth Racing thru the flames in her soft boots mocking as the jay and she be mocking you —for the film Hunger Games: Catching Fire JUST KIDS Wake up Come—take my hand Truth was like a dictionary Urgent and sublime We shook ourselves Into the light Like washing on a line Like a gleaming sari In the Indian wind Wrapped in one another Where pure hearts are kin We ventured to the city To the Chelsea Hotel A place to lay our heads A bit of heaven in hell Entered the halls Of our new university They gave all the keys to you And you offered them to me In the blue night You were bluer still Your ankles tattooed with stars We were so hungry We could not sleep And another hunger ensued And we called out to Morpheus To spread his cloak On the world of our ways You walked without fear Toward the golden ladder And I watched you Climb rung by rung Toward another kind of sun And I went for another cup It ran all over my dress And you drank it up Life to life Scene to scene Fortune’s strife Dream upon dream Love was love Art was art Comingling in the heart Kids Just kids MERCY IS Mercy is as mercy does Wandering the wild The stars are eyes watching you A breath upon a cloud Two white doves Two white wings To carry you away To a land in memory A land in memory The sky is high The earth is green And cool below your feet So swiftly now Beneath the bough Your father waits for thee To wrap you in His healing arms As the night sky weeps For mercy is the healing wind That whispers as you sleep That whispers you to sleep. —for the film Noah QANA There’s no one In the village Not a human Nor a stone There’s no one In the village Children are gone And a mother rocks Herself to sleep Let it come down Let her weep The dead lay in strange shapes Some stay buried Others crawl free Baby didn’t make it Screaming debris And a mother rocks Herself to sleep Let it come down Let her weep The dead lay in strange shapes Limp little dolls Caked in mud Small, small hands Found in the road They’re talking about War aims What a phrase Bombs that fall American made The new middle east The rice woman squeaks The dead lay in strange shapes Little bodies Little bodies Tied head and feet Wrapped in plastic Laid out in the street The new middle east The rice woman squeaks The dead lay in strange shapes Water to wine Wine to blood Ahh qana The miracle Is love WITHOUT CHAINS Five long years was I a man dreaming in chains with the lights on five long years nothing to say thoughts impure at Guantanamo Bay Now I’m learning to walk without chains I’m learning to walk without chains without chains Born in Bremen played guitar a young apprentice building ships loved and married heard the call is attaining wisdom a pursuit of fools? Journeyed to Pakistan to study Koran taken in custody no reason why then a prison camp no freedom to breathe branded an enemy an enemy No fault was found yet do they believe then flown home a version of free chained to the floor muzzled and bound a last humiliation left to endure They say I walk strange well that may be so it’s been a long time since I walked at all Now I’m learning to walk without chains to talk without chains to breathe without chains to pray without chains to live without chains to love without chains without chains —for Murat Kunaz CHILD 13 Child 13 his father gone Saw Jupiter ride All the things His father had known Abided within him Charity boy charity boy You live you give You groan you’ve grown My heart’s a stone Your heart’s a throne Child 13 dreamed He and his father did ride The beaten track The unbeaten track The uncharted sky His radiant face Felt his father’s eyes cry Clarity boy, charity boy You live, you give You groan, you’ve grown My heart’s a stone Your heart’s a throne In your hand a wand A pen to pen The physician within I held you in my arms I held you in my arms I cradled you in my arms BURNING ROSES Father I am burning roses father only God shall know what the secret heart discloses the ancient dances with the doe Father I have sorely wounded father I shall wound no more I have waltzed among the thorns where roses burn upon the floor Daughter may you turn in laughter a candle dreams a candle draws the heart that burns shall burn thereafter may you turn as roses fall MARIGOLD He had a face of long ago driven and strange with sad, sad eyes and a smile to raise paradise She tended her flock upon a hill watched him from a place above obscured by light, blushing gold The heart is its own, yet not as god plans and ne’er will she know so fine a man Providence speaks another tongue he traced the path of star and sun and caught the eyes of the beguiled one Through field and flower the poor girl fled she raised her face her bonnet slid he traced the path of star and sun signs that marked the beguiled one Faith has a flair divining good her bonnet swept where he stood he smoothed it out with his healing hand and made his way into the cold, cold wind The heart is its own, yet not as god plans and ne’er will she know so fine a man THE PRIDE MOVES SLOWLY I heard you crying in your sleep and stood above your contour there I saw the moon behind your ear wrists as mine, my mother’s hair I saw you with your father’s arms and so possess his blades, protruding like small wings I thought I’d never see again The lamp of his boyhood glows, the pride moves slowly as in a dream. Circling the shade’s lucent plain Bequeathed with certain calm, the outline of their forms diffuse as memories stream sown in sadness, sleep A WOMAN’S STORY She stepped out from the caravan Draped in white by attendants round And a black top hat veiled in lace And read the faces she laid down She sang in her sleep A woman’s story Just a diviner shuffling time An image of a girl in a wedding gown And her king his mane a crown And she sang in her sleep A woman’s story And the faces divined Were their own She raced through the hall Like a young gazelle Climbing the twilight painted sky He drew her with a silken prayer Into the calmness of his lair And a garland of rubies for her hair They drank from a cup never known And her soul and his soul were as one And they lie in their bed as ordained Wrapped in an emerald sea of dreams And she lifted her pale limbs To the sadness of horns Sounding him And he died in her bed Like a swallow Beating to go home But he just gave up And fell thru the sky Like an arrow Thru the night Thru the infinite And she sang in her sleep A woman’s story And the faces divined Were their own And her golden eyes sought An emptiness The twilight painted sky Ruled by him And to her life’s Only bliss She returned Like a lioness LAUGHARNE It was the town of Laugharne Behind a gate of stone The Merlin ring Another winding wall Where the voices find A triangle of vine He limped into town A three-legged dog Struck by lines Infusing the air Mighty charms Tossed carelessly It’s not the rock, the rock It’s not the dome, the dome It’s not the wall, the wall It’s just a wall that’s all It was a tad unnatural And his kingdom came Through the moaning trees New Jerusalem The lamb but a babe Stood by Raphael And the summer man Bared his hairy soul Through mythology Through the mystic fire The way of prophecy Is not the grail, the grail Is not the bow, the bow Is not the wall, the wall It’s just a wall, that’s all Ah, but give me a whirl Come from this and that You drop in my heart Just a linear tale Clarity revealed To a three-legged dog In the town of Laugharne The new Jerusalem With its solemn pines And the small small homes And an energy Uncontained contained It’s not the rock, the rock It’s not the grail, the grail It’s not the wall, the wall It’s just a wall, that’s all THE WRITER’S SONG I laid my mat among the reeds I could hear the freemen call oh my life what does it matter will the reed cease bending will the leper turn I had a horn I did not blow I had a sake and another I could hear the freemen drunk with sky what matter my cry will the moon swell will the flame shy Banzai banzai it is better to write then die In the blue crater set with straw I could hear the freemen call the way is hard the gate is narrow what matter I say with the new mown hay my pillow I had a sake and another I did not care to own nor rove I wrote my name upon the water nothing but nothing above Banzai banzai it is better to write then die A thousand prayers and souvenirs set away in earthenware we draw the jars from the shelves drink our parting from ourselves So be we king or be we bum the reed still whistles the heart still hums The Writer’s Song Acknowledgments The lyrics in this book are the result of four decades of collaboration. With the exception of a handful of my own songs, all of the music has been written or cowritten by these musicians: Lenny Kaye, Ivan Kral, Richard Sohl, Jay Dee Daugherty, Allen Lanier, Oliver Ray, Tom Verlaine, Bruce Springsteen, Fred Sonic Smith, Jesse Paris Smith, and Tony Shanahan. My grateful appreciation to Gabriella Doob and Suet Chong. Royal image: © Oliver Ray. Horses cover image: © Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation, Inc. Used with permission. Dalai Lama: courtesy of Tibet Image Bank. Handwritten lyrics and prayer shawl image, here, reprinted from the author’s personal archives. Bloomsbury Publishing An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 1385 Broadway 50 Bedford Square New York London NY 10018 WC1B 3DP USA UK www.bloomsbury.com BLOOMSBURY and the Diana logo are trademarks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc This electronic edition published in 2015 by Bloomsbury Publishing Plc First published in the USA in 1998 as Patti Smith Complete by Doubleday, New York This revised, updated and expanded edition published in Great Britain 2015 © Patti Smith, 1998, 2006, 2015 ‘Because the Night’ © 1978 by Bruce Springsteen and Patti Smith. ‘Trampin’’ arranged by Edward Boatner Patti Smith has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as Author of this work. Photographs are from the author’s personal collection except where credited otherwise. All rights reserved You may not copy, distribute, transmit, reproduce or otherwise make available this publication (or any part of it) in any form, or by any means (including without limitation electronic, digital, optical, mechanical, photocopying, printing, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author. British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. ePub: 978-1-4088-6302-2 To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com. Here you will find extracts, author interviews, details of forthcoming events and the option to sign up for our newsletters. Copyright First published in the United States in 2000 by The Overlook Press, Peter Mayer Publishers, Inc. 141 Wooster St New York NY 10012 www.overlookpress.com Copyright © 2000 by Robert Lax All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to be invented without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages in connection with a review written for inclusion in a magazine, newspaper, or broadcast. ISBN 978-1-46830-766-5 To Bernhard Moosbrugger and Gladys and Tessa Weigner with thanks and love and to the memory of my sister Gladys Lax Marcus ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Grateful acknowledgment for their support, advice, and friendship to Peter Mayer and Tracy Carns of The Overlook Press; to Robert Wickenheiser, Paul Spaeth, and Barbara Carr of St. Bonaventure University; and to Michael and Rebecca Daugherty, Judith Emery, Cammy Brothers, Marcia Kelly, and Connie Brothers. Contents Copyright Dedication Acknowledgments Introduction Circus of the Sun Morning The Morning Stars Afternoon Acrobat’s Song Penelope and Mogador Ortans La Louisa Evening The Dust of the Earth The Midway Snake Charmer Dog Act Colonel Angus Night Acrobat About to Enter Rastelli Mogador’s Book Voyage to Pescara The Juggler A Lover of Cats Fritzist The Devils Children Circus at Twilight W INTRODUCTION henever the circus would arrive in town (in those days by train), there was usually a small boy who had been brought to the station by his father to witness and experience the event. The town was Olean, in southwestern New York State, and the small boy was Robert Lax. The circus presented the chance for the two to meet new people and to see them perform acts of daring, humorous acts, and acts filled with beauty and grace. But most of all, for the father and for the child, the circus filled them with a sense of awe at the wonderful thing that was coming into their town. Robert Lax never lost that sense of wonder whenever he was around a circus. He went to see these wandering caravans of performers as often as he could, long after he had ceased being a child (at least as far as physical age went). It was in 1943, when Lax was twenty-seven years old, that he first met the family of circus performers that were to become the centerpiece of both Circus of the Sun and Mogador’s Book. When Lax’s friend Leonard Robinson was sent to write a short piece on the Cristiani family for the “Talk of the Town” section of The New Yorker (“Waiting for Lucio,” v. 19, no. 16, June 5, 1943, p.15–16) he took Bob with him. Bob got along well with the family members. So well, in fact, that he kept in touch with them from that point on. But a special friendship was struck up between himself and Mogador Cristiani, the handsome acrobat/equestrian son who handled the family affairs. Ten years later Lax wrote his own article on the family for Jubilee magazine (“The Incomparable Cristianis,” v. 1, no. 1, May 1953, p. 52–55). In the decade in between, Lax not only corresponded and visited the family, but also traveled with them during the summer of 1949 through western Canada. Mark Van Doren wrote, concerning this time: He [Lax] talked more and more about the circus—a small one named for the Cristiani brothers who performed most of its acts—which he had adopted as a multiple and ever moving friend. He followed it one year to Canada, writing me from there about the unearthly sweetness and grace of the people who had taken him in as a poet and philosopher without portfolio. He spoke particuliarly of Mogador, a bare-back rider whose father, Papa Cristiani, had named him for the place in North Africa where he happened to be born. (Voyages, v. 2, nos. 1–2, 1968, p. 62–64) During his travels with the family, Lax occasionally let himself be made up as a clown. He used the name “Chesko.” In an unpublished remembrance, he writes of one such occasion: I walked around the ring. I hardly looked up at the crowd at all at first. Then I looked a little, scanning through the sea of faces for one familiar, for one that was watching me. When I found a pair of eyes watching me, I watched them back, watched and waited, waited for anything. When they changed, I changed. If they smiled, I looked quizzical; if they looked angry, I looked shocked. If a child put both hands to his ears and waggled, I’d make a face at him and walk away. Sometimes I layed down in the track ... singling out a beautiful lady in the grandstands, or the fair flower she wore at her shoulder, looking at her wistfully, thinking, and not thinking, of all the dreams of romance. Lady, I am a beggar at the door of your castle. Your beauty has smitten me through the eyes and to the heart. You are Eleanor of Navarre and I am a troubadour. She laughs. I pick myself up slowly, Brush myself off, with a distracted gesture. I walk away looking back sadly at the fair flower on her shoulder. In an interview in New York Quarterly (no. 30, 1986), Lax talked about the need to be immersed in life in some way in order to be able to write poetry. Although he had known the Cristianis for a number of years, the experience of traveling with the family provided the necessary impetus to bring to conception a series of poems and remembrances of the family. But it was in that same interview that Lax also spoke of the need to withdraw, “at least enough to sit quietly and write.” When Lax did withdraw in order to set to work on the group of poems which became Circus of the Sun, he had already filled up a portion of a composition notebook with thoughts about Mogador and the Cristianis. It was in the spring of 1950 that the text of Circus of the Sun was actually composed. This was done for the most part in a room in the lower level of the library of St. Bonaventure University (a place that now houses the largest archival collection of his work to be found anywhere). Lax was comfortable on the campus, for he had been coming to it for many years. He had not come to take courses, but rather to talk to the Franciscan friars and to use the library. The advice given to him by one of the friars was to write at the same time and in the same place each day. Lax followed that advice. After finishing the text of Circus of the Sun, Lax made preparations for a trip to France. Before leaving, he showed the text to a number of friends. Of those friends it was Robert Butman, whom Lax had first met years before at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, who helped most with the process of editing. But it was almost ten years before the complete version of Circus of the Sun was finally published. In talking about Lax, Mark Van Doren has said, “His chief secret ... was a sort of bliss he could do nothing about. Least of all could he express it.” If Lax did express this bliss anywhere in his writings, I think it comes out most clearly in Circus of the Sun. Circus of the Sun is a blending of devotional poetry, in the Catholic tradition, with the eye of a journalist and the delight of a child. I use the term “journalist” in the sense of being a reporter but also in the sense of one who keeps a journal or diary. Lax, the reporter seeing things with childlike grace, at times relates his vision like an Old Testament prophet, at times like St. Francis composing a new “Canticle of the Sun,” and at times like a kid wandering through the circus grounds eating popcorn. What we are presented with is a group of poems that are thematically rather than formally related to one another. The poems are drawn together by imagery which is most often taken from the Bible. The whole is firmly tied together with an ending that echoes the beginning. This aspect of the beginning found in the end brings to mind another means of coherence. The poems form a cycle that can be interpreted in a number of ways. The most obvious cycle is that of the day, for all events presumably happen within that temporal framework. The set of poems is divided into five sections (morning, afternoon, evening, the midway, night), four of which designate periods of time. Lax intended these sections to correspond to the canonical hours of the day in the Roman Catholic Church which are set aside for prayer and meditation (especially matins, lauds, vespers, and compline). There is a further cycle that is cosmic. For the circus, when it appears in a new town, is in a sense a new creation. This analogy is one of the main metaphors employed by Lax. Lastly, there is a cycle that relates to the Christian doctrine of redemption and resurrection. The circus can be said to “die” when it leaves one town, but is “reborn” in the next. The resurrection that occurs is by means of grace imparted to the performers, and that grace is reflected back to the giver with each performance; as it says in one poem, “The circus is a song of praise, a song of praise unto the Lord.” Instead of invoking some pagan muse, Lax prefaces his work by quoting a passage from Proverbs in which Wisdom is personified. Wisdom is there spoken of as being present, with God, at the time of creation. The first short poem we encounter says this: Sometimes we go on a search and do not know what we are looking for, until we come again to our beginning. The question, or quest, of the search is here answered by pointing to our beginning. We need only turn to the next text for Lax to talk about that beginning. Here we have a reworking of the Genesis account of creation. The void is scribed by compasses and in this way given order. The compasses inscribe circles; later to be seen as the circles of the circus ring, the circles of the spheres the jugglers use, the circles of the acrobats somersaulting onto the backs of horses. The inscribed circle of the compass marks out a line where “beginning and end were in one”; the one being the creator God who, with wisdom, brings into existence all things. What was the motivation for this creation? The motivation was love; “Love made a sphere.” Out of the love of God flows a fountain; the fountain of the fecundity of God that gives birth to all things. From this cosmic perspective, Lax takes us to the field where the circus is to be set up. We read here that even the grass in the field waits in anticipation for the wonder that is the circus. Indeed, the six days of creation are present in the setting of the circus; “We have seen all the days of creation in one day.” And just as all of creation praises its creator, so the circus people moving over the field “are coming to praise the Lord.” Toward the end of Circus of the Sun, Lax gives us an explanation of his poetic intentions: Now in telling the story of the Cristianis ... we tell of creation and glory, of rising, and fall: and again of the rising where we are all risen; for each man redeemed is risen again. Here we have the microcosm of the circus, which, in moving from place to place, rises, falls, and rises again, each time creating itself anew. That microcosm is compared to the macrocosm of the universe created in all its glory and wonder by God. And again, the circus is also likened to the Christian doctrine of redemption, where the fall of each person into sin is counteracted by the sacrifice of Christ on the cross and his resurrection from the dead. Because Christ conquered death by rising again, we also can have the hope of resurrection. The “morning” section ends with the appearance of Mogador. Although Lax describes different family members, it is Mogador who is the centerpiece. Indeed, this set of poems was originally going to be called “Mogador’s Book.” That title came to be used later for the second collection of materials published in this volume. The friendship that developed between Lax and Mogador is shown most fully in the long journalistic portion of Mogador’s Book, where the conversations of the two are recounted as they ride together at night between towns in one of the circus trucks. The whole of Mogador’s Book can be seen as a companion piece to Circus of the Sun: both a commentary and an expansion. When the larger-than-life figure of Mogador makes his entrance in Circus of the Sun, it is said that “He walks the earth like a turning ball.” The imagery used in this passage is like that of the prophet Ezekiel when he relates his vision of the angelic beings each of whose movements were accompanied by a wheel within a wheel (Ezekiel 1:15–21): “The moment is a sphere moving with Mogador.” When asked by Penelope, the tightrope walker, how Mogador performed the acrobatic feats he did on horseback, Mogador responds, It is like a wind that surrounds me or a dark cloud, and I am in it, and it belongs to me and it gives me the power to do these things. The wind can be likened to the description that Jesus gave of the movement of the Spirit of God (John 3:8), and the dark cloud like the one that sat on the top of Mount Sinai when Moses received the law (Exodus 20:21). The melding of these images points to Lax’s own background, as he entered the Roman Catholic Church after an upbringing in Judaism. We can also relate Mogador’s performance to the ideas of redemption and resurrection. Although Mogador falls off the horse three times (remember, Jonah was in the belly of the great fish three days and nights: the same period of time that Christ lay in the tomb), he literally rises again to complete his routine. When he says that “it was nothing,” he means that the feat was accomplished through the grace of God moving him like a wind and enveloping him like a dark cloud. The poem which has received more attention than any other is “The Sunset City.” This poem moves us more by the sound of its words than by their meanings. R. C. Kenedy called it “one of the greatest poems in the English language—and its pulse is surely one of the most blood-curdling rhythms yet devised by poet” (Art International, v. 15, no. 1, January 20, 1971, p. 62–65, 68). Denise Levertov described the poem in this way: It is composed—as music may be out of a certain set of tones—from a relatively small number of key words which are used over and over, not in idle repetitions but in a progression of phrases which take resonance and increased meaning from one another. (Voyages, v. 2, nos. 1–2, 1968, p. 93–94) “The Sunset City” appears nearly in the center of Circus of the Sun and, because of the time imagery of that text, is also set in the turning point of the day, when daylight turns to dusk. The daytime work of setup and practice turns into the nighttime activities of the midway and the main performance. Day turns to night as the microcosm of the circus completes another cycle. Lax says of the circus, “Like civilizations and everything that grows, it holds in perfection but a little moment.” Three years after his travels with the Cristianis, Lax was in Europe. In the summer of 1951 Lax was in Rome. He went there for the holy year and to visit a Trappist monk whom he had met when visiting his friend Thomas Merton at the Abbey of Gethsemani. Lax stayed for a short time with the Trappists, but then found himself in the city with little money and no place to stay. Lax met an old friend from Columbia University, and this friend introduced him to a man named Peter (who was the son of someone from the diplomatic corps). Peter and his wife invited Lax to stay with them in their large apartment. The place was large enough to accommodate an art studio, which at the time was being used by the Chilean-born surrealist painter Roberto Matta. Another acquaintance at the time was the painter Georgio de Chirico. It is interesting to note that although de Chirico was Italian, he had been born and raised in Greece, which later became Lax’s home. While in Rome, Lax again was given the opportunity to travel with a circus. This time it was the Alfred Court Zoo Circus. He met up with them in Rome (at the empty field when they first pulled into town) and, after ingratiating himself to the circus people, went with them to the other side of the Italian peninsula to the port city of Pescara, on the Adriatic. Lax again turned this experience into a memoir laced with both poetry and prose, which he called Voyage to Pescara. The Pescara River rises in the Apennines and flows past Aquila and Populi before it reaches the Adriatic at the town of Pescara. The circus went first to Rieti, in the valley, before it ascended into the mountains to follow the route of the river to the sea. Lax was befriended this time not by the star of the show, but rather by one of the workers, whose name was Fritz. The narration of this journey is much more concrete and journalistic than Circus of the Sun. But while there are differences in tone and treatment, there are also some similarities. One of the central metaphors which Voyage to Pescara presents is that of the circus as the Tabernacle which Moses and the Jewish people traveled with in the desert. The Tabernacle itself was a tent surrounded by an open court and was placed in the center of their enormous camp. Just as the priests ministered to the people out of the Tabernacle in the wilderness of Sinai, so the performers and workers of the circus are depicted as modern- day priests ministering to the needs of the people who come to watch. In Rome, when the first worker begins to make preparations to put up the massive circus tent, he removes his shirt, and in dropping it to the ground sanctifies the site. The circus tent becomes the tabernacle. But rather than the people being outside, they are now inside: a perfect portrait of the church. Rather than the priest offering a sacrifice that only he can see, the circus performers present their efforts before the whole of the people. The performer’s entrance is “within the tent, but not of it,” just as believers are supposed to be in the world but not of it. The ministry of the priest was to offer sacrifices for the sins of the people. The ministry of the performers is to refresh and refocus the people to look back at a world “whose pattern they had lost, a world before whose multiplicity their eyes had grown dim.” In Voyage to Pescara, the time of dusk again proves to be a center point for the text. Darkness falls on the camp in “Circus at Twilight” as it does on the world. In this lyrical poem there is a sense of peace and completion. It serves the text as the last of a series of portraits in verse, and it serves the narrative by highlighting the last night in Rome. When the circus finally arrived in Pescara, Lax parted company with the troupe rather than continue on with them up the coast to San Juliana and Rimini. Although he doesn’t say so in the text, Lax had received word from his friend Peter in Rome that two of his relations were going to be coming to visit him. Lax returned to Rome and the three of them journeyed together to other parts of Europe. Though written around the time of the events narrated, Voyage to Pescara has not been published as a whole before. Circus of the Sun was first published in its complete form in 1959 by Emil Antonucci through his press, Journeyman Books. Antonucci, a graphic artist, was the first one to publish Lax in book form. He did so for over a decade, not only producing beautifully designed and illustrated volumes, but also films based on Lax’s writing. Previous to the Antonucci volume, there were two appearances of material that would become the finished Circus of the Sun. The first was in New-Story magazine in Paris (no. 4, June 1951, p. 34–36). Lax had been working for this publication while living in France. The text was published under the title “Circus of the Sun” and was said to be an “Excerpt from a novel in progress.” The piece that appeared was “The Sunset City,” but it was a longer version (almost twice as long) than the text that appeared in the Antonucci volume. The next printed appearance was in New World Writing #13 (New York: New American Library, 1958). The piece was entitled “The Circus.” It contained about a third of the completed work but also had some extra material here and there. The second complete edition of the text was published by Bernhard Moosbrugger of Pendo Verlag in Zurich, Switzerland. Moosbrugger was a photographer who began Pendo mainly to publish Lax’s works. The edition he produced had the English text with full translations in German and French and a partial translation in Spanish. The volume was also lavishly illustrated with circus photographs that Moosbrugger took. Pendo has since published more than a dozen Lax titles in beautiful uniform editions containing the English text with a German translation on the facing page. In recent years the text of Circus of the Sun has appeared submerged in the Lax anthologies 33 Poems (New York: New Directions, 1987) and Love Had a Compass (New York: Grove, 1996). The present volume places this early masterwork back in the position of prominence that it deserves. In an unpublished appreciation of Lax as a poet, R. C. Kenedy stated that Circus of the Sun is, in all probability, the finest volume of poems published by an English-speaking poet of the generation which comes in the wake of T. S. Eliot. Mogador’s Book was mostly transcribed from a notebook now in the Lax Archives at St. Bonaventure University entitled “Afternoon at the Circus.” It was in this standard composition notebook that Lax first recorded impressions of the time he spent traveling with the Cristianis in Canada. Lax wrote this while staying at the Virgin Islands retreat of Robert Gibney and Nancy Flagg. Another visitor at the time was their mutual friend Ad Reinhardt. Lax’s reminiscences of this stay can be found in Journal E\Tagebuch E (Zurich: Pendo, 1996) and also in Nancy Flagg’s articles “The Beats in the Jungle” (Art International, Sept. 1977, p. 56–59) and “Reinhardt Revisiting” (Art International, Feb. 1978, p. 54–57). Lax must have gone directly to the Islands via New York City, as he begins the journal by saying that he had to send Mogador a check to repay him for lending Lax the money for the plane fare. The journal also shows how much the circus had captivated him, for Lax records no less than three dreams he had of the circus and of Mogador in particular. Mogador’s Book was first published by Pendo Verlag in Zurich in 1992. The material in Circus of the Sun and Mogador’s Book was written within six months but published thirty years apart. Voyage to Pescara was written in 1951 and is first seeing the light of day with the publication of the present volume. By the time that Circus of the Sun was published and the material of Mogador’s Book and Voyage to Pescara was written, Lax had already moved on in his poetic development, so it can be said that the circus materials mark the end of the early period of his writing. With the publication of New Poems (New York: Journeyman Books, 1962), “Sea & Sky” (Lugano Review, v. 1, nos. 3–4, 1965, p. 15–133), and “Black & White” (Lugano Review, v. 1, nos. 5–6, 1966, p. 35–50), Lax headed into uncharted poetic waters in which he is still sailing. As David Miller has written, Lax is a poet whose discoveries are entirely his own and not drawn from the books of other poets; he has been from the beginning an extremely original, unprecedented innovator. (Lugano Review, v. 2, 1975, p. 46–48) PAUL J. SPAETH Curator of the Lax Archives Director of the Library St. Bonaventure University For further information on Robert Lax and his writings see: David Miller and Nicholas Zurbrugg, eds., The ABCs of Robert Lax (Exeter, England: Stride Publications, 1999). Sigrid Hauff, A Line in Three Circles: The Inner Biography of Robert Lax (München: Belleville Verlag, 1999). CIRCUS OF THE SUN I was set up from eternity, and of old, before the earth was made: The depths were not as yet and I was already conceived, neither had the fountains of waters as yet sprung out, The mountains with their huge bulk had not yet been established; before the hills I was brought forth; He had not yet made the earth, nor the rivers, nor the poles of the world: when he prepared the heavens, I was there. Proverbs 8:23–27 morning Sometimes we go on a search and do not know what we are looking for, until we come again to our beginning. In the beginning (in the beginning of time to say the least) there were the compasses: whirling in void their feet traced out beginnings and endings, beginning and end in a single line. Wisdom danced also in circles, for these were her kingdom: the sun spun, worlds whirled, the seasons came round, and all things went their rounds: but in the beginning, beginning and end were in one. And in the beginning was love. Love made a sphere: all things grew within it; the sphere then encompassed beginnings and endings, beginning and end. Love had a compass whose whirling dance traced out a sphere of love in the void: in the center thereof rose a fountain. Fields were set for the circus, stars for shows before ever elephant lumbered or tent rose. THE MORNING STARS Have you seen my circus? Have you known such a thing? Did you get up in the early morning and see the wagons pull into town? Did you see them occupy the field? Were you there when it was set up? Did you see the cookhouse set up in dark by lantern light? Did you see them build the fire and sit around it smoking and talking quietly? As the first rays of dawn came, did you see them roll in blankets and go to sleep? A little sleep until time came to unroll the canvas, raise the tent, draw and carry water for the men and animals; were you there when the animals came forth, the great lumbering elephants to drag the poles and unroll the canvas? Were you there when the morning moved over the grasses? Were you there when the sun looked through dark bars of clouds at the men who slept by the cookhouse fire? Did you see the cold morning wind nip at their blankets? Did you see the morning star twinkle in the firmament? Have you heard their laughter around the cookhouse fire? When the morning stars threw down their spears and watered heaven ... Have you looked at spheres of dew on spears of grass? Have you watched the light of a star through a world of dew? Have you seen the morning move over the grasses? And to each leaf the morning is present. Were you there when we stretched out the line, when we rolled out the sky, when we set up the firmament? Were you there when the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy? Morning is quiet over the field. Clouds hang over it close and full. The song of the morning goes up from the grass; the sun receives and returns it to clouds, bending over the morning field, full of the song of the grass. In a green straw Mexican hat, very gentle and shy, Tina watches the morning. Belmonte’s child. Her hair is brown and shining, straight. She loves to go out into her province. Air is summer blue, full of life, eager to carry light and color. This is the day when the people come walking slowly to the outskirts of town; when over the field they come to walk in the grass where the stakes are driven: rust and dew. They stand in the morning field, watching. “See him drag that chain. Look how he pulls it?” At work in loose pajamas, elephants twist their trunks around the tent poles, lifting lightly, their faces and hides are finely lined, maps of a land of mountains and rivers: they move about in the tall grass, lifting their great scalloped feet. The men are on hand as witnesses; “Look at the camel.” “Moulting, I guess.” “There must be something wrong with it.” Inwardly she weeps. The big stuffed mat the reapers land on sits on the field. The weary lie on it like Romans; or sit on it upright, pensively on edge, like little big-headed Bagonghi. Thinking about his teeth. “I go downtown to see the dentist, every day, every day.” Every day a different town. The festivity of plumes on timothy grass, water-filled young shoots up from the early ground aspiring, up in the early morning playing, they are wet with water of sky, sprinkled by clouds, standing, overshoulder peering at light on the field; dart of birds, and look here: walkers walking in sky water; drops on grass, hanging colors: light of sun in many colors, all the colors, and the drop stands on the timothy grass wondering will I fall to earth or will I rise to heaven? Up every day for the festival, today is the festival of walkers, walking: Out of all the round year today, the day of its coming. We the innocent grasses stand on tiptoe overshouldering each other, looking toward the circle’s center, middle of the field where they stretch the skyworks. Birds dart over us, pulling shadows through us. Quietly the field waited; she would be blessed with the wonder of creation. Workers are arrived from another world; like visiting angels, they speak their own language and put their questioners off with jokes: rough trousers, blue denim shirts, flesh red from the elements: Their eyes look far back, and infinitely on. They penetrate and do not appraise: beholding all things before them with the innocence of light. Strange visitors, when they meet they fall to laughter, their glances flash together like water in sunlight. These are the ones who tug at the ropes and put up the tents; roustabouts with chants and hammers, who drive the stakes that hold in place the billowing firmament. Bagonghi says, “I’ll take your suitcase until Mogador wakes up.” Stubby, bowlegged, he rocks from side to side, a tug in a swell as he crosses the field, holding the bag an inch above the ground. He opens the wide door of the trailer, stands on tiptoe, swings the suitcase into the dark. “It’ll be all right till Mogador wakes up.” He comes back, leaving the door ajar. The ground of the field is rich and growing, but who will eat the grass? Horses, camels, zebras. A song rises up from the ground, herbs from the field. Who will watch the green grass growing; who will hear the song of earth? Children who come to see the tent set up in the morning. Three masts stand on a sea of canvas. Rope line loops from one to another, drops in a gentle arc to the ground. Bagonghi swings his hand toward the gesture in midair. “Look! The big top!” Who stretches forth the canopy of morning? (Knowing the wonder to be born of her, hoping to bring forth a son, a tree, in whose laughing and delicate shade the children of innocence could rejoice, the field waited.) We have seen all the days of creation in one day: this is the day of the waking dawn and all over the field the people are moving, they are coming to praise the Lord: and it is now the first day of creation. We were there on that day and we heard Him say: Let there be light. And we heard Him say: Let firmament be; and water, and dry land, herbs, creeping things, cattle and men. We were there in the beginning for we were there in the morning and we saw the rising of the tent and we have known how it was in the beginning. We have known the creation of the firmament: and of the water, and of the dry land, and of the creatures that moved in the deep, and of the creatures that moved on the land, and of the creation of men: the waking of acrobats. We have known these things from the beginning of the morning, for we woke early. We rose and came to the field. They lie in slumber late, the acrobats, they sleep and do not know the sun is up. Nor does the Lord wake them, nor do the sun’s rays touch them. And the Lord, who has chosen them, the Lord, who created them, leaves them in slumber until it is time. Slowly, slowly, His hand upon the morning’s lyre makes a music in their sleeping. And they turn, and turning wonder eyes awake to light of morning. They rise, dismounting from their beds, they rise and hear the light airs playing songs of praise unto the Lord. The circus is a song of praise, a song of praise unto the Lord. The acrobats, His chosen people, rejoice forever in His love. Mogador comes down the field. “There he is!” He walks the earth like a turning ball: knowing and rejoicing in his sense of balance: he delights in the fulcrums and levers, teeterboards, trampolines, high wires, swings, the nets, ropes and ring curbs of the natural universe. Beneath his feet the world is buoyant, thin and alive as a bounding rope. He stands on it poised, a gyroscope on the rim of a glass, sustained by the whirling of an inner wheel. He steps through the drum of light and air, his hand held forth. The moment is a sphere moving with Mogador. afternoon ACROBAT’S SONG Who is it for whom we now perform cavorting on wire: for whom does the boy climbing the ladder balance and whirl— for whom, seen or unseen in a shield of light? Seen or unseen in a shield of light, at the tent top where rays stream in watching the pinwheel turns of the players dancing in light: Lady, we are Thy acrobats; jugglers; tumblers; walking on wire, dancing on air, swinging on the high trapeze: we are Thy children, flying in the air of that smile: rejoicing in light. Lady, we perform before Thee, walking a joyous discipline, thin thread of courage, slim high wire of dependence over abysses. What do we know of the way of our walking? Only this step, this movement, gone as we name it. Here at the thin rim of the world we turn for Our Lady, who holds us lightly: we leave the wire, leave the line, vanish into light. The tent is soaked in afternoon light. Filled with sound. Pilgrims wander in at the wide door, full of wonder. The expanse of it! Waving walls. Tiers of seats. Can this have been built in one day? They enter, parents guiding: they have seen more places. Yet look: a child is leading. Filled with wonder, the tent is strange; circus horses and circus men. Clowns are from a far-off land. The tent shuts out the wind, and heat, the dust and rain, and locks light in. Through the wide door: they roll like marbles; first a few, and later many. Tent flap leads to the field beyond: performers cross; their plumed hats shake; their red and gold capes billow in the wind. The family running lightly into the ring leads one horse with them and leaves two others standing in the track. There is a flourish of trumpets. The Cristianis approach the center of the ring, raise their hands, smile, and bow. The music starts again. The horse trots rhythmically around the ring, five Cristianis stand in a row, marking time, in rhythm with the hoofbeats. At a signal from Lucio they run across the ring to meet the horse when he comes around. They fork-jump as he passes and land all sitting on his back. Applause. The horse runs halfway around; the riders, relaxed, lift their hands to show how easily it is done. Then they leap off, Belmonte first, Corky, Ortans, Mogador, and Oscar. Once more raise their hands and smile. Music again, the horse starts around and the boys, Belmonte, Mogador, Oscar, make jumps to his back, land standing with arms upraised. Leaping separately but riding together. As they come around Lucio, in baggy pants, oversized jacket and battered hat, steps out in front. The boys shout: “Hey! get out of the way!” Lucio doesn’t. The boys jump down from the horse. “Get out of the way. What are you? Drunk?” Lucio shrugs, walks over to the ring, sits down, begins to ponder. Again music. The boys begin their run to the horse when Lucio slides across the ring somersaults through the horse’s legs over the ring curb onto the track. Gasp. He tries again from outside the ring. Somersaults through the flying hooves into the ring. Picking up a bamboo pole he vaults magnificently to the horse’s back. Trembling he lands standing on one foot flailing his arms, sure to topple. Shouts. At last he finds it: the point of balance. Secure, both feet planted firmly, he leans back thumbs in his pockets: never a doubt in his mind. He pulls a newspaper from his hip pocket, slaps it open, begins to read, then turning still reading he takes a huge step off the horse’s tail like an old man descending from a bus. PENELOPE AND MOGADOR One time Penelope the tightrope walker asked Mogador how he was able to land so gracefully after he did a somersault on horseback. Mogador said: It is like a wind that surrounds me or a dark cloud, and I am in it, and it belongs to me and it gives me the power to do these things. And Penelope said, Oh, so that is it. And Mogador said, I believe so. The next day in the ring, Mogador leaped up on the horse. He sat on it sideways and jogged halfway around the ring; then he stood up on the horse’s back with a single leap; he rode around balancing lightly in time to the music; he did a split-jump—touching his toes with his hands; he did a couple of entrechats—braiding his legs in midair like a dancer: then Oscar threw him a hoop. Mogador tossed it up in the air and spun it. He caught it, leapt up, and did a somersault through it! He thought: I am a flame, a dark cloud, a bird; I will land like spring rain on a mountain lake for the delight of Penelope the tightrope walker; He landed on one foot, lost his balance, waved his arms wildly, and fell off the horse. He looked at Penelope, leapt up again, did a quick entrechat, and Oscar tossed him the hoop. He spun it into the air and caught it. He did a somersault through it and he thought: It is like a dark cloud, and I am in it; it belongs to me, and it gives me the power to do these things. He landed on one foot, lost his balance, waved his arms wildly and fell off the horse. Penelope the tightrope walker looked very calm, Mogador leapt on the horse again. Oscar frowned and tossed him the hoop. Mogador threw it into the air and caught it; leapt up and did a somersault through it. He thought: I am a bird and will land like a bird! He landed on one foot, lost his balance, waved his arms wildly and fell off the horse. Now in the Cristiani family, when you fall off three times, they grab you by one ear and bend you over, and one of the brothers kicks you. And that is what they did to Mogador. Then the circus band started playing again. And Mogador looked at Penelope: then he looked at the horse and flicked his ear with his hand; he jumped up on the horse and landed smartly; he stood up in one leap and caught the hoop; and then he did a somersault through it. He didn’t think anything. He just did a somersault— and landed with two feet on the horse’s back. Then he rode halfway around the ring and got off with a beautiful scissors leap. Penelope applauded and, clasping her hands overhead, shook them like a boxer, Mogador looked at her, then back at the horse, and with a gesture of two arms he said it was nothing. ORTANS Ortans stands on one end of a teeterboard: Mogador and Belmonte, from the height of two tables, jump down and land on the other end. Ortans flips into the air, does a two and a half turn, and lands neatly in a high chair. Relaxed as a rag doll, gracious as a queen, looking as though she had been there all afternoon. She lolls a moment in the chair, gives the audience a glance and a beautiful smile. Then she daintily dismounts into her brothers’ arms; lifts her right hand, curtseys on tiptoe, and disappears. LA LOUISA Her toes almost touch the top of the tent; she lies out, balanced at the arch of her back, her toes are pointed, her long slim legs stretch before her, her waist is taut, her whole body is semi-relaxed. Her arms lie out gracefully behind her head, her long hair rides behind her as she swings forward: there is a flower in her hair, it hugs her head as she swings back. Back and forth, back and forth. Now she drops. Headfirst: her hair and the flower tumbling toward the ground. Look away! Precipito- volissimo- volmente! She has caught herself, is hanging by her feet; she swings back and forth, her back beautifully arched, her hands and fingers poised, the flower riding in her long hair. She pulls herself up, hangs by her hands, grasps the rope between her legs, slides down it to the ground. Bows graciously, accepts applause with lifted arm, And leaves the ring. Our dreams have tamed the lions, have made pathways in the jungle, peaceful lakes; they have built new Edens ever sweet and ever changing. By day from town to town we carry Eden in our tents and bring its wonders to the children who have lost their dream of home. evening They are with me now, the golden people; their limbs are intertwined in golden light, moving in a heavy sea of memory: they come the beautiful ones, with evening smiles: heavy-lidded people, dark of hair and gentle of aspect, whose eyes are portals to a land of dusk. Their melancholy holds me now: sadness of princes, and the sons of princes: the melancholy gaze of those I have not seen since childhood. For childhood was full of wonder, full of visions: the boy on horseback, either in a dream or on the plain, approaching: the two gypsy girls who stood together and asked the mysterious question. Truth and the dream so mingled in their eyes I could not tell which of the two had spoken. Once more now they are with me, golden ones, living their dream in long afternoons of sunlight; riding their caravans in the wakeful nights. After supper light on fields, prairie, long yellow light on fields aspiring, fields looking up grass singing high grass singing yellow light on green grass growing, the wide round horizon, the long tired light on the field and the green grass high yearning up aspiring to heaven to the dome sky heaven the grass growing up to the sky and the light dying, the sun wearily sleepily smiling lying down, with a sighing song, a long smiling sigh over the fields and the grass rising, thin prayer rising tufted to the air above the field to the sky the dome sky thin made of light air the dome above the field and the field breathing the air full rich golden grass smelling sweet and tired with sun dying sun lying down, dying down in west. The sunset city trembled with fire, the air trembled in fiery light, a fiery clarity stretched west across the walks, the tongues of air licked up the building sides, the wings of fire hovered over the churches and houses, steeples and stores of the wide flat city that stretched to the sea. The walk like a drum was stretched as though over the hollow kettle of ground, the hollow darkness under the walk resounded as he walked toward the sunset, and the street glowed like a drum in firelight, like a drumskin glowed the walk and road as he walked toward the light, walked slowly toward the light through the fiery clarity of the burning air now cooled with evening as sun set. Walls of glass reflected the fire of sun, took fire from it, were kindled and blazed bright, so as he walked down the drumskin city, he was walled in fire and walked toward fire, and in the fire dark caverns were, dark doorways in the walls of fire, portals in the panes of brass where these men sat on folding camp chairs waiting while the world went round, bald men sat on folding camp chairs waiting while the world went round, their drumskin heads took fire from the sun, kindled and blazed, were copper drums, brass helmets glowing above the drumskin walks, each in his dark portal surrounded, tipped on his camp stool in doors darkness; brass accent in the walls of glass. In the fiery city they sat on camp stools waiting while the world went round. This is our camp, our moving city; each day we set the show up: jugglers calm amid currents, riding the world, joggled but slightly as in a howdah, on the grey wrinkled earth we ride as on elephant’s head. THE DUST OF THE EARTH The dust of the day hangs in the air, motes in the light, dust of the trampling multitude, dust of the elephants padding by, dust no one stirred till the circus came, it hangs like a veil! Dust of the earth riding the twilight, silently moving each sphere each molecule riding the air, in wakening twilight could whirling turn to earth to planets, support the verdure of creation the moving animals and men, could raise from its own green growing white clouds and dark alive with lightning, could ripple with seas flow with rivers reflect the waters, the mountains and sky. But where does the first mote come from, the first gliding sphere? the midway The paintings on the sideshow walls, the banners and signs are dark and strange: “Look at the two-headed boy, the armless wonder, the lion tamer, the harlem band, the seal boy, the sword swallower, fire eater, tattooed woman, snake charmer, and the man who throws knives at his wife.” In the darkening twilight, the last of sunset. Banners heraldic and strange: Beowulf lives here, ogres inside, but gay, strange music, come in and look, stand considering on the midway soon you will come in and look. SNAKE CHARMER “You see this snake? he looks terrible, don’t he? But in the southwest where I come from we got ’em like cats to kill mice.” She strokes his head, folds him gently, and puts him back in the box. Picking out a larger one, she holds it aloft in both arms: “This here is the same kind of snake,” she says, “Only bigger.” DOG ACT Girl in white ten-gallon hat, jeweled band; white shirt, jeweled sleeves; white gauntlets jeweled with flowers and stars; skirt, white doeskin, fringed; spurred and jeweled high-heeled boots, white with red interior, striding in a wash of small white dogs. Yapping, prancing, barrel-walking, ladder-climbing, table- mounting, somersaulting, hopping at her hissed command through tiny shiny hoops. COLONEL ANGUS “I don’t remember where he lived out there,” said the Colonel. “I think it was ... aaaah! That lion!” It was time for him to go on; the lion knew it and roared. The Colonel went into the small cage carrying a folding chair and a whip. The lion, big and dusty, snarled and pawed at him, Then he roared, Angus snapped the whip, the lion crouched and pounced. Apparently alarmed, the trainer dropped his chair, scurried from the cage, slipped through the steel door, and sprang it behind him. The audience was impressed. The lion, furious, was left standing with his paws against the door. “I think it was Pasadena!” said the Colonel, coming lightly down the steps. night ACROBAT ABOUT TO ENTER Star of the bareback riding act, dressed in a dark red high-collared cape, black-browed, waiting with the others to go in: To enter the bright yellow glare of the tent, He stood on an island, self-absorbed. At twenty-one there was trouble in his universe. Stars were failing; planets made their rounds with grating axles: The crown of stars in blackness was awry. Clouds were rising, thunder rumbled; he was alone, nobly troubled waiting a moment. He waited with challenge, young and in solitude, mourning inwardly, attentive to the black, fiery current in his mind, he would not be comforted. Swift water, failing darkness: he alone could hear it. Hoarded the sound, pulled his cape around it: bitter and intense, but it was his: Youthful secret, black and smouldering, not of the crowd; It was his private woe and, being private, prized. Now in telling the story of the Cristianis, their early beginning and long-ago birth and their rising from earth to brightness of sunlight, we tell of creation and glory, of rising, and fall: and again of the rising where we are all risen; for each man redeemed is risen again. The spinning of the sun, the spinning of the world, the spun sun’s span on the world in its spinning, are all in the story from its beginning; and when it is spun there shall be no unspinning. Mogador is running along with the horse. His eyes are serious, full of thought. His mouth is a little open as he runs and breathes. He is smiling a little. His lips are thin. As he runs, bending the knees, dancing lightly beside the horse, he is in step with the horse. They both land lightly. They both spring from the earth; their movement is through the air. Their feet drop lightly to earth and push off from it. And as they rise and fall, rise, fly, and (momentarily) fall, their heads rise too and fall in regular rhythm. They rise and the hair of the horse’s mane clings to him, pointing to earth. They drop down and each hair of the white long mane remains in air The boy’s hair too, dark silk rides close as he rises; then rises in the air falling lightly over his forehead as he drops to earth. They come around the ring, The boy runs on the inside. The horse trots along close to the curb. The boy with his horse as they turn in the ring are boy and horse running in blue and green field: his hand is on the horse’s back the horse is to him close as hand. They round the turn, the boy is out of sight. But now, behold! He flies above the horse, holding a strap at his shoulders. His feet fly out behind. His toes are together and pointed like closed scissors. Now he splits, sits riding bareback pointing his toes to the ground spinning beneath them. His arms are held in air relaxed. He rides lightly, barely touching, his arms in air. Then he leaps up and with a pirouette begins his dance. What was begun as a run through the field is turned to ritual. RASTELLI Now the story of Rastelli is one they love to tell around the circus. He is a hero not because his work was dangerous but because he was excellent at it and because he was excellent as a friend. He was good at juggling at talking at coffee Loving everyone he died juggling for everyone He died Oscar said in a low secret voice when he was 33 The age of our Lord They loved Rastelli and he loved them their loves flamed together a high blaze Ascending to the Sun of being Rastelli was a juggler and a kind of sun his clubs and flames and hoops moved around him like planets obeyed and waited his command he moved all things according to their natures: they were ready when he found them but he moved them according to their love. As dancers harmonize, the rising falling planets mirrored his movements. Rising, falling, rotating, revolving, they spun on the axis of his desire. Clubs were at rest, he woke them and sent them spinning, from which again they flew, until flying and falling, spinning and standing a moment in midair, they seemed to love to obey his command, and even dance with the juggler. Seeing the world was willing to dance, Rastelli fell in love with creation, through the creation with the Creator, and through the Creator again with creation, and through the creation, the Lord. He loved the world and things he juggled, he loved the people he juggled for. Clubs and hoops could answer his love: even more could people. Lover and juggler bearer of light he lived and died in the center ring dancing decorously moving all things according to their nature And there, before the Lord, he dances still. He is with us on the double somersault; the three-high to the shoulders; he is with us on the Arab pirouette and the principal act on horseback. And in the long nights, riding the trucks between towns, Rastelli is with us: companion, example, hero in the night of memory. He stood outside the horse truck, waiting for Mogador to come back, and he began to whistle. Across the field the men had taken down the sides of the tent and were moving about in dim light under the top, picking up trunks, ropes and equipment and packing it away. He began to whistle a tune from the depths of his soul; he had never heard it before but he recognized it as a form of the song his soul had always been singing, a song he had been singing since the beginning of the world, a song of return. It was as though he stood in a dark corner of the universe and whistled softly, between his teeth, and the far stars were attentive, as though he whistled and waves far off could hear him, as though he had discovered a strain at least of the night song of the world. By day I have circled like the sun, I have leapt like fire. At night I am a wise man in his palanquin. By day I am a juggler’s torch whirling brightly. Have you known such a thing? That men and animals light and air, graceful acrobats, and musicians could come together in a single place, occupy a field by night set up their tents in the early morning perform their wonders in the afternoon wheel in the light of their lamps at night? Have you seen the circus steal away? Leaving the field of wonders darkened, leaving the air where the tent stood empty, silence and darkness where sight and sound were, living only in memory? Have you seen the noonday banners of this wedding? MOGADOR’S BOOK The principal act is a psalm of praise; the somersault a well-turned proverb. Big black door, square opening; elephant’s entrance, performer’s entrance, the door that led to the back performer’s entrance near the bandstand. The bandstand; Pete’s chair, the mike, the springboard, the leapers’ mat. Circus wagon. Dressing tent; men’s & women’s, black canvas, the canvas wall between the men’s and women’s side of the dressing tent. Performer’s tent; trunks, mirrors, towels, makeup can, powder puff (tent stake iron tent stake) folding chair. Light beam through sky in top of tent wall, just under the deckled eaves of the roof. Red & white makeup on towels. Bell-bottom blue silk trousers, white silk wide-collared blouse. Blouse caught wind and light. Red and gold riding habit. Fancily draped (crepe de chine) tie. Black hair. Piss hole in corner. Rain hole covered with sawdust. Lonely spectators who had wandered back, family of Indians, blond child, curls, limp-dressed, balanced like a shaky tripod onto skinny lanky legs. Cowboy Eddie makes money selling rides on pony out back. Tina with green flat Mexican hat, idly eating, munching at, chewing (listlessly) at the string (which was) meant to go under her chin. Tent ropes cutting each picture diagonally. Orange sun streaming into sag in tent wall. Grass, sky, elephants stepping lightly. Earth is a tattooed lady. In her tegument Signs and the signs of signs: mermaids and dolphins, hearts and arrows, roses and eagles; Signs and the signs of signs sewn with a fiery needle into her woven walls. One bright leg across the other, she sits on a camp stool under the tent of sky smoking a momentary cigarette. I have often thought how much like a circus the world is, and how the more like a circus it becomes, the better. These are some of the reasons: More than almost anything in the world, the circus is an end in itself. (That used to be said of all art, but too often literature painting & music, even ballet turn into means & servants of some other end) No one jumps through a hoop on horseback to prove a point (except incidentally, the point that anything that is done proves: i.e., that it can be) So if the world ever came to its final rejoicing what would it prove (what better thing could it try to prove) except that it can be. That which we have believed in, said prayers and made sacrifices in the hope of, is. The traveling circus (and that’s what I mean) in its nature is always in motion, even when it seems to be standing still. This is literally true. Circuses in their season are always traveling from town to town. When the circus is in one town, advance agents are moving about the next working routes, checking ads, making reservations in hotels, and “Put it up & tear it down” is the constant chant of the circus. It spends all morning building up tents and bleachers, rings, trapezes, and all evening tearing down (silently) unobtrusively (an unoccupied clown folds chairs) folding chairs, loosening ropes, sending the cookhouse out through the night. Like civilizations and everything that grows, it holds in perfection but a little moment The world too is always in motion. Nothing abides, all changes. A bright falbala turns to the light and is seen no more (For this poor world presenteth naught but shows whereon the stars in secret influence comment) Everyone who travels with a circus is of use to the circus. Nobody is just along for the ride. There is a hierarchy in the show; not of souls but of skills and talents, it is a natural kind of hierarchy allowing free movement up and down, which gives legitimate hope to aspiration but not just cause for resentment. In most circuses the administrators (owners) and star performers make up two kinds of nearly sovereign aristocracy, but the line is seldom drawn tight between them. Performers often become entrepreneurs. I said it is a hierarchy of talents. What (precisely) does the circus aristocracy have a talent for? A talent precisely for life in the circus (which, by analogy, means life in the world) The circus is a show; the aristocrats are showmen. The circus is an organization (almost an organism). The aristocrats (entrepreneurs) are good at organizing at keeping it organically functioning. The circus is in motion, it requires (calm) nerves, easy breathing, balance, an ability to change from place to place without inner disturbances. Circus aristocrats, the performers are well fitted to this kind of motion, to traveling through the world from day to day eating & sleeping in a new town each day. But further, motion precisely is their business; easy, graceful, (physical) motion through space, the balance and coordination of physical movement is the quality, the talent, which distinguishes these people. It is a quality (most) useful and highly valued in the life of the circus. Useful and highly valued (though too often now in a state of atrophy) throughout the world. It is no wonder that wherever they go these graceful movers are asked to give a show. Mama, sitting in her chair at twilight, assumes (like the sun) the same position at twilight; after the glow, before dinner, the hour of rest, of gossip, of comings and goings. Mama sits in her chair and judicates; weighing the family, weighing the world, saying too bad at what is too bad, and laughing at what is funny. Mama, on the judge’s folding chair, sits in some town each day at twilight weighing the world with her eyes, pronouncing judgment with the corners of her mouth. Mogador, somersaulting on a horse, praises the Lord; Creator of horses and men, Creator of light wherein the acrobat disports with skill he has acquired, holding on the invisible wires on which the world is strung. Mogador, brightly dressed and riding in the light while music plays, is like the juggler at Our Lady’s shrine is like King David dancing before the Ark of the Covenant is like the athletes of God who sang their praises in the desert wind. Why does he look so intense. What makes an acrobat look burningly from his eyes, narrow them and burn for a particular thing. You have your answers, which are good. He is a younger brother in a family of talented acrobats. He wants to be as good as they, better than they to justify his existence. He is the younger brother of Lucio; the dreamer, the entrepreneur, the one who wants to start the great circus. He wants to do it with talent & taste, and acumen, and honesty. Mogador wants to be Lucio’s partner. He wants to have all Lucio’s qualities and an additional one: a taste for elegant showmanship (He likes this so much and considers it so much of the essence that he is willing to attribute it to Lucio, who has indeed some feeling for it, but Mogador knows that he has the most) He is the younger brother of Chita; a queen of elegance, the most graceful and beautiful bareback rider-principal act there ever has been, in his opinion. Mogador also rides principal. His riding is and must be in the same tradition as hers. It is not acrobatics on horseback. It is ballet. It is not comic ballet. It is appropriately dignified praise. An ancient and very pure form of religious devotion. It is easy to compare it to the childlike devotion of the jongleur de Notre Dame; But it is more mature, more knowing. Like the highest art, it is a kind of play which involves responsibility and control; An activity which involves awareness and appreciation; Its own symbolic value. Like the prayers of the old in wisdom, it has the joy and the solemnity of love. By day I have circled like the sun, have leapt like fire. At night I am a wise man on his palanquin. By day I am an acrobat, spinning brightly, a juggler’s torch. Nights I am contemplative, drinking deep of silence. Road, prairie, night go through me: Songs of praise like mist rise up: Blessings tumble down like dew. Into the dark the truck rolled, my eyes were on the road, the blond dirt road in the light of the headlamps, we sat high on the truck’s wide smooth seat, our luggage in back, there was plenty of room, for all we carried were the sandwiches in the brown paper bag and the thermos bottle. The night before, we had talked a great deal, of love, of women, Mogador had said that the kind of smile he liked in a woman was a smile as of the wind hitting flowers. And we said many another rare and true thing. Enough to make a man less than Mogador tend to close up, to be a clam on the subsequent night, but he did not. In truth we were both eager to talk. And yet for the first couple of minutes of riding in silence I felt some panic at my solar plexus thinking, what’ll I ask him now we’ve both been over the main things and we know so well what the other is thinking, about most of this. There is no point, in fact it is almost impolite to ask more questions. And further (particularly if Mogador doesn’t feel like talking) my questioning him and his lapsing into silence of reticence, or my driving him to utter a half truth (as we do when we’re weary or irritated) will make it a long unpleasant ride. And everything has been so good so far. We rode along a little farther. A wobble developed up front. The radiator cap, it was loose again. All the night before, we had had trouble with it rattling and falling off. We’d have to hop out with a flashlight, look around on the road behind us & pick it up. Usually a couple of the circus trucks would pass us as we searched. We got out again. “May as well put it inside the truck” I said. Mogador agreed “We’ll get it fixed tomorrow.” We started again. He was being very serious and “acting” serious at the same time. I was being serious and acting serious too. For every sort of conversation, open or secret, light or heavy, there is a convention and a tradition, an appropriate tone of voice, a proper stance or sitting position, a rhythm of give and take. People who are fond of form don’t try to avoid these conventions, unless to avoid them is also appropriate. Our talk was in the form of youthful speculation. We each may have felt ourselves to be a little old for it, but in our association we were still young. In establishing the terms of our conversation we were adolescent. And a return to that freshness (with new minds) I think was pleasant for us both. I was as thrilled on that ride as I could be. I guess I was as happy as I’ve ever been. I don’t know whether I could ever tell anyone how or why (I suppose someone could tell me how or why) and I don’t know why I should try to tell anyone anything about it. I think it’s partly just a nice instinct in me and in everyone to try to share all good things with everyone. I’d like to tell about it because I’d like to remember it. I’d like to have it in writing so I can look at it later. I think I’ll remember it all my life. But if I have it in writing (and have written it well and fully) it will be fun to reread later, to see how much of a self-enriching experience (or what gets better in the memory, and comes to mean more as the years go by) how much of it you appreciate as it happens, and shortly after it happens. I think if it happens at a good time (of maturity) a ripe moment, you appreciate most of it as it happens. That nothing can be added to it except the perspective of time, and even that addition is at the sacrifice of some detail or some immediacy. And so, although it is hard to write it well and fully and make it neat also, and do it as fast as I’d like (so the family can see it soon) and well wrought, graceful and as lastingly beautiful as, say, a Picasso harlequin; this one won’t be neat. Instead I think I’ll surprise my friends, my relatives, and loving readers, myself most of all, by showing just how badly I can write. The other reason I’d like to write it, and like to make it good (yea, wonderful) is that I’d like Mogador to see it. I’d like, just by way of debt-paying, to let him see that I meant it when I said I was going to write a Cristiani book and that it would be mostly about him. I’d like him to see that I understood what he was saying (a good part & maybe all of the time) that the sort of thing we said in long rides in the truck (though they sounded mystic even as they passed between us, and telegraphic too) could nevertheless be written down, stated directly (retaining their mystery) and restated clearly so that anyone whose soul was prepared, whose mind was attentive, could read and understand. And I’d like him to see, but I guess this is asking too much, that I can write a book, with all the joy and verve and grace, with all the seriousness and intensity, with the playful formality, the style and exuberance, the praise-rendering wonder, the dignity and humility, the elegance and flow, the tradition and originality, the control, the meekness, the youthfulness and grace with which he rides a horse. And I want to write it so Mark Van Doren, and my sister, Gladys, and all my friends who I wished were with me could come along. And so that some, reading the book, not knowing the family, may see their name on a circus sign, and go to the show and see what they see, and to some degree, see what I see too. (So grass if it knew itself would be less than it thinks and as great as it is and greater than it thinks it is) All in a single moment. And I’d like to write about this family, the serious and sober, the happy and playful Cristianis, who seem to be serious about living from generation to generation as entertainers, as bareback riders, graceful and skillful in an art of dancers & acrobats on horseback; extraordinary equestrians. (“Things that are difficult to do on the ground we do on horseback,” says Mogador) A family whose aim is to own a circus and to perform in it, and to do this thing, dynastically from generation to generation, giving each child a choice whether or not he will join the circus; but leaving them no room for choice whether they will love the family, for the children do love the family and are proud to be in it. I’d like to write about a family whose activities suggest one answer to a recurrent question of the skeptical young: Wouldn’t it have grown boring perhaps in Eden? (perhaps in Milton?) No, there would have been horses to ride, tightropes to walk trapezes to swing from ideas to discuss jokes to make laughter anger. All the emotions of the artist or acrobat confronted with his task. All of the joys and most (I guess) of the tensions of large family life. I want to write about these people because I love them as a group and love them individually. I like to think about them all; to know them all as well as I can, and to write about them in a book. And I’m pretty pleased about the way I questioned him, the way the Lord put it into my heart to question him; for I hardly questioned him at all. I kept silence, let us say attentive silence, as we rode along. If Mogador spoke, I listened. If one phrase puzzled me in what he was saying, I let it ride until he had spoken completely. Then I would ask him what he had meant by this phrase and he would tell me. Sometimes I’d ask him pointblank questions about his ideas; and often direct questions about the circus and the routine of the act. And sometimes I would ask questions rather obliquely, asking a question near, or with a rather direct, logical connection to the question I did want answered. And often in asking the first question, we would be led to a consideration of the very question I wanted answered. But we must not think of this means of questioning (with which we are all familiar) as a series of stratagems for coaxing truth from an unwilling Mogador. It was, I think, a cooperation with Mogador to coax truth from himself. For the man one talks to (when one talks to the inner self) is not at all the man the world knows. It can almost be said he is not the man the man himself knows. He is part of him (hidden in darkness) very often the noblest part, and very often very shy. The cab of the truck (jolt)ing through the dark, where most nights Mogador had ridden alone, thinking his own thoughts, was an excellent place in which to ask questions (for this discussion). For in that dark, in the long stretch between Kamsack and Humbolt, we were each sent, or each retired to our innerselves and when we talked and talked, it seemed from the center of our being. And of course it is true that we often rode for miles in perfect silence. He passed me an open pack of cigarettes “Light me one, will you?” I did. “Here I will give you the pack you can light them for me from time to time as we drive, if you will.” We drove through the first real darkness. In Saskatchewan, in summertime, there is waning day and dying sunset almost until eleven-thirty when the very last ray of the sun disappears in the (southwest). There is a short period of true night. Then at about two-thirty day begins to dawn. “I notice when you talk about anything that is beautiful, whether it is singing, or speaking, or love, or a graceful act in the ring, you have a gesture of the hand; moving it out from the diaphragm (or solar plexus). An easy, generous, giving gesture; your wrist leads and your hand opens at the end of the arc. An expansive gesture; bestowing the good you’re talking about, and showing the center of it seems to be near the center of the body, and moves out from there. Is that the way it seems to you?” “Yes” said Mogador “I think that might be true.” “And there’s a way your hand, when you somersault through the hoop, after your feet have landed and are secure (in fact as they are still coming down through the air) your arm begins to move up and when you land you toss your head back a little. Your arm completes the upward swing, your hand relaxed and graceful at the top of the swing-move seems to culminate the whole turn to greet the crowd, proclaim a modest triumph and before it falls and you leap with a slow scissors from the horse (it seems bowed with gratitude) arched like a rain of mercy, a blessing on the moment. And then you smile. When your hand goes out (like) that; Where do you feel it? Is it something in the head, in the whole body, in the hand? Do you know what I mean?” “Yes, I do know what you mean. But it is hard to say. When the hand goes out that way, the muscles don’t lead it, and neither does the mind. The flesh doesn’t lead the spirit nor the spirit the flesh. It is a kind of wedding of the spirit and flesh.” (He had said it before, the first day I came “It is like a wind or a dark cloud that surrounds you and you are in it, and it belongs to you and it gives you the power to do these things”) “It is all a feeling; knowing when to turn your head to the right or the left. Knowing how it should feel so it will have (beautiful movement). I almost think I could do the somersault better with my eyes closed, not looking down at the horse to see where I land. I know where he should be and I should be. It is (all a matter of feeling how it should be)” Actually the audience doesn’t have much to do with it We talked about the fact that it wasn’t the danger, it wasn’t the skill, it wasn’t the applause that made the act what it was. It was principally the grace; the bringing into being, for a moment, the beautiful thing, the somersault, the leap, the entrechat on horseback. The skill, of course, has something to do with it. It is pleasant to know you can do anything so difficult. It is good when you have mastered it, and you are really in competition with yourself. “When we make a mistake in the ring we are very angry. The audience doesn’t know, but we know.” But it is a pleasure to do anything so difficult and do it gracefully. Then we talked about talking. It was good, Mogador said, to talk thus “Whatever is withheld is lost. Whatever we give away, whatever we throw away, what we disburden ourselves of is profit to us. We keep giving things away, throwing them out like old chairs out of a house; keep destroying until we can destroy no more.” “Because what is left is indestructible” I said. We were driving down a dirt road (now due east) toward the 2 o’clock rising sun. I lit a cigarette and handed it to Mogador. Man, with his specialized eye, and specialized hand, and foot & brain surveys the earth from his upright position and finds that all that moves & breathes obeys or could obey him. Order the earth then, man, for earth’s own good & for thy good. This seems to be the advice of those who study. Order the earth for its own good, and thus fulfill in loving thy duty and thy life. Mogador, I still haven’t gotten to say the thing I want to say about you and the whole family. It is that, to a greater degree than almost anyone I know, you are what you are. You are an acrobat in a family of acrobats. And you have arrived at that generation in the family which is most to be desired, the time of ripeness, the moment of fullest awareness of function and responsibility of producing beauty, songs of praise. You wanted to call this book “Unfolded Grace.” You said that early in the morning when we were both too tired to talk more, and you pointed out that it meant a lot of things. Unfolded Grace: the acrobat in somersault unfolding, landing lightly on horseback; the family in its generations unfolding, and arriving at the same moment, those same moments of unfolding grace. Why talk about the somersault, the leap and landing as such a great thing. It is great and small. It is a high achievement for man & no achievement at all for god or angel. It is proud and humble. It represents graceful victory over so many obstacles; the most elegant solution of so many problems. And yet like the blossoming of the smallest flower or the highest palm, it is a very little thing, and very great. Think, Mogador, of the freedom, in a world of bondage, a world expelled from Eden; the freedom of the priest, the artist, and the acrobat. In a world of men condemned to earn their bread by the sweat of their brows, the liberty of those who, like the lilies of the field, live by playing. For playing is like Wisdom before the face of the Lord. Their play is praise. Their praise is prayer. This play, like the ritual gestures of the priest, is characterized by grace; Heavenly grace unfolding, flowering and reflected in the physical grace of the player. I had a friend, a Hindu monk named Bramachari, whose monastery near Calcutta was called Sri Angan, which he translated as “The Playground of the Lord.” That is the key to the whole matter, the monks playing joyously and decorously before the Lord, praise the Lord. The playground, though sown with tares, is a reflection of Eden. I think there can be a “Circus of the Lord.” For we are all wanderers in the earth, and pilgrims. We have no permanent habitat here. The migration of people for foraging & exploiting can become, with grace, in (the latter days) a traveling circus. Our tabernacle must in its nature be a temporary tabernacle. We are wanderers in the earth, but only a few of us in each generation have discovered the life of charity, the living from day to day, receiving our gifts gratefully through grace, and rendering them, multiplied through grace, to the giver. That is the meaning of your expansive, outward arching gesture of the arm in the landing; the graceful rendering, the gratitude and giving. After his act the juggler crossed the road quietly lightly in slim white suit: a moving pillar a path of light in the darkness. VOYAGE TO PESCARA Never touched earth—once in my life— lived in a dream, always, until the circus began to come toward Rome ... Whirling (in Peter’s jeep) near the ancient Forum, we saw the signs (first one, then another) and said: We will go and take pictures; the life of a clown; a day at the circus. It will come in two weeks. For two weeks I thought about the circus. The day it arrived I was first on the field (Circus Maximus). Soon after came the men with a truckload of sawdust to spread in the ring. Each day, on Peter’s roof, I would write about the circus. And when I had written would go back and look again. Yesterday the circus pulled into town and I went to watch it. I walked over to the Circus Maximus and saw the small red car with the awning in front of it, and stood there and looked at the table under the awning, and saw the folded posters for the circus. I rounded the trailer and looked in the window; nobody in there, but coffeepots were on the stove. There were children playing on the field; young boys playing a game like soccer. I started to walk away when around the bend came a big truck with three men: a dark fat hairy man driving, a dark young sharp-nosed mustached man sitting beside him, on the back of the truck a blond young man, slim, tanned, with muscles rippling swift as lightning. Relaxedly the blond man sat on the truck, joggling as it bumped along over the ground of the Circus Maximus. The truck was full of dirt; of earth. Why does the circus need a truck of earth? They drove a little way into the field, and then the three stood on the back and shoveled the dirt onto the ground. “Terra for the piste,” a watcher explained (soft earth to overlay the stony flat top of the Circus Maximus). They shoveled it off onto the ground. The blond man was an acrobat. He should have been dressed in tumbler’s tights. He should have finished a flying act and taken a majestic bow. They went on laying terra for the piste. People seeing I was a stranger asked me questions about the circus: When would it be in? How long would it stay? Where had it been? Where was it going? A car came around the bend pulling a white clean trailer, like a white neat beetle in the rear. In the window of the low convertible, the face of an acrobat. Eyes alive aimed like slingshots alert as a rabbit’s features clean trim; tendons of the face pulled back like bowstrings; well fleshed but not a molecule to spare; radiance of an acrobat. When they dismounted from the car I asked them if they were not acrobats yes, they said, with diffidence (they did not want to be thought more than they were, nor too much less). Their wives, young girls, weary from travel, nostalgic for Paris. Now they had set their feet to earth at Rome, and would give a show. They said, “Look, it is coming.” Down the street a long line of red trucks (high as elephants, slow as caterpillars, lettered in gold) came rolling; stopped before the baths of Caracalla, waited a long time. Then the first truck turned into the lot, festooned with roustabouts. They rode like feathers on the van, rakish, calm; watching the morning with eyes that looked to its center, the center of morning, the gyroscope that whirls at the center of the world. The clear-eyed rakish people, innocent pirates, angel desperadoes; towns, roads and forests had washed through them, trees had plucked thin the webs from their eyes. They had been washed clean. They had been combed like wool. Their eyes were clear and radiant as the wool of dew. They joggled as the trucks bumped. They were on a flying ship. They had sailed in and landed here. They had moored like angels among us. They had brought honor again to the field. They were almost weary but they were alert (alive) moving always outward from the center, the center was deep deep deep; the center was deeper than all their centers. The center was a center all their roots could enter. One had a bandanna around his head, and one a black felt hat. The door of the first truck opened and one dismounted. His eyes were blue as depths of the sea; within them more than fire of sun. He wore a stocking cap over the live curls of his head; over the high bones of his cheeks was live sun-textured flesh. He was stocky (muscular) moved on the land like a mariner; took off his shirt with an arc of his hand, began to drop it as a gesture on the ground, but seeing one watch him, he held and did not let his mantle fall (when will the mantle of his acceptance fall like a blessing on the field?) The circus is here and this cloth shirt is the first cloth to touch it; the first and smallest curtain of the tabernacle. Now they will stake out the place of the ring; the place of the tent. Soon on its masts the tent will rise like a wing obscuring the earth, the ruins, the dome of St. Peter’s, and stand alone between earth and sky. The trucks move like caterpillars around in a ring; the red truck marking the area of wonder. Now the old Circus Maximus is alive. It had slept very patiently (waiting) and now it lives again, as though spring had flowered. From the tail of a plane, where the swifts flew, issued rectangular light square particles of paper, falling slowly, drifting snow above the trimmed trees to the roofs below and to the streets Martedi 3 luglio a 21.30 Grande Debutto Zoo Circus al Circo Massimo Colosalle Sarraglio And there in the tent he had seen it being made: the dark tent with the flap that led to the field beyond the Circus Maximus and beyond it San Pietro’s; three rings and the dark blue tent, the ribs that led down diagonally to the ground; the rings full of the sifted earth and sawdust enough to keep the horses happy but not to break the fall of acrobats. Zavata, the clown-ringmaster, in a blue-striped shirt, directing, harried, but bright; there is much to put up to arrange for an opening. Tonight it must go well. If tonight is good we shall stay in Rome a month, we shall be performers in Rome; we will be here for a month, we will be part of the flow of this life and all through the month of July a part of its flow. When we leave, Rome will remember and we will remember. Sitting in the tent they said, “But you could come this afternoon.” “Really?” “Surely!” After a tour of the zoo, where we enjoyed the small white pony, and where we saw the five staring baby wolves—and they gave me the french word, loups (cuteau), and indicated tiny with their hands—we issued from that tent and went around past theirs to the back of the main tent, the performer’s entrance, where we met William Randal, a French clown, cousin of Zavata, and Nono, the dwarf sténodactylo from a northern town in France, who, tired of life and taunts in an office, woke his parents one night when the circus was in town and said, “Please, Mother and Father, I desire to go with the circus.” They cried and he cried, but he went and has seldom cried since (so beautiful is his smile and so content his soul). He is a friend of William Randal’s. The Le Forts introduced me to another man, big and big-faced, stern and kindly, who shook my hand and said he was enchanted (and seemed to be) with an American journalist who had come to see the show. We talked of photographing the circus from the outside and at night from the inside with lights. There was music inside the tent. And though I tried to keep my eyes upon the presence of my friends, they strayed, hoping to catch a moment’s view of the ring. The Le Forts could see this and they asked the big-faced man if I could enter. William Randal looked at me to see if this is surely what I desired. In less than a moment I said yes, and the big-faced man said yes. And they said to me, and indicated with their hands, go with him (follow after and he will take you to your place). They came with me almost to the row of seats, then left for their trailer. The big man pointed to a row of blue canvas chairs and said, “Take your choice.” I thanked him and took the nearest one. After he departed another came, the perchist’s brother, whom I welcomed. He sat in the chair beside me. “Fait chaud,” he said, mopping his brow as a charade. “Yes, hot.” “Not many people.” “But for a matinee it isn’t bad.” “It is too hot. Last night the tent was full.” We watched the girl from Milan (the French clown’s friend) in a ballet dress as she rode a white and black horse around the ring; kneeling and leaning against his neck, and pointing one toe daintily in the air. She whirled down, spun around, and regained this position. She leapt from the horse and ran beside it. Again with a leap she mounted, sitting sideways on the bareback horse; her arms held out, her hands dropped prettily, jogging as the horse went around. Smiling she rode as with wings in the air. There was music playing. There were dancers. There was a family of boys who tossed a small brother from one to another and who leapt in the air as he swiftly ran under them. The wind blew open a flap that led to the performer’s entrance. In sunlight slanting through the door I saw the clean, taut, supple calves of an acrobat. A moment later, to solemn music, the Brothers Le Fort entered. A platform had been raised in the center ring and they stepped up and stood upon it, each at one corner of the platform. Facing the audience in front, they raised their arms slowly up the side and over their heads (a solemn salutation full of light), “Mesdames, Messieurs, we salute you. Behold, regard the wonder we have been gifted to perform.” They step together and René ascends, standing on the shoulders of his brother. Solemnly, as music plays, he drops his hands while Albert raises his. He then bends (hand to hand), he stands, René upon his palms, upon his brother’s upraised hands; and every muscle strains and every vein stands out; the muscles of the lower brother’s back are all symmetrical, and all stand out; the leaves and branches of the slim spinal tree, and all the human structure top to toe is taut with the effort of the ritual. Now René moves his weight to one side, pointing his toes, arcing his body to the right. His right hand presses down upon his brother’s; the left goes free to find a point of balance for the whole. A moment thus the form remains. Then René redescends, carefully, slowly, with lithe decorum, never breaking the mystical line of balance. There is a moment when they stand in line, their muscles still taut from the exercise. They stand outlined in the light, then they turn again to the audience, lift their hands; the applause is like the sound of leaves or rain. Now they face each other (music playing), grasp each other’s hands, and both lean back, their backs curve down like the line of a boat, with weight at the center. Then with Albert leaning back and René leaning forward, he lowers him to the floor. Albert’s knees rise up like a fulcrum. René, a lever, seesaws over them. Again they are hand to hand and begin a new ascent. With labor of muscles, Albert turns on his side, raising his brother as he does, thrusting him upward with his lower strength. There is a moment for the sculptor: Albert’s back beginning the ascent; then all is fluid again as they arise. And there is no art but this, the main a main, to reproduce the wonder of that rising. “Do you think,” they had asked, “an act like this is too slow for the circus in America? In the music hall I think it would pass, but for the circus do you think it is too slow?” Performers’ entrance; round stools the elephants stand on their heads on, a clown, a dwarf, two hand balancers working out, a girl in a ballet dress limbering up, a tan Norwegian horse waiting for his act to begin, the boys who work around the circus standing, watching, the flat cars out in the back with all the neighborhood children standing, watching, the German worker watching. William Randal practices his dance. Zavata gives him a couple of new ideas. Zavata suggests another trick, “Throw the puppet out when you dance with her. See, like this.” Randal watches. Sees that it’s funny. Everybody watches. All are charmed to see one instruct another. The perch-pole boys about to enter; the grey troupe’s perch-pole coming out of the curtain over the performer’s entrance. The juggler going to enter. Thin line of red lipstick on truck driver’s mouth, white satin tights over scrap-iron body, long, coarse blond hair, scar of lanced carbuncle on back of neck, the blond hair chopped off by barber (or stable boy). The big bag of chalk or sawdust they reach their hands into to dry them. The silhouette of the girl getting flipped by an understander against the performer’s entrance curtain in the long light of afternoon. The performer’s entrance is the place of the most (magic) activity. It is between the world of performance and preparation. The moment before flowering (long) after planting. A moment before the bursting of the bud; almost the moment of bursting. When the flap opens, it is the bud unfurling; the green bud of the flower. A charmed place. It is within the tent, not of it. It is intimate with the tent, but has a wide door to the backlots. To the audience it is the tabernacle from which the awaited enters. For the performers it is a place for a moment’s rest. In the afternoon it shares the streaming rays of sun, it gets the breeze, the view of the lot, the people beyond, the ruins, the world outside. The people inside are willingly cut off. The performers (priests) help them forget; help forget by giving them (the cream) give them the life of outside, concentrated and perfected, and thus refocusing them for another look at a world whose pattern they had lost a world before whose multiplicity their eyes had grown dim. THE JUGGLER The juggler is throwing and catching (standing where the tent flaps open) practicing his art. Hours a day, with Indian clubs steadily moving; if one of them drops, he moves very slowly, bending and reaching to pick it up. Two from the right hand two from the left, and catching two and two; one from the right, and one from the left, one from the right, and one from the left; catching them one by one. They wing through the air; they fly like birds. They land in his hand like pigeons roosting. They are clubs turning, whirling, birds flying, comets falling. They are fields moving, circling, flying, being moved from hand to hand (his hand sends flying, his hand brings home). But there is a law in earth and air to make the bird return. Between his turns the juggler stands holding his clubs, resting his weight, watching the earth. Again he is swift, is agile, full of wit. He commands and they follow; he sends them spinning where they intend to go. He is here, is there, moving swiftly; one who hides from cloud, to spring to mountain-cleft, to a voice within a flame. He leans back and throws them over his head (two at a time, two at a time) catching and throwing (under his right leg, under his left, under his right leg, under his left) his solemn dancing is only a way of letting clubs go by. The juggler is playing, throwing and catching, resting, returning; practicing his art. A LOVER OF CATS The young Czechoslovak told me he was a lion tamer, and that his father had been one before him; until a lion ate him. He said that nonetheless he loved lions and loved to be a trainer; that the work took tremendous concentration, that the lions were moody from day to day (one never knew) and it was better not to be married if one was to follow this profession. Lions were dangerous yes, but he liked them. After a few moments’ conversation, and a short uncomfortable silence, he excused himself. Later (from a distance) I saw him sitting alone on the crosspiece of his wagon, thinking. He had said he was a man without a country, that he would rather live with lions than people. Somebody told me that evening that he was not the tamer, that he was just a boy who helped around the zoo; feeding, cleaning up, prodding the lions as they prowled through their tunnel to the big cage for the performance. He stood alone at one matinee listening to the sound of the tamer’s whip, the growling beasts, the music of menace. His eyes were held by the movement of the enormous cats. When he saw me watching he looked away, and for several days I did not see him. Then I found him asleep under the bleachers in the afternoon; shirtless, facedown, resting on folded arms. Exactly at the center of his back (between his shoulder blades) there slept a small white mouse. A clown called me over to look. Aware of the audience the mouse half woke and moved to a higher position on the boy’s left shoulder. Later (waking) the lion-man held the mouse in his hand and stroked it, smiling very kindly. He took me back to his wagon to see the punctured cardboard box the white mouse lived in. One night during the show he sat in the shadows of the performer’s entrance. “How’s it going,” I said. “All right, it’s hot.” “How’s the small beast?” “What?” “How’s the mouse?” “Oh, fine”; he smiled. Later still, in the dark he stood looking in at the ring through a part in the performer’s curtain. A narrow shaft of strong light hit his face; shadows of the lions played across it. In the air was the sound of the crowd, the whip, the roaring, and the music. FRITZIST The lion tamer said to me, “He’s good; Fritz. He’s a character. He is an original man.” Fritz was over in the sunlight washing his feet; a big man in a visored straw cap and bathing trunks. He sat on a camp stool splashing his feet in a tub of water, methodically soaping one leg at a time. “Comment ça va, Fritz?” I said. “Ça ne va pas.” “Comé, çe ne va pas. C’est que vous fait mal?” “Ah, c’est le monde. C’est le temps. Le temps sont mauvais.” “Il n’y a pas de la paix?” “Jamais la paix. La guerre toujours. Encore il sera sûrment la guerre.” “Vous le croyez.” “Sûrement.” “Il n’est pas possible à faire la paix?” “Not a chance.” “But why have war? Nobody wants it.” “Yes, the capitalists want it. The capitalists on both sides want it. The people don’t, but they do.” “How does it work?” “The capitalists get government contracts to make guns and cannons. They make guns and cannons for ten years until all the governments have a big supply. There is nothing to do with a big supply of guns and cannons but shoot them.” “What can you do about it?” “Nothing. The capitalists are no good, and the communists are no good. In Czechoslovakia they have a big factory (it goes on for blocks) making automobiles, but in it they have people spying; if anyone does a good job, he gets a promotion. “That’s better. It’s an American idea.” “That’s not bad. But what is needed is to have bosses and workers working together, not against each other; just working together.” “How’s it ever going to happen?” “I don’t know. Everybody’s against everybody; French against Italians against Germans, and bosses against workers.” “What can you do about it?” “You can see the situation.” “But what can you do about it?” “Nothing. I don’t know. Oh yes I know. But nobody will ever do it.” “What’s that?” “It takes one man who knows all the languages very well to go from country to country, from factory to factory, and talk to the workers and talk to the bosses, and make them see the situation. And then get them to work together, main à main pour la paix. Not anticapitalist (we need capitalists). Teach the workers to work with the capitalists and teach the capitalists to work with the workers. Marxism is a good idea, but the people who believe it are not all good. Christianity is a good idea, but nobody practices it. We don’t need any more marxists or christians, what we need is men of goodwill. But even if somebody did that, went around from one place to another, and the idea was taking hold, someone would come up to him and say, Yes that’s a good idea, main à main pour la paix, we’d like to buy it for a large sum of money. (so they could use it their own way!) And don’t you think the guy would sell it?” “I don’t know.” “Ah!” said Fritz, “He would just as sure as you’re standing there.” THE DEVILS A busy mischievous music begins which has in it a thin vibration of the nether- world, and the two young devils rush into the ring (red tights horned hoods raised eyebrows and black capes). They scramble up the rope ladder onto their white diabolic seesaw; standing together a moment on the trapeze bar before they step carefully to opposite ends of the delicate teeter-totter high above the ring. Now the music begins, a waltz a plaintive song of an alto sax rising, rising, and pleading. They unclasp their capes and drop them to the ring. Jean is heavier and sits at his end adjusting the weight, while Jacques at the other end stands up raising his hands above his head. (The audience applauds while Jacques is standing) Jean gets up slowly slowly adjusting the balance at every move slowly slowly until he is standing. He raises his arms one to his side the other is slanting downward toward the center of the seesaw. Moving slightly, seeming to hold the balance only with the movement of his hand, while Jacques starts down leaning out to add weight bending his knees spreading his arms arcing his arms out slowly slowly until he is moored in a sitting position while Jean stands his hand held gently toward the center, playing (slightly) with his fingers strings of balance. Then Jacques descends farther, climbing carefully over the edge at his end; at first hanging on, then taking a bit in his mouth he hangs, extending his arms and pointing his toes to the ground. And Jean, still standing, moves his weight from foot to foot and holds his hand toward the center. The crowd is silent; rapt. Women look up; their hands clasped; their eyes are held as by some living glow; for all of us are on that moment’s balance. Then Jean cries out, drops to his end and both begin to swing head over heels head over heels; Jean over Jacques over Jean over Jacques; red devils flying as the white seesaw pivots on the trapeze bar; Jean over Jacques over Jean over Jacques to rollicking music. Then Jacques arrests the swing, stands on the trapeze bar, grasps a long rope, and slides down to the ring. Jean follows him. Both lift their arms, smile, then duck from the ring to a strain of their nether- world music. (Jacques told me that the most important thing in circus life is “Qu’on veut arriver!”) CHILDREN Three children sat on a trunk that William Randal keeps his dancing puppet in. The oldest was a boy, the wisest was a girl, the youngest was another little boy. The girl was sitting on the trunk, the boys were leaning over it and talking. All three of them wore new straw hats. The girl had a little paddle-like paper fan. She had large, wondering eyes; very serious and wise. And they were comfortable and well dressed and knew a great deal about the ropes and canvas and the show. They were talking over the things they knew. Earlier I had seen her climbing a rope ladder in her great straw hat, and the little boys were following. Now, on the trunk with her legs like a young deer’s resting, she sat and listened with gravity and amusement to the gay or solemn piping of their discoveries. CIRCUS AT TWILIGHT Sitting on the fence between the street and the circus, I watched the sun going down between the tent and the row of caravans and cages; watched the last of daylight die far off across the field across the city behind St. Peter’s dome. Here was the darkness, the slightly reddened twilight, the food wagon, sleeping wagons (dark and low) the eating tent, and then the new pond in the field (and their reflections walking in it toward the tent of tables) and the pump (and their figures bending to it humbly). Some sat near it and eating, spoonless, from tin plates, scooping up beans, drinking wine from deep long-handled canisters; and beyond the lake and the water hose, the avenue of lions (dark cage-wagons whence rose a plaintive roar). In lines as weary, graceful as the sky, as much at home as mountains, rose the tent. Above it were two lights and letters before. Below it were the midway lights; long pointed stars and gently looping vines of light, cascading as an arch above the midway. But in this lake this pond this pregnant sea, all is reflected here, all shadows pass as circus from the field; and light falls on it gently as a star. With the last 500 lire I bought marsala and eggs and sugar, and brought them to Fritz just after supper. He put them away in the electric wagon, saying thank you. At midnight I walked home, through the Roman ruins in tennis shoes, wondering sadly why I had not been asked for zabaglione. The day before they left Jean Le Fort said, “Surely you are coming with us.” I said, “Do you think so?” He said, “Surely.” I packed a canvas bag with a few things and returned to the field. All that night I watched the demontage while Fritz and Randal talked to each other about the circus life and laughed about me. When his work was done Fritz wrapped himself in blankets, stretched out his sleeping bag, and slept on the field while the heavy trucks rolled and backed around him (a dark cocoon on the black field with the dark night standing over him). I watched Raymond and George packing the last of the wire cables. I helped Harry stack the sections of iron fence. I watched the monteurs, mute as rain clouds rolling the tent in four huge bundles and loading them onto the truck; and bringing down the great central light and lowering the masts. I slept for a minute in one of the berths in a workers’ caravan hung with red coats and gold-striped pants. In the morning, dewy and cold with the air like ground glass we stood on the fields while the trucks lined up and waited. Fritz was up now, calling hoarsely, wearing his cap and jacket and checked green shirt. His truck was the first in line. He kept gunning it and waiting. On the way out of Rome in the early morning, on the long road, white- fenced and lined with flowering trees, we were guided by three municipal cops on motorcycles, friendly, turning back to signal the directions, glowering involuntarily beneath their black helmets. I rode in a big cab with Robert the chauffeur and two brothers from Savoy who did the perch-pole act. At one roadside place where we stopped for coffee, Fritz came stamping in, jacket off but wearing the windy green shirt, “Has anyone got a cigarette?” I had one and threw it to him. “Thanks!” he shouted, lighting and seeming to eat it. After the stop, Robert’s truck got ahead of the others and led the way out of the villages in the valley up the mountain roads in the clear morning. The motor heated. So did the day. We took off our sweaters, unbuttoned our shirts, leaned out of the windows. The red trucks followed up the winding roads like caterpillars. “Where’s Fritz?” “See, there below.” “Where are the Le Forts?” “Way down there. Just coming around. See the little white trailer?” Robert’s truck made all the hills with no trouble. But we could see the others pulling off to the side, stopping, rolling back. On one hill the Le Forts honked past us, pulling the light white trailer. They had put down the top of the roadster, two were sitting up front, two were outside on the back ledge of the rumble seat, waving as they went by. “What is the name of the next town?” “Rieti.” “Is it far?” “Another two hours.” At about two o’clock we pulled into Rieti. A few cars were there ahead of us and Banane had begun to stake out the ground. We were in a field a little outside town, near a big closed building (a theater or market) but still in an area of public drinking fountains, bars, and a watermelon stand. The villagers stood around watching us quietly. Fritz’s truck did not arrive till late. When it did he swung it into the lot. A cheer went up from the rest of us when he hopped out heavily and threw his cap to the ground. The monteurs (roustabouts), the roughest-looking crew to arrive, rolled off the trailer where they traveled, lying in the folds of the rolled green tent, sleeping or talking, making jokes, passing cigarette butts between them. Hats askew, hair uncut and full of dust, chins unshaven, grimed and sweaty from their travel, they leapt from the weather-beaten canvas, landing on the field like a rain of rockets. Frtiz went directly across the field to where a pipe coming out of the earth issued in a stream of water. He leaned down and drank from it, washed his face in it, looked up, drew breath, and smiled. I threw him a cigarette. He laughed. “Merci, Robert!” He reached in his pocket for matches; struck, and brought fire to it. Then he walked back across the lot where the other workers were eating lunch from tin army plates and drinking wine from field canisters. The generator truck was still on the road, turned off to the side, unable to move. The tent could be put up, but until the generator truck arrived, there was nothing real for us to do. The roustabouts, having eaten quickly, began to hammer at the iron stakes. “Now,” I said to Fritz, “shall we see the town a little?” “No,” he said, astonished, “I have to work. Tomorrow we will take a walk through the town.” “Good.” Toward 7 in the evening Jacques Le Fort and I stood in the grey light near the electric wagon, looking into the blackness of the tent, regarding absently a flap of tent and rope tied to a stake. “Do you like it?” “Yes, it is a good place for me. I’m glad I came along.” The crowds were beginning to gather, but there was no saying whether they would see a spectacle tonight. Fritz came and sat beside us on the steps of the wagon. “Where will you sleep tonight?” “Here on the ground.” “No, I’ll give you my mattress,” said Fritz. “And I’ll bring you a blanket. Jean has one in the car,” said Jacques. “And Randal will bring him a blanket; he told me he would,” said Fritz. “Wonderful,” I said. Jacques smiled, looking at me intensely but with amusement and delight, measuring all meanings in his glance. From the beginning he had regarded me familiarly as one who had been born in his household. Considered exteriorly, he might have seemed thin, nervous, intellectual; more mind than heart. Actually the balance was more human, his way of regarding me avuncular. While we talked William Randal came up with a neatly folded soft wool blanket. “My mother sent it,” he said, smiling. “Do you think it will be warm enough?” “Sure it will,” I said, handing it to Fritz, who put it beside him in the wagon. “I’ll get ours,” said Jacques, going over to his car. It was one they had had around the rear right tire to keep it from the sun as it stood in the field. He tugged at it a minute until it came loose. “OK?” “Great.” I carried it back to Fritz, who folded them both together, took them and stowed them on top of his bunk. And we sat down to wait again for the generator truck. It was 8:30 before it arrived and then we discovered it didn’t work. Crowds stood inside the tent, mystified at the total darkness. Fritz left his perch on the steps and beelined it for the other side of the tent. He had to work against the darkness, striking matches, cursing in Czech, French and Italian, grimy and glowering. Angry at the dynamo, at the management, at the totality of things. I had some cigarettes and popped them to him; never too often. He was always glad to see them, always laughed as they arrived through the air. Matches too (he was always out of them). I would light them and cup them. He would lean into the light; over a rope, under a rope, bending down to couple the great plugs and sockets. “Merci, Robert,” he would say through the cigarettes as he ran and scuttled about the edges of the tent, working like a man with eight hands. At last there was light and Fritz, disgusted with how long it had taken, walked from the field. The crowd, never discouraged, moved in for the performance. By this time I had grown too fond of the performers to watch their acts. If they wanted to balance high in the air, that was their privilege. More likely I would stay some distance from the ring, outside the tent, hearing the music, being with them silently from afar and imagining the performance. One time at Rome during an aerial act, I stood in the tent beside Jacques, who realized I wasn’t watching. “Why aren’t you looking?” he said. “Don’t know,” I replied. He laughed again, giving me a quick, penetrating glance. After the performance Fritz pulled out the khaki-colored mattress from his bunk and put it down beside the tent, across from the electric wagon. He laid the blankets down on it, threw me a cushion for under my head, brought out his sleeping bag, and unrolled it at the foot of the steps that led to his wagon. “I’ll be back soon,” he said. I lay still, watching the tent move in the slight breeze, shadows of the ropes in moonlight moving as the canvas moved; looking, too, at the iron stake with hammered head. Lions, muffled in their cages, roared. The tent breathed heavily, creaking at the poles like a vessel at anchor. Fritz and three friends, laughing easily, passed at a distance. Then lions again, and the chattering of monkeys. The circus was like a quiet night in the jungle. In the morning I looked over at the sleeping bag. Fritz was just waking up too; eyes friendly and good smile. “Bonjour, Monsieur Robert!” “Bonjour, Monsieur Fritz.” “Bien dormi?” “Très bien. Et vous-même?” “Oui, très bien.” He sat up, reached for his straw visored cap, rolled up his sleeping bag, and threw it into the wagon. “I’ll see you later,” he said, and disappeared around the tent. I lay still a few minutes, watching the morning, then got up, folding the blankets and sliding the mattress back into the wagon. I took a turn around the tent, then found a little dusty road that led off toward the hill that overlooked the town. There was a monastery at the top of the hill. I had seen it yesterday and thought I’d climb up there today. The climb was winding and not too far. The hill overlooked the neatly cultivated valleys, fresh and child-like in the morning haze. The monastery seemed to be deserted, but eventually I ran into two young monks, tonsured and wearing the brown robes of the Capuchins. “Are you a tourist?” they asked me. “No, I’m with the circus. You see it below there?” The green tent in the valley looked big and was clearly the most living thing on the landscape. “Is it a good circus?” “Oh yes!” “Very big?” “Quite big, yes.” “Many animals?” “Yes; elephants, lions, tigers, monkeys, wolves too.” “Imagine! Would it be a good circus for a monk to see?” “Oh yes!” “No vulgar acts?” “Oh no!” “No naked women?” “I don’t think so; it’s a very nice show.” “Really?” “Oh yes. You ask for me and we will get you some tickets.” “Are you sure?” “Yes, we’d be glad to have you.” “Afternoon or night?” “Whichever you like. You will see the animals. It’s a very beautiful show.” “Maybe we will come down and just see the zoo.” “Good.” “Good then, we will see you later.” “Yes, I’ll look for you.” I went down the hill feeling happy. Later, going up toward the main street of Rieti I saw the Le Forts; Jean wearing a white shirt and shorts and a white cap. They were shopping, but had found all the dairies closed. “Dové la latteria, per favore?” “La latteria é chiusa.” “Perché la latteria é chiusa?” asked Jean, liking the sound of his own Italian. “Perché la latteria é chiusa?” He kept it up all the way down the street. When we were sure all the dairies were closed, we went back up the hill for an aperitif; the first white cinzano I had ever drunk. “How do you like traveling with the circus?” “Great!” “It’s not too bad.” (I was part of their family by now, having married an imaginary sister) That afternoon Fritz and I went down to the river, took off our shirts, and lay in the high grass and the hot sun. Everyone was there from the show. The managers brought folding beach chairs. Their children played near them, standing on their hands and turning cartwheels. The Le Forts, in bathing suits, waded and swam a little in the swift rocky stream. I took pictures. Fritz stretched out facedown in the grass (contented) the director’s children astride his shoulders. Later, as the sun went down, Fritz and Harry (the cage-boy) and I walked through the town. Fritz got himself a new white cap and, it being payday, another just like it for me. The label inside said “Sporman” and it was obviously meant to be worn at yachting parties. We got some marsala at a wine shop and drank it in the cool of what seemed to be a sweets shop with tables. Later we all walked up the dusty road toward the monastery, but now in the afternoon it seemed too far away. Just before supper, Freddy (a German 22-year-old who worked in the menagerie) asked if I could make a call for him to Rome. He wanted to leave the circus and there was someone in Rome who’d give him a job as a chauffeur; an English fellow. I called the number he gave me. “Hello, I’m calling for Freddy Muhlhaussen.” “Oh good!” “He says he wants to leave the show and come to work for you. Have you still got the job?” “Yes, I’m glad to have him come. Just tell him to call me when he gets to Rome.” “OK then.” “All right, and thank you.” He seemed very happy. “Are you sure you want to go?” I asked Freddy. “Yeah, I’m sick of the circus.” “OK then.” “OK, thank you very much, eh?” “Yeah, so long.” He looked troubled but he had made up his mind. I ate bread and cheese at a store in town and walked back over the bridge as the lights came up. The sky was beginning to cloud and I looked down at the grey river, roaring swiftly over its rocky bed. The next morning Fritz said, “You can ride on the chapiteau today.” That meant his second trailer. First the truck with sections of the iron fence stacked in the back. Then the first trailer; all the steel masts and girders laid out lengthwise on it and bound with wire cables. Then a flat trailer for the chapiteau; the big tent in six huge rolls (like blinis) tied with the ropes that hold it in place on the field. I climbed onto the middle and lay down on the canvas. It was soft as a mattress. Fritz laughed, went forward to the cab of the truck, and gunned the motor. We swung around the field majestically and put out toward the town, leading the procession of trucks, trailers and caravans (all red and battered- looking, all driven by people I now knew well) over the bridge and out through the town. On a high plateau we went through orchard land. Leaning on one elbow, my feet in tennis shoes hooked underneath a rope, I watched the countryside go by. The day was bright. The fields were like children in the early morning. The trailer rumbled, stopped often at every rise. If it was in danger of rolling back, Puncho would jump out of the front seat, while Fritz was still rolling, and get ready to set little wooden wedges behind the rear wheels of the truck and trailer to keep them from rolling back. I only watched, snug enough on the tent, and not knowing what to do. The smell of the exhaust was like burning badger hair; it got in my eyes and made them sting. I closed them and lay my head down on the canvas. The poles rumbled and clanked in the trailer ahead. Those on top joggled about loosely. If ever one had slid back toward my trailer, I’d have had to jump for it. My trailer was tied to the one up ahead by a little twisted piece of metal. I was at ease lying on the tent, feeling princely, riding under the open sky, watching the fields go by. But I was also disquieted, knowing that except for the love of God and Fritz’s vigilance, everything about the truck and trailer was makeshift; that the managers, for the most part, were probably trusting to luck. We rode barely squeezing through the narrow streets of three little towns. Old ladies in the windows waved to us. Young men and children on the streets would shout, and if there was a policeman on the square, he would nod gravely and smile familiarly (a smile for the right kind of circus). I was wearing Fritz’s Sporman cap and, where it seemed right, waved it. Down a long road, through an avenue of trees, we approached Aquila. Rough spots and sharp rocks caused a few big jolts. As we came to the field, preceded by one or two cars, the right rear tire on Fritz’s truck blew out. He stopped, got out of the truck, kicked the tire, hurled a Czech malediction at it, and got back into the cab. We had arrived, so I jumped off. He wheeled the truck and trailer around onto the field. I was about to follow him on foot when Harry showed up. “Hi,” I said, “where are you going?” “Over to town for something to eat,” he said. “I’ll come with you. Just want to tell Fritz.” “He’ll know,” said Harry, “come on.” It was hot (noonday) and we went down a little dusty road to a country store that sold grain, farm supplies and a small stock of groceries. We bought rolls, cheese, sardines and bottled lemonade; ate them at a table with the sun beating in. Harry liked the meal and he liked being away from the circus. He joked with the tired lady who ran the store, and with an all-day customer who sat on a crate against the wall. As we started up the little rutted path that led to the field, I saw Fritz heavily running down the path. “Robert!” He grabbed me by both shoulders. “Where have you been?” “I got something to eat,” I said. “Ah,” he said. “I get out of the truck. I look in the chapiteau. And where is he? He’s bounced off the truck. I go back and look for you, all along the road ...” “I was going to tell you,” I said. “I’m sorry.” “No, it’s all right. Only I thought we had lost you.” “I’m sorry. I should have told you.” “No. Forget it. Did you eat?” “Yes.” “Good. I’ll go and eat too.” “Yeah.” “See you later.” All the trucks were in now. The performers had arrived, by families, and were beginning to set up their tables for the noon meal. I ran into William Randal. “Hey, Fritz is looking all over for you.” “I know. I just saw him.” “Where were you?” “I went down the road to get something to eat.” “Should have told him.” “I wish I had told him.” “He was looking all over for you,” said William. “Come over here, I want you to meet someone. This is Monsieur Le Deuff.” A man in a well-made panama hat, his face the shape of an almond, his physique as delicate as that of a praying mantis, Baron Le Deuff, whose home was in St. Malo, traveled with the circus as paymaster, but thought of it as a sort of hobby, too. Behind his thin-rimmed glasses his brown eyes were lively and perceptive. His thin lips were made to pronounce words clearly. His French was good to hear, and his English too. He sat in the shade of William Randal’s tent. Before him was a table with salad and wine, as though he were eating on the deck of his yacht. “I hope you’ll enjoy the journey,” he said. “We must get together sometime and talk about the circus.” “I’d like to,” I said. “Right now, though, there’s nothing for me to do but sleep.” I suddenly felt overcome with exhaustion. “Yes, you must sleep,” said Monsieur Le Deuff. And William Randal agreed. I stopped by a moment to see the Le Forts. They had just sat down to eat under a little canopy outside their white trailer. “We were looking for you,” said Jacques’s wife. “You were?” “We wanted to ask you to dinner.” “What a shame. I just went down the road and had something to eat.” “Ah well, another time!” Randal, I felt, was my friend; un copain. We would drink an aperitif, or pass the time of day. He presented me formally to Monsieur Le Deuff, to his mother, and his fiancée who rode bareback. But the Le Forts, though they were younger than I, were somehow aunts, uncles, and cousins. I felt at home in their trailer, or looking over their album of pictures. It was a place I could visit whenever I pleased. “The truth is, I would have been too sleepy to eat. I’ve never been this tired.” “You should take a nap this afternoon. You shouldn’t do anything else.” “I will,” I said. “Do you need a blanket?” “No thanks, I’ve got the one you lent me.” “What about a pillow?” “I’ve got a pillow too ... over at Fritz’s.” “Did you see him? He was looking for you,” said Jacques. “Yes, I know.” “Get some sleep. We’ll see you later.” Fritz was back at the electric wagon, throwing out coils of wire. “I’m beat,” I said. “Going to take a nap.” “Sure,” he said. “Take a blanket and a pillow and go up there in the field. No one will bother you.” He pointed to a white terra-cotta wall. It was all that remained of a ruined house a little way up the hill, away from the traffic and the noise of the montage. It would cast a shadow all afternoon. Scarcely able to move, almost drunk from exhaustion, I went up the hill, around the back of the wall; spread out the blanket, threw down the pillow, and lay down. The earth spun under me as I lay back. Before I closed my eyes, I looked down at the field again: the circus rising, the tent shining in the sun. I slept for several hours, more deeply than I can ever remember. When I woke, it was late afternoon. Light slanted in from the far hills; shadows were long in the grass. I woke feeling as though in sleep something significant had fallen into place, and I had become part of the whole. That night we slept under the wagon. Fritz gave me the sleeping bag and two blankets. He kept the mattress and a third blanket. We spread them lengthwise under the wagon trailer where the electric equipment was kept. I went to bed early and was asleep before the night performance was over. At three in the morning I woke up. Fritz was asleep but tossing unhappily, coughing every few minutes. My extra blanket made it too hot, and I wanted to throw it across to him. I sat up carefully, because the wagon was low, wondering if I could do it without waking him. He coughed again. Let it go, I thought, he’s maybe used to it. I went back to sleep, burdened with the extra blanket. When I woke up it was late in the morning. Fritz had already gotten up and gone, leaving his mattress on the ground beside me. I wandered up to town and had breakfast on the fine colonnaded terrace of a café which caught the morning sun. George Wong and his father and a little sister joined me, eating peaches out of a net bag, while I drank coffee and ate rolls. Before noon I came back to the lot and saw Fritz hurrying from the main entrance of the tent where the switchboard was to the electric wagon. From the way he carried his head I knew he was feeling bad. He ducked under the wagon, and by the time I had gotten over there, he was back on his mattress half asleep. Monsieur Jean, one of the directors, went by shouting for Fritz and muttering to himself. But he didn’t think of looking under the wagon. At noon I came by again and spoke to him. “Hey! Fritz, do you want something to eat?” “No, I’ve got a fever. I want to sleep.” His lips were chapped, his eyes half closed and weary; their movement seemed to be turned inward, like quicksand. He was unhappy, sick and angry about his condition. At about three I started up to town. The afternoon was bright and hot. Vendors had set up stands and were selling slices of watermelon. Paul, Fritz’s assistant, brought three little slices; one for me, one for him, and one for Papa Zavatta, who, as everyone seemed to know, was very fond of it. Standing up on one of the trucks, looking down into the skylight of his reflex camera, was George Wong. He had it pointed toward the tent and the crowd. “How do you think this will be?” he asked from up there. At the stand outside a dark little vegetable store in town, I bought a small bag of tomatoes. The lady wrapped them in a paper cone. I washed them a few at a time in the clear jet of a little fountain in a quiet, empty public square before the worn stone steps of a twilight-colored church. The moment seemed both foreign and familiar. The next day we set out for Populi. It was not too far from Aquila to Populi, but the road was steep. Every few minutes we would come to a new steep incline and Fritz would have to brake the truck. Puncho and I would jump down and set blocks under the wheels. Then Fritz would start up again. As the convoy rolled forward, I would take the blocks out, set them on a little ledge next to the tent, and scramble onto the trailer while Puncho hopped back into the truck. The day was beautiful, but as the morning advanced it got very hot. At one point on a level stretch, Fritz stopped again, came back to my trailer, and detached it from the first trailer which carried the rattling steel poles and girders. “You stay here with the tent,” said Fritz. “It’s too heavy to pull up the hill.” “All right.” For a minute, after Fritz and Puncho drove off with the truck and trailer full of steel poles, I felt marooned. Still I was confident, reassured that they would be back for us; without the tent, there couldn’t be any performance. We were off to one side of the road in a nice part of the countryside. I liked seeing the fields and the hills around, and I liked sitting alone on the wagon with the tent, in the midst of it. I got down, found a red ladder at the side of the truck and, for a moment, set up my own circus. At the edge of the road I stood the ladder on end and stepped up onto the bottom rung and stood balancing on it for a moment. Then I tried the second step, holding tight to the stays of the ladder and leaning back to keep balanced. But the ladder fell forward and I let go. I kept trying until I got as high as the second step. Then I had another trick: standing on the lower rungs and walking with the ladder as though I were on stilts. Whatever I attempted, I did with as much professional flair as possible, bowing graciously to an unseen audience. By the time Fritz came back with the truck, I was up on the tent again, stretched out, leaning on one elbow, looking out over the summer fields. After they had left me, there had been an accident. On a particularly steep incline, the poles in the first trailer had begun to slide. In a second they had avalanched off the trailer and onto the road. At the top of the hill Fritz attached our trailer to “Le Dodge” and went back to pull the poles himself. A crowd of monteurs climbed onto the tent and rode with me: Henri, who had been interned in the States, and had heart trouble and periodic nervous crises; Banane, a Russian from Berlin, the chief monteur, and Marcel, an amiable roustabout who helped prod the lions out of their cages and had a felt hat turned down all around, sideburns, and a carefully trimmed mustache. They passed a bottle of wine among them, made jokes, slept briefly in the folds of the tent. When we got to Populi, Banane and the monteurs began to lay out the lines in a piazza in the center of town. Fritz sat for a moment on a concrete curbing at the side of the lot, with his chin in his hands. He was still feeling ill. He was angry at himself and everyone else because of it. I stood beside him for a minute, then decided to have a look at the town. It was almost noon and the sky was overcast. The streets were narrow and angular, opening out in one or two places to flat public squares. In one of these, the menagerie wagons had been lined up in a hollow rectangle. The ticket office was set up in another. So it seemed as though there were two shows in town. Harry was working as I went by, tightening a bar on one of the cages. I found a restaurant in town, a little place with red paint around the borders of the windows, a row of potted plants inside, all signs that lunch would be expensive but it seemed to be the only restaurant open. A director and one of the starring clowns were there, already eating when I came in. I ordered spaghetti, cheese and wine. I walked through town; Populi was just the right name for it. It had public schools, banks, post offices, and a sober, civic-minded population. Political posters were on the old stone walls: Parti Communiste. The day continued overcast, changing every twenty minutes; showers, a few moments of sunshine, and then clouds again. I stopped back at the circus several times to see how the montage was progressing and how Fritz was feeling. One time I found him sitting outside his wagon talking to ten or fifteen men of the town: against the communists and in favor of Fritz’s kind of peace. Later in the afternoon I climbed a hill toward an old castle, got lost in a patchwork of backyards, and finally scrambled down to a narrow street that led back to the circus; past an old man on a stone bench who sat leaning on his cane, past two old women talking together on the stone steps of their house, past a little girl with long blonde hair. I drank water from a public fountain and read a proclamation (heavy black letters on yellow paper) where the mellow light of late afternoon fell on the rugged wall. I went back to the circus. The tent was up now and they were beginning to sell tickets. Fritz’s cold was worse, but his spirits were better. He took off five minutes and went down to a café where we drank coffee with a shot of rum. Toward evening I walked through the town again and ran into the janitor of the public school, who took me on a tour of the building. Later he gave me the name of his relatives in America and let me look out of the upstairs windows at the beautiful fields beyond the town. The monteurs were in all the bars, being very well treated by a democratic population. All of them liked Populi. I ran into Harry as he came out of the menagerie, and we headed immediately for a grocery store, bought bread and cheese and anchovies, and ate them standing at the counter. Then at a café we filled a Coca-Cola bottle with hot coffee, added a few shots of rum, and carried it back to Fritz along with some aspirins. He was pleased. He’d been having some trouble with the generator and couldn’t get off the lot. He hadn’t eaten for two days, but rum and coffee was just what he needed. By 7:30 the crowd outside the tent was enormous. We had set up only one ring in this town, and were charging only 100 lire a ticket instead of 250 (a one-night stand in a town of poor farmers). By the time the evening performance began, the tent was fuller than it had been since Rome. Children were sitting on the ground in front of the bleachers all the way up to the ring. An enthusiastic crowd, they applauded, demanded encores, gasped at the aerial acts, and were convulsed with laughter at the clowns. Their country faces, ruddy from the fields, shone with delight in the performance. Their dark eyes followed each move, bright with amazement. Their lips were a little open (poised), ready to shout or smile or laugh aloud. None of us had ever known such an enthusiastic and sympathetic audience. The performance itself improved, reaching top form in a single, lively ring. At the end, when the children were doing le can-can francais, and before the final circling of plumed horses, I took a walk out away from the town, down a dark main road that led to a long bluff overlooking a valley. The stars were bright and seemed near. I sat down at the roadside and looked out over the dark stretch of lowlands. I felt melancholy and yet untroubled; curiously estranged but at the same time at home. It was as though, sitting on this dark rock on a far-off hillside, I had been carried home for a few minutes to sit in the darkness of the hills I knew; hills I knew as well as my own blood, whose depths I had measured as well as my own heart’s, but which in the end I knew no better than the hills around me now (no better and no less). For I was close to each, and far away. Almost weeping, yet with an endurable sorrow, I looked out over the valley, down into its darkness. Not far off down the road, in a rising mist, was the strand of lights which looped before the tent. Later, Fritz and I slept under his wagon, putting our mattresses on the road across the width of the wagon so that we faced the tent. I slept soundly; Fritz must have too. I woke at about 5:30 and there was already a grey light dawning. Fritz was just waking then too. “Bonjour, Robert, bien dormi?” “Oui, très bien, Fritz. Ça va mieux?” “Oui, ça va mieux. C’est tout passé.” I could have slept another hour but felt a presence near me, urging me to look in its direction. I looked down toward the foot of the mat. Leaning down easily, smiling kindly, attentive, eager, but not importunate, was George Wong, my particular friend in the family of Chinese acrobats. I had forgotten that we had planned to ride together on the tent (le chapiteau) today. But he had arrived exactly on time, well dressed, with his good new camera slung over his shoulder in a dark leather case. Fritz got up, pulling his mattress after him. I rolled up the sleeping bag and put it in the back of the truck among the lights and wires. Then George and I climbed up on the tent trailer and waited for the caravan to move. The road out of Populi went downhill at first, then for a long level stretch through the fields. George and I lay in the folds of the tent, looking up at the sky and white clouds blown in from the sea, then out at parched and stubbly fields where hay had been harvested. An hour out of Populi we stopped for coffee and rolls. “How’s it going?” asked Fritz. “Great,” said George. “Wait till you see the roads we have to go down,” said Fritz. At about 11 we came to the road leading down to Pescara. The sun by now was bright and hot; the road was narrow with chalky cliffs on either side. Fritz slowed the truck slightly and we could feel the tension of resistance to the sharp descent. The road, which must have begun as a goat path in the mountains, was never meant for trucks and trailers. But Fritz threaded its abrupt turnings cautiously and neatly; leaning out of the cab and working within an inch of the rocks at one side of the road. We crept down for almost an hour. We could sense in all we saw, and by the smell and feeling of the air, that we were coming to the sea. We leveled off for a few minutes, climbed another hill, and then came down to the outskirts of Pescara. The road had widened out now and was completely flat and straight. We passed a line of stands and restaurants. And now both of us were excited by the prospect of coming to the sea. I knew, and had known for several days, what Pescara would be like; far off at the foot of the mountains, white sand, white sun on the breakers of a green sea. The other trucks were catching up to us. On the one just behind us, the roustabouts rode, some in the back with the materials, some sitting on the roof of the cab. “As soon as we get there, we’ll put on our bathing suits and go down to the ocean,” I said. “We can take our cameras,” said George. It didn’t surprise us that the circus lot was so near the sea. Our only disappointment was that it wasn’t right on the sand. Yet we didn’t run to the ocean the minute we got there. We first followed Fritz to a big, light, airy, and newly built café for cups of black coffee and sugared rolls. Then, when it was almost time for lunch, we took a run, George and I, down to the seaside. The sand was not white, but a bleached tan, coarse-grained, good for mixing with concrete. The sky was not Italian blue, the sun no whitely glowing ball, but both, for the moment of noon, a little hazy. There were breakers all right, but the waves were a sandy mixture of brown and grey, roiled water. Even the castles of its spray were circled with moats of sand. The two perchistes (perch-pole artists) from Savoy had gotten here ahead of us. “Can’t swim in it,” they said. “It’s the change of seasons, August ninth and tenth, feast days of Pescara’s fisherman saint. Nobody ever goes swimming then. It’s forbidden. Tomorrow will be OK.” The snarling ocean affirmed what they said. “Well, we can take pictures anyway,” said George, taking one of me in a state of desolation. We ate in an upstairs restaurant whose blinds seemed habitually drawn against the sun. We ordered a dish of fish and rice. While we were eating, a clown, whom I had usually seen in his spangled costume, came over to our table, followed by a beautifully smiling woman with lively dark brown eyes. He introduced her to us as his wife, saying that she spoke good English (and she did). In the afternoon we went to the beach again, this time meeting the Le Forts, who never missed a chance to swim, and the two Savoy brothers of the perch-pole act. Though one of the Le Forts rushed into the water briefly, the rest of us stayed out; the acrobats playing ball and turning handstands on the beach. There was a festival in town that night for the fisherman saint. Most of it took place on a couple of boardwalks along the sea, just a step from the circus grounds. When I got back from supper (which I ate alone at the café), I looked for Fritz. But 15 minutes earlier someone had seen him going toward the festival in his white cap. I had expected him to wait for me. But I had gotten back too late. I found my white cap too, put it on, and went out toward the boardwalks. The first of these was a block from the ocean and ran like a deck raised above the sand. The street was festooned with streamers, archways and strings of many-colored lights. A few little stands sold candy, paper birds, hot crullers and little bright red shrimp. Songs of the sea came over a rudimentary speaker system with every scratch amplified and every note pathetically distorted. Yet they were wonderful carnival songs, sung with spirit and listened to in innocence. Beyond the runway of lights and music, the night and the sea seemed a high black wall: a realm of mystery from which things came (winds, mist, the fish and prawns, and even these bright- eyed celebrants on shore), a mysterious realm from which things came, but into which no one should carelessly enter. Was Fritz out there, somewhere beyond the lights, walking along the shore? I wandered among the stands, alone and melancholy. The mist was falling heavily as rain. I was coming closer to the source of the music, when on an impulse I turned, stepped as quickly as I could out of the area of lights, walked back in a straight line through the field to our tent with its filtering lights (the familiar blare of its trumpets, the muffled percussion of its disciplinary drums). I lay down on my pad in the grass behind the electric wagon, listening to the music of circus and fair as they battled each other in the night. Then, off in the direction of the sea, rockets went up, red and green sprays of light which spread and glowed, and fell quietly and sadly back into the night. The little runway of lights was still aglow, even after the circus had ended, and the people, talking excitedly, had burst like a wind out of the broad main entrance, then slowed and went off home. I was asleep before Fritz got back to the wagon. The next morning was Sunday and I had found a little church (as fragile as a sailboat) between the lot and the sea. At mass there was a handful of little old ladies, mostly in black, and a few soberly dressed, round, kind and serious-looking men. But standing in back were the young of the parish: beautiful young girls with bright scarves on their heads; young men in suits they could have worn only on Sundays. A marble plaque embellished with an anchor listed the names of parishioners lost at sea. But the little church was light as a skiff, and the mass was red as wine and brighter than gold. Feeling light and happy, I passed through the lot; stopped a moment to talk to the Le Forts. “Will you be coming with us tomorrow?” they asked. “No, I think I’d better be going back. Where is it tomorrow?” “San Juliana,” they said, “then Rimini. Rimini is very nice. You’d better come along.” “I’ll see. Anyway, I’ll see you before tomorrow.” I went over past the tent to the main street and into the airy café where we had first checked in. Fritz was there and so was George Wong. We had caffe latte and sugared rolls. We sat a long time talking about the weather. Then Fritz went back to the tent. George and I went around the corner to take a picture of the circus billboard: the caravan threading down a mountain road. Later I went back to the wagon and lay down again on the mat which we had left spread out on the grass. Fritz, all washed and shaved, and again with the cap, asked me if I wanted to take a stroll over to the fair. I said sure, and we cut through the field to the boardwalk. We ran into Paul, a Breton, who helped Fritz with wiring. He was just coming out of one café, so we strolled along together to another with flap doors that let in air and sunlight. We each ordered a vino rosso, and shared a couple of pieces of heavily spiced salami. “Sure you don’t mind my coming along?” I asked Fritz. “I wouldn’t have asked you,” he said. We wandered around the stands for another half hour and then went back to the tent. Toward noon, I walked into town, asked a man in the street for the name of a good restaurant; not too expensive. He took me over to one owned by a friend of his, just a few blocks from the circus. Everyone else had discovered it that day too. All the tables were full of people from the show. I ordered a “spaghetti al burro” and carafe of wine, then took coffee with Monsieur Le Deuff and the Italian accountants for the show. “We’ll have to be getting back to France,” Le Deuff was saying. “Business is good, but traveling here is expensive and taxes are terrible.” As long as they were in Italy, a couple of Italian entrepreneurs were taking a cut of the profits. When they got to Rimini in three days, they could turn back, then go over the border and into the south of France. “It has been beautiful,” Le Deuff said wistfully, “but far too expensive.” After lunch, I sat inside the tent, alone on one of the planks in the gallery. Sunlight streamed in from the top of the tent (from the holes that surrounded the center pole) three separate rays which fell as three discs of light into the ring. One was on the bright red tabouret the elephants sat on, one straddled its diagonal blue leg, the third stood poised sedately in the ring as though having performed and about to perform again. There was no sound in the tent, and no other activity but that of the lights and occasionally the breathing of the whole tent when a breeze sighed through it. When the wind moved the tent, the discs of light were displaced from the stool to the ring where they were shaken like dice; set in motion as though by the hands of a juggler. But as the earth moved away from its noon, they mounted again up the blue diagonal toward the top of the red tabouret. The sun was blazing white outside the tent. The silence was almost too perfect to enter. Then at a moment which seemed foreknown, a stir of wind went through the tent. The monteurs roused in their rolling barracks, a child ran out of one of the wagons, and Fritz came stepping over a rope to say that we ought to take a walk by the sea. We walked out on a long pier decorated with little triangular banners, looked out at the slate blue horizon, then sat on a wooden bench to wait for the boating regatta to begin. It was good just to sit there and look at the sea. Occasionally, a wildly decorated boat would cruise by to join the others at the inlet, and crowds began to gather on the pier. Occasionally, too, a breaker would roll in and I would notice (without great interest) that the water had cleared, but that now the sky was slightly overcast, the air once more a little cool, and the notion of even slightly offending the fisherman saint by swimming was unthinkable. But sitting on the rough bench and watching the sea was all I suppose I had hoped to do when I first heard that the circus would go to Pescara. At about half past six in the evening, we hooked up the amplifying system and began to play music to call in the crowds for the after supper performance. A couple of accordion waltzes from Marseille, an Italian “paso doublé,” and an old bit of American jazz, too scratched and obscure to recognize. Then Fritz said, “This is my favorite song,” and played a blue-labeled record he had of Gounod’s Ave Maria. People of Pescara began to drift toward the tent for the performance. I went to the same restaurant for supper and again ran into Le Deuff. We talked a little about the circus, and then, after drinking a beer together, he bicycled and I walked back to the lot. When I got back I found him dealing with the major problem of the day. Thirty gypsies (men, women, and children) all brightly dressed, had stood at the main entrance for almost three hours demanding admission. Le Deuff let them in for 50 lire (about 10 cents) apiece, which was also a tenth of the usual price. Later everyone said it had been a joy to perform for them. Fritz was already stretched out on the sleeping bag, behind the electric wagon, when I got back and sat down on mine. “This is a good life,” he said, “out under the stars.” “Everyone ought to know what it’s like,” I said. “Funny,” he said, “everyone wants to be rich. I like to be poor.” “Fritz?” I said “Qu’est-ce que c’est, Robert?” “Rien.” I was wondering what it was like when the circus went into winter quarters. Did he sleep on the floor in a cold room? “There go the fireworks!” said Fritz. “Do you see?” A rocket raced up through the sky (spitting a trail of red sparks) then exploded in a fountain of blue and white lights and drifted back down into the dark. Another rocket of green and red; another of blue and green. The slow waltz they played for Maryse Begary on the high trapeze rose too in the night. After it, carried on a breeze from the sea, ascended the music of the festival. In the morning I got up with all the others, shook hands with Fritz, George Wong and the Le Forts and told them I didn’t know whether I could go on to San Juliana or not. I wanted to spend the morning quietly in Pescara. The caterpillar line of trucks circled the field, as it always did, with Fritz’s truck again in the lead. They would have to take a long turn through the town and circle back to the road by the sea. I watched them go, my eyes cast down to the mark of the ring on the field. Then I decided that at last I could swim. The fisherman saint’s days were both past, and the sun was coming up bright on the beach. As I crossed the road toward the ocean, I saw the circus trucks rounding the corner and heading north toward me and San Juliana. Fritz was first, he honked and waved. Then the red truck of Robert the chauffeur; Nono the dwarf rode in it and leaned out of the window and waved. Then one, then another, until they had all passed. Then I walked toward the shore and looked out at the sea where the sun, slowly rising, laid down a white path of light. Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. Official Telegram channel Z-Access https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library z-library.sk z-lib.gs z-lib.fm go-to-library.sk This file was downloaded from Z-Library project Título original: Night Sky with Exit Wounds Published by Copper Canyon Press, 2016 Primera edición: junio, 2018 © Ocean Vuong, 2016 © de la traducción: Elisa Díaz Castelo, 2018 © Vaso Roto Ediciones, 2018 ESPAÑA C/ Alcalá 85, 7° izda. 28009 Madrid vasoroto@vasoroto.com www.vasoroto.com Grabado de cubierta: Víctor Ramírez Queda rigurosamente prohibida, sin la autorización de los titulares del copyright , bajo las sanciones establecidas por las leyes, la reproducción total o parcial de esta obra por cualquier medio o procedimiento. ISBN: 978-84-949457-8-6 eISBN: 978-84-122146-8-0 BIC: DCF Ocean Vuong Cielo nocturno con heridas de fuego tặng mẹ [và ba tôi ] for my mother [& father ] tặng mẹ [và ba tôi ] para mi madre [y mi padre ] The landscape crossed out with a pen reappears here BEI DAO El paisaje tachado con pluma reaparece aquí BEI DAO Índice Threshold Umbral Telemachus Telémaco Trojan Troyano Aubade with Burning City Alborada con ciudad en llamas A Little Closer to the Edge Un poco más cerca de la orilla Immigrant Haibun Haibun inmigrante Always & Forever Por siempre y para siempre My Father Writes from Prison Mi padre escribe desde la cárcel Headfirst De cabeza In Newport I Watch My Father Lay His Cheek to a Beached Dolphin’s Wet Back En Newport, veo a mi padre reclinar su mejilla sobre la espalda mojada de un delfín encallado The Gift El regalo Self-Portrait as Exit Wounds Autorretrato como heridas de fuego Thanksgiving 2006 Acción de Gracias 2006 Homewrecker Rompe hogares Of Thee I Sing Of Thee I sing Because It’s Summer Porque es verano Into the Breach En la brecha Anaphora as Coping Mechanism Anáfora como mecanismo de defensa Seventh Circle of Earth El séptimo círculo de la Tierra On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous En la tierra, somos brevemente hermosos Eurydice Eurídice Untitled (Blue, Green, and Brown): oil on canvas: Mark Rothko: 1952 Sin título (azul, verde y marrón) : óleo sobre lienzo: Mark Rothko: 1952 Queen Under The Hill La reina bajo la colina Torso of Air Torso de aire Prayer for the Newly Damned Oración por los recién condenados To My Father / To My Future Son A mi padre / a mi hijo futuro Deto(nation) Deto(nación) Ode to Masturbation Oda a la masturbación Notebook Fragments Fragmentos de un cuaderno The Smallest Measure La menor medida Daily Bread El pan de cada día Odysseus Redux Odiseo regresa Logophobia Logofobia Someday I’ll Love Ocean Vuong Algún día amaré a Ocean Vuong Devotion Devoción Notas del autor Agradecimientos Threshold In the body, where everything has a price, I was a beggar. On my knees, I watched, through the keyhole, not the man showering, but the rain falling through him: guitar strings snapping over his globed shoulders. He was singing, which is why I remember it. His voice— it filled me to the core like a skeleton. Even my name knelt down inside me, asking to be spared. He was singing. It is all I remember. For in the body, where everything has a price, I was alive. I didn’t know there was a better reason. That one morning, my father would stop —a dark colt paused in downpour— & listen for my clutched breath behind the door. I didn’t know the cost of entering a song—was to lose your way back. So I entered. So I lost. I lost it all with my eyes wide open. Umbral En el cuerpo, donde todo tiene un precio, yo era un mendigo. De rodillas, miraba, por la cerradura, no al hombre bajo la ducha, sino la lluvia atravesándolo: cuerdas de guitarra que se rompían contra sus hombros curveados. Él cantaba, y por eso lo recuerdo. Su voz me sostenía por dentro como un esqueleto. Incluso mi nombre, arrodillado dentro de mí, suplicaba clemencia. Él cantaba. Es todo lo que recuerdo. Pues en el cuerpo, donde todo tiene un precio, yo estaba vivo. No conocía una mejor razón. Que una mañana mi padre se detendría –un potro oscuro, inmóvil bajo el aguacero– para escuchar mi respiración crispada detrás de la puerta. No sabía que el precio de entrar en una canción era perder el camino de regreso. Así que entré. Así que perdí. Lo perdí todo con los ojos bien abiertos. Telemachus Like any good son, I pull my father out of the water, drag him by his hair through white sand, his knuckles carving a trail the waves rush in to erase. Because the city beyond the shore is no longer where we left it. Because the bombed cathedral is now a cathedral of trees. I kneel beside him to see how far I might sink. Do you know who I am , Ba? But the answer never comes. The answer is the bullet hole in his back, brimming with seawater. He is so still I think he could be anyone’s father, found the way a green bottle might appear at a boy’s feet containing a year he has never touched. I touch his ears. No use. I turn him over. To face it. The cathedral in his sea-black eyes. The face not mine—but one I will wear to kiss all my lovers good-night: the way I seal my father’s lips with my own & begin the faithful work of drowning. Telémaco Como todo buen hijo, saco a mi padre del agua, lo arrastro del cabello por la arena blanca, sus nudillos dejan un surco que las olas se apuran a borrar. Porque la ciudad más allá de la costa ya no está donde la dejamos. Porque la catedral bombardeada es ahora una catedral de árboles. Me arrodillo a su lado para ver cuánto podría hundirme. ¿Sabes quién soy , Ba? Pero la respuesta nunca llega. La respuesta es un agujero de bala en su espalda, rebosando agua salada. Permanece tan quieto que, pienso, podría ser el padre de cualquiera, hallado, como una botella verde que aparece a los pies de un niño y contiene un año que nunca tocó. Toco sus orejas. Es inútil. Lo giro bocarriba. Para enfrentarla. La catedral en sus ojos de mar negro. El rostro no es el mío, pero lo usaré para besar de buenas noches a todos mis amantes del modo en que cierro los labios de mi padre con los míos y comienzo la devota tarea del ahogamiento. Trojan A finger’s worth of dark from daybreak, he steps into a red dress. A flame caught in a mirror the width of a coffin. Steel glinting in the back of his throat. A flash, a white asterisk. Look how he dances. The bruise-blue wallpaper peeling into hooks as he twirls, his horse -head shadow thrown on the family portraits, glass cracking beneath its stain. He moves like any other fracture, revealing the briefest doors. The dress petaling off him like the skin of an apple. As if their swords aren’t sharpening inside him. This horse with its human face. This belly full of blades & brutes. As if dancing could stop the heart of his murderer from beating between his ribs. How easily a boy in a dress the red of shut eyes vanishes beneath the sound of his own galloping. How a horse will run until it breaks into weather—into wind. How like the wind, they will see him. They will see him clearest when the city burns. Troyano A un dedo de oscuridad del amanecer, él se pone un vestido rojo. Una flama capturada en un espejo tan ancho como un ataúd. El acero brilla al fondo de su garganta. Un destello, un asterisco blanco. Míralo cómo baila. El tapiz azul amoratado se descascara en ganchos mientras él gira, su sombra, una cabeza de caballo, cae sobre los retratos familiares, el vidrio se rompe bajo su mancha. Y él se mueve como cualquier fractura, revelando las puertas más breves. El vestido se deshoja como la piel de una manzana. Como si sus espadas no se estuvieran afilando en sus adentros. Este caballo con su rostro humano. Este vientre colmado de armas blancas y de bestias. Como si bailar pudiera detener el corazón de su asesino que late en sus costillas. Con qué facilidad un chico en un vestido rojo como cerrar los ojos desaparece bajo el ruido de su propio galope. Cómo un caballo correrá hasta romperse en clima, en viento. Cómo lo mirarán tan viento. Lo mirarán tan claro cuando arda la ciudad. Aubade with Burning City South Vietnam, April 29, 1975: Armed Forces Radio played Irving Berlin’s “White Christmas” as a code to begin Operation Frequent Wind, the ultimate evacuation of American civilians and Vietnamese refugees by helicopter during the fall of Saigon . Milkflower petals in the street like pieces of a girl’s dress. May your days be merry and bright ... He fills a teacup with champagne, brings it to her lips. Open , he says. She opens. Outside, a soldier spits out his cigarette as footsteps fill the square like stones fallen from the sky. May all your Christmases be white as the traffic guard unstraps his holster. His fingers running the hem of her white dress. A single candle. Their shadows: two wicks. A military truck speeds through the intersection, children shrieking inside. A bicycle hurled through a store window. When the dust rises, a black dog lies panting in the road. Its hind legs crushed into the shine of a white Christmas . On the bed stand, a sprig of magnolia expands like a secret heard for the first time. The treetops glisten and children listen , the chief of police facedown in a pool of Coca-Cola. A palm-sized photo of his father soaking beside his left ear. The song moving through the city like a widow. A white ... A white ... I’m dreaming of a curtain of snow falling from her shoulders. Snow scraping against the window. Snow shredded with gunfire. Red sky. Snow on the tanks rolling over the city walls. A helicopter lifting the living just out of reach. The city so white it is ready for ink. The radio saying run run run. Milkflower petals on a black dog like pieces of a girl’s dress. May your days be merry and bright . She is saying something neither of them can hear. The hotel rocks beneath them. The bed a field of ice. Don’t worry , he says, as the first shell flashes their faces, my brothers have won the war and tomorrow ... The lights go out. I’m dreaming. I’m dreaming ... to hear sleigh bells in the snow ... In the square below: a nun, on fire, runs silently toward her god— Open , he says. She opens. Alborada con ciudad en llamas Vietnam del Sur, 29 de abril, 1975: la estación de radio de las Fuerzas Armadas tocó «Blanca Navidad» de Irving Berlin como un código para comenzar la operación Frequent Wind, la última evacuación de civiles estadounidenses y refugiados vietnamitas en helicóptero durante la caída de Saigón . Pétalos blancos en la calle como retazos de un vestido de niña. Oh, blanca Navidad, sueño y con la nieve alrededor ... Llena una taza con champaña y la acerca a sus labios. Abre , dice él. Ella abre. Afuera, un soldado escupe su cigarrillo, mientras los pasos llenan la plaza como piedras caídas del cielo. Nieve , un sueño blanco y un cantar mientras el policía de tráfico desenfunda su pistola. Él recorre las orillas de su vestido blanco. Una sola vela. Sus sombras: dos pábilos. Un camión militar acelera en la intersección, niños gritan adentro. Una bicicleta arrojada a través de un escaparate. Cuando se levanta el polvo, un perro negro yace jadeante en el camino. Sus patas traseras destrozadas en el brillo de una blanca Navidad . Sobre la cómoda, una ramita de magnolia se expande como un secreto revelado por primera vez. Un sueño blanco y un cantar , el comandante de policía boca abajo en un charco de Coca-Cola. Un retrato de su padre se empapa detrás de su oreja izquierda. La canción atraviesa la ciudad como una viuda. Blanca... Blanca Navidad... sueño una cortina de nieve que cae de sus hombros. La nieve crepita en la ventana. Nieve triturada por disparos. Cielo rojo. Nieve sobre los tanques que aplanan los muros de la ciudad. Un helicóptero alza a los vivos justo fuera de alcance. La ciudad: tan blanca que está lista para la tinta. La radio diciendo corran corran corran. Pétalos blancos sobre un perro negro como retazos de un vestido de niña. Oh, blanca Navidad, sueño y con la nieve alrededor . Ella dice algo que ninguno de los dos escucha. El hotel tiembla bajo sus cuerpos. La cama un campo de hielo. No te preocupes , dice él, cuando la primera bomba ilumina sus rostros, mis hermanos han ganado la guerra y mañana ... Se apagan las luces. sueño... sueño ... y con la nieve alrededor ... Abajo, en la plaza: una monja, en llamas, corre en silencio hacia su dios. Abre , dice él. Ella abre. A Little Closer to the Edge Young enough to believe nothing will change them, they step, hand in hand, into the bomb crater. The night full of black teeth. His faux Rolex, weeks from shattering against her cheek, now dims like a miniature moon behind her hair. In this version, the snake is headless—stilled like a cord unraveled from the lovers’ ankles. He lifts her white cotton skirt, revealing another hour. His hand. His hands. The syllables inside them. O father, O foreshadow, press into her—as the field shreds itself with cricket cries. Show me how ruin makes a home out of hip bones. O mother, O minute hand, teach me how to hold a man the way thirst holds water. Let every river envy our mouths. Let every kiss hit the body like a season. Where apples thunder the earth with red hooves. & I am your son. Un poco más cerca de la orilla Con la juventud suficiente para creer que nada los cambiará, entran, de la mano, en el cráter de la bomba. La noche, llena de dientes negros. El Rolex falso, semanas antes de romperse contra el rostro de ella, ahora brilla tenue como una luna miniatura atrás de su cabello. En esta versión, la serpiente no tiene cabeza –inmóvil como un cordón desatado en torno a los tobillos de los amantes. Él levanta la falda blanca de algodón, revela otra hora. Su mano. Sus manos. Las sílabas que guardan. Oh padre, oh presagio, ábrete paso dentro de ella, mientras el campo se hace trizas con el canto de los grillos. Muéstrame cómo la ruina construye una casa con los huesos de la pelvis. Oh madre, oh minutero, enséñame a sostener a un hombre como la sed sostiene el agua. Deja que cada río envidie nuestras bocas. Que cada beso golpee al cuerpo como una estación. Donde las manzanas cimbren la tierra con pezuñas rojas. Y yo soy tu hijo. Immigrant Haibun The road which leads me to you is safe even when it runs into oceans . EDMOND JABÈS * Then, as if breathing, the sea swelled beneath us. If you must know anything, know that the hardest task is to live only once. That a woman on a sinking ship becomes a life raft—no matter how soft her skin. While I slept, he burned his last violin to keep my feet warm. He lay beside me and placed a word on the nape of my neck, where it melted into a bead of whiskey. Gold rust down my back. We had been sailing for months. Salt in our sentences. We had been sailing—but the edge of the world was nowhere in sight. * When we left it, the city was still smoldering. Otherwise it was a perfect spring morning. White hyacinths gasped in the embassy lawn. The sky was September-blue and the pigeons went on pecking at bits of bread scattered from the bombed bakery. Broken baguettes. Crushed croissants. Gutted cars. A carousel spinning its blackened horses. He said the shadow of missiles growing larger on the sidewalk looked like god playing an air piano above us. He said There is so much I need to tell you . * Stars. Or rather, the drains of heaven—waiting. Little holes. Little centuries opening just long enough for us to slip through. A machete on the deck left out to dry. My back turned to him. My feet in the eddies. He crouches beside me, his breath a misplaced weather. I let him cup a handful of the sea into my hair and wring it out. The smallest pearls—and all for you . I open my eyes. His face between my hands, wet as a cut. If we make it to shore , he says, I will name our son after this water. I will learn to love a monster . He smiles. A white hyphen where his lips should be. There are seagulls above us. There are hands fluttering between the constellations, trying to hold on. * The fog lifts. And we see it. The horizon—suddenly gone. An aqua sheen leading to the hard drop. Clean and merciful—just like he wanted. Just like the fairy tales. The one where the book closes and turns to laughter in our laps. I pull the mast to full sail. He throws my name into the air. I watch the syllables crumble into pebbles across the deck. * Furious roar. The sea splitting at the bow. He watches it open like a thief staring into his own heart: all bones and splintered wood. Waves rising on both sides. The ship encased in liquid walls. Look! he says, I see it now! He’s jumping up and down. He’s kissing the back of my wrist as he clutches the wheel. He laughs but his eyes betray him. He laughs despite knowing he has ruined every beautiful thing just to prove beauty cannot change him. And here’s the kicker: there’s a cork where the sunset should be. It was always there. There’s a ship made from toothpicks and superglue. There’s a ship in a wine bottle on the mantel in the middle of a Christmas party— eggnog spilling from red Solo cups. But we keep sailing anyway. We keep standing at the bow. A wedding-cake couple encased in glass. The water so still now. The water like air, like hours. Everyone’s shouting or singing and he can’t tell whether the song is for him—or the burning rooms he mistook for childhood. Everyone’s dancing while a tiny man and woman are stuck inside a green bottle thinking someone is waiting at the end of their lives to say Hey! You didn’t have to go this far. Why did you go so far? Just as a baseball bat crashes through the world. * If you must know anything, know that you were born because no one else was coming. The ship rocked as you swelled inside me: love’s echo hardening into a boy. Sometimes I feel like an ampersand. I wake up waiting for the crush. Maybe the body is the only question an answer can’t extinguish. How many kisses have we crushed to our lips in prayer—only to pick up the pieces? If you must know, the best way to understand a man is with your teeth. Once, I swallowed the rain through a whole green thunderstorm. Hours lying on my back, my girlhood open. The field everywhere beneath me. How sweet. That rain. How something that lives only to fall can be nothing but sweet. Water whittled down to intention. Intention into nourishment. Everyone can forget us—as long as you remember. * Summer in the mind. God opens his other eye: two moons in the lake. Haibun inmigrante El camino que me lleva hacia ti es seguro incluso cuando se cruza con los océanos . EDMOND JABÈS * Entonces, como si respirara, el mar creció bajo nosotros. Si debes saber algo, aprende que la tarea más difícil es vivir una sola vez. Que una mujer en un barco hundiéndose se convierte en un bote salvavidas, sin importar cuán suave su piel. Mientras yo dormía, él quemó su último violín para calentarme los pies. Se acostó a mi lado y colocó una palabra en mi nuca, donde se disolvió en una perla de whisky . Herrumbre de oro a lo largo de mi espalda. Llevábamos meses navegando. Había sal en nuestras frases. Llevábamos meses, pero la orilla del mundo no aparecía. * Cuando la dejamos, la ciudad seguía en llamas. Por lo demás, era una mañana perfecta de primavera. Jacintos blancos boqueaban en el césped de la embajda. Un cielo de un azul septembrino y las palomas seguían picoteando el pan esparcido por el bombardeo de la panadería. Baguettes rotas. Medias lunas aplastadas. Automóviles eviscerados. Los caballos ennegrecidos giraban en el carrusel. Él dijo que la sombra de los misiles agrandándose en la acera parecía un dios tocando un piano de aire sobre nosotros. Dijo Hay tanto que necesito decirte . * Estrellas. O, más bien, los drenajes del cielo, esperando. Pequeños agujeros. Pequeños siglos que se abren sólo el tiempo suficiente para deslizarnos por ellos. Un machete dejado a secar en la cubierta. Le doy la espalda al otro. Mis pies en los remolinos. Se arrodilla junto a mí, su respiración un clima extraviado. Dejo que sus manos viertan un cuenco de mar en mi pelo y lo enjuaguen. Las perlas más pequeñas –y todas para ti . Abro los ojos. Su cara entre mis dedos, húmeda como una herida. Si llegamos a puerto , dice, nombraré a mi hijo como esta agua. Aprenderé a amar a un monstruo . Sonríe. Un guión blanco donde irían sus labios. Hay gaviotas sobre nosotros. Hay manos aleteando entre las constelaciones, tratando de no caer. * Se alza la bruma. Y lo vemos. El horizonte, de pronto, desaparece. Un destello aguamarino que conduce al precipicio. Limpio y misericordioso, justo como él lo quería. Justo como en un cuento de hadas. Aquel donde el libro se cierra y se convierte en risa sobre nuestro regazo. Despliego la vela y llevo el barco viento en popa. Él lanza mi nombre al viento. Miro las sílabas desmoronarse en guijarros sobre la cubierta. * Rugido furioso. El mar se quiebra en la proa. Lo mira abrirse como un bandido que observa su propio corazón: todo huesos y madera astillada. Las olas se elevan por ambos lados. El barco encerrado en paredes líquidas. ¡Mira! dice él, ¡ahora lo veo! Salta de arriba abajo. Besa el dorso de mi muñeca mientras se aferra al timón. Se ríe pero sus ojos lo traicionan. Se ríe aunque sabe que ha arruinado todo lo que es hermoso sólo para probar que la belleza no puede cambiarlo. Y he aquí el meollo: hay un corcho en lugar de un atardecer. Siempre estuvo ahí. Hay un barco hecho de palillos y resistol. Hay un barco en una botella de vino sobre el mantel en una fiesta de Navidad. El ponche se derrama de los vasos rojos desechables. Pero de cualquier forma seguimos navegando. Seguimos parados en la proa. Una pareja de novios de pastel encerrados en vidrio. El agua ahora tan quieta. El agua como aire, como horas. Todo el mundo grita o canta y él no sabe distinguir si la canción es para él –o para los cuartos en llamas que confundió con la infancia. Todos bailan mientras un hombre y una mujer diminutos permanecen atrapados dentro de una botella verde pensando que alguien les espera al final de sus vidas para decir ¡Oye! No tenías que haber venido tan lejos. ¿Por qué viniste tan lejos? Justo cuando un bate de béisbol destroza el mundo. * Si hay algo que debes saber, es que naciste porque nadie más estaba en camino. El barco se balanceaba mientras crecías dentro de mí: el eco del amor tomando la forma de un niño. A veces me siento como un ampersand . Despierto esperando el choque. Tal vez el cuerpo sea la única pregunta que una respuesta extingue. ¿Cuántos besos hemos estrujado contra nuestros labios en oración, sólo para recoger pedazos? Si necesitas saberlo, la mejor forma de entender a un hombre es con los dientes. Una vez, tragué lluvia durante una tormenta entera, verde. Horas acostada de espalda con mi niñez abierta. El campo debajo de mí por todos lados. Qué dulce. Esa lluvia. Cómo algo que vive sólo para caer no puede sino ser dulce. El agua se destila hasta la intención. La intención hasta el alimento. Todos pueden olvidarnos –siempre y cuando tú recuerdes. * Verano en mente. Dios abre el otro ojo: dos lunas en el lago. Always & Forever Open this when you need me most, he said, as he slid the shoe box, wrapped in duct tape, beneath my bed. His thumb, still damp from the shudder between mother’s thighs, kept circling the mole above my brow. The devil’s eye blazed between his teeth or was he lighting a joint? It doesn’t matter. Tonight I wake & mistake the bathwater wrung from mother’s hair for his voice. I open the shoe box dusted with seven winters & here, sunk in folds of yellowed news -paper, lies the Colt .45—silent & heavy as an amputated hand. I hold the gun & wonder if an entry wound in the night would make a hole wide as morning. That if I looked through it, I would see the end of this sentence. Or maybe just a man kneeling at the boy’s bed, his grey overalls reeking of gasoline & cigarettes. Maybe the day will close without the page turning as he wraps his arms around the boy’s milk-blue shoulders. The boy pretending to be asleep as his father’s clutch tightens. The way the barrel, aimed at the sky, must tighten around a bullet to make it speak Por siempre y para siempre Abre esto cuando más me necesites, dijo, y deslizó una caja de zapatos, envuelta en cinta canela, bajo mi cama. Su pulgar, todavía húmedo del escalofrío entre los muslos de mamá, trazaba círculos alrededor del lunar sobre mi ceja. El ojo del diablo brillaba entre sus dientes o ¿se encendía un porro? No importa. Esta noche despierto y confundo el agua de la ducha que escurre del pelo de mamá con su voz. Abro la caja empolvada por siete inviernos y aquí, sumergida en pliegues de periódico amarillento, yace la Colt .45, su peso silencioso como una mano amputada. Sostengo el arma y me pregunto si el orificio de una bala en la noche podría hacer una herida tan amplia como la mañana. Me pregunto si, de asomarme a través de ella, podría ver el final de esta frase. O quizá sólo a un hombre arrodillado junto a la cama del niño, el mono gris que apesta a gasolina y cigarros. Quizá el día se cerrará sin darle vuelta a la página mientras él envuelve sus brazos en torno a los hombros azul leche del niño. El niño que finge estar dormido mientras se ciñe el abrazo de su padre. Así como el cañón, apuntado al cielo, debe ceñir la bala para hacerla hablar My Father Writes from Prison Lan oi, Em khỏe khong? Giờ em đang ở đâu? Anh nhớ em va con qua. Hơn nữa & there are things / I can say only in the dark / how one spring / I crushed a monarch midflight / just to know how it felt / to have something change / in my hands / here are those hands / some nights they waken when touched / by music or rather the drops of rain / memory erases into music / hands reaching for the scent of lilacs / in the moss-covered temple a shard / of dawn in the eye of a dead / rat your voice on the verge of / my hands that pressed the 9mm to the boy’s / twitching cheek I was 22 the chamber / empty I didn’t know / how easy it was / to be gone these hands / that dragged the saw through bluest 4 a.m. / cricket screams the kapok’s bark spitting / in our eyes until one or two collapsed / the saw lodged in blue dark until one or three / started to run from their country into / their country / the ak-47 the lord whose voice will stop / the lilac / how to close the lilac / that opens daily from my window / there’s a lighthouse / some nights you are the lighthouse / some nights the sea / what this means is that I don’t know / desire other than the need / to be shattered & rebuilt / the mind forgetting / the body’s crime of living / again dear Lan or / Lan oi what does it matter / there’s a man in the next cell who begs / nightly for his mother’s breast / a single drop / I think my eyes are like his / watching the night bleed through / the lighthouse night that cracked mask / I wear after too many rifle blows / Lan oi! Lan oi! Lan oi! / I’m so hungry / a bowl of rice / a cup of you / a single drop / my clock-worn girl / my echo trapped in ’88 / the cell’s too cold tonight & there are things / I can say only where the monarchs / no longer come / with wings scraping the piss-slick floor for fragments of a / phantom woman I push my face / against a window the size of your palm where / beyond the shore / a grey dawn lifts the hem of your purple dress / & I ignite Mi padre escribe desde la cárcel Lan oi, Em khỏe khong? Giờ em đang ở đâu? Anh nhớ em va con qua. Hơn nữa y hay cosas / que sólo puedo decir en la oscuridad / cómo una primavera / maté a una monarca en pleno vuelo / sólo para ver qué se siente / ver cambiar algo / entre mis manos / aquí están esas manos / algunas noches se despiertan por el roce / de la música o, más bien, de gotas de lluvia / la memoria borrándose en música / manos buscando el aroma de las lilas / en el templo cubierto de musgo una esquirla / de amanecer en el ojo muerto / de una rata tu voz al borde de / mis manos que presionaron la 9 mm contra la mejilla / crispada de un chico yo tenía 22 la cámara / sin balas no sabía / lo fácil que era / desaparecer / estas manos / arrastraron la sierra a través de las 4 de la mañana más azules / canto de los grillos y el ladrido de la ceiba escupiendo/ en nuestros ojos hasta que uno o dos colapsaron / la sierra alojada en la oscuridad azul hasta que uno o tres / comenzaron a escapar de su país a / su país / la ak-47 el señor cuya voz detendrá / la lila / cómo cerrar la lila / que cada mañana se abre en mi ventana / hay un faro / algunas noches tú eres el faro / algunas el mar / esto quiere decir que / no conozco / otro deseo más que la necesidad / de ser destruido y restaurado / la mente olvida / que el crimen del cuerpo es vivir / de nuevo querida Lan o / Lan oi qué importa / hay un hombre en la celda vecina que implora / cada noche por el seno de su madre / una sola gota / creo que mis ojos son como los suyos / observan la noche desangrarse por / el faro la noche esa máscara agrietada / que uso después de demasiados golpes de rifle / ¡Lan oi! ¡Lan oi! ¡Lan oi! / Tengo tanta hambre / un tazón de arroz / una taza de ti / una sola gota / mi niña ajada por el reloj / mi eco atrapado en el 88 / la celda está demasiado fría esta noche y hay cosas / que sólo puedo decir allí donde las monarcas / ya no vienen / con sus alas a raspar el piso resbaloso de orina en busca de fragmentos de una / mujer fantasma presiono la cara / contra una ventana del tamaño de tu palma donde / más allá de la costa / un amanecer gris levanta el dobladillo de tu vestido púrpura / y yo ardo. Headfirst Không có gì bằng c ơm với cá. Không có gì bằng mávới con . Vietnamese proverb Don’t you know? A mother’s love neglects pride the way fire neglects the cries of what it burns. My son, even tomorrow you will have today. Don’t you know? There are men who touch breasts as they would the tops of skulls. Men who carry dreams over mountains, the dead on their backs. But only a mother can walk with the weight of a second beating heart. Stupid boy. You can get lost in every book but you’ll never forget yourself the way god forgets his hands. When they ask you where you’re from, tell them your name was fleshed from the toothless mouth of a war-woman. That you were not born but crawled, headfirst— into the hunger of dogs. My son, tell them the body is a blade that sharpens by cutting. De cabeza Không có gì bằng cơm với cá. Không có gì bằng má với con . Proverbio vietnamita ¿Acaso no lo sabes? El amor de una madre ignora el orgullo como el fuego ignora los gritos de lo que incendia. Hijo mío incluso mañana tendrás el día de hoy. ¿Acaso no lo sabes? Hay hombres que tocan pechos como tocarían cráneos. Hombres que cargan sueños y atraviesan montañas, con los muertos sobre la espalda. Pero sólo una madre puede andar con el peso de otro corazón latiendo. Niño tonto. Puedes perderte en cada libro pero no te olvidarás de ti mismo como dios olvida sus manos. Cuando te pregunten de dónde eres, diles que tu nombre fue arrancado de la boca sin dientes de una mujer de guerra. Que no naciste sino que te arrastraste, de cabeza hacia el hambre de los perros. Hijo mío, diles el cuerpo es una daga que se afila cortando. In Newport I Watch My Father Lay His Cheek to a Beached Dolphin’s Wet Back & close his eyes. His hair the shade of its cracked flesh. His right arm, inked with three falling phoenixes—torches marking the lives he had or had not taken—cradles the pinkish snout. Its teeth gleaming like bullets. Huey. Tomahawk. Semi -automatic. I was static as we sat in the Nissan, watching waves brush over our breaths when he broke for shore, hobbled on his gimp leg. Mustard -yellow North Face jacket diminishing toward the grey life smeared into ours. Shrapnel -strapped. Bushwhacker. The last time I saw him run like that, he had a hammer in his fist, mother a nail-length out of reach. America. America a row of streetlights flickering on his whiskey -lips as we ran. A family screaming down Franklin Ave. ADD. PTSD. POW . Pow. Pow. Pow says the sniper. Fuck you says the father, tracers splashing through palm leaves. Confetti green, how I want you green. Green despite the red despite the rest. His knees sunk in ink-black mud, he guides a ribbon of water to the pulsing blowhole. Ok. Okay. AK -47. I am eleven only once as he kneels to gather the wet refugee into his arms. Waves swallowing his legs. The dolphin’s eye gasping like a newborn’s mouth. & once more I am swinging open the passenger door. I am running toward a rusted horizon, running out of a country to run out of. I am chasing my father the way the dead chase after days—& although I am still too far to hear it, I can tell, by the way his neck tilts to one side, as if broken, that he is singing my favorite song to his empty hands. En Newport, veo a mi padre reclinar su mejilla sobre la espalda mojada de un delfín encallado y cerrar los ojos. Su cabello del mismo tono que el de esa piel agrietada. Su brazo derecho, tatuado con tres aves fénix en picada –antorchas que marcan las vidas que había o no cobrado– arrulla el hocico rosa. Sus dientes relucen como balas. Huey. Tomahawk. Semi- automática. Permanezco inmóvil sentados en el Nissan, mirábamos las olas rozar nuestra respiración cuando salió corriendo hacia la rompiente, cojeando con su pierna renga. El color mostaza de su chamarra North Face se atenuaba hacia la vida gris adherida a la nuestra. Canana. Guerra de guerrilla. La última vez que lo vi correr de esa forma, cargaba un martillo en el puño, mi madre fuera de su alcance a salvo por un pelo. América. América: postes de luz en hilera, parpadeando en el whisky de sus labios mientras huíamos. Una familia gritando por la Avenida Franklin. ADD. PTSD. POW . Pow. Pow. Pow dice el francotirador. Jódete, dice el padre, salpican los rastreadores entre las palmeras. Confeti verde, que te quiero verde. Verde a pesar del rojo a pesar del resto. Con las rodillas sumergidas en la tinta negra del lodo, guía una cinta de agua hacia el espiráculo que pulsa. OK . Okey . AK -47. Tengo once años sólo una vez mientras se arrodilla en el agua para levantar al refugiado. entre sus brazos. Las olas devoran sus piernas. El ojo del delfín jadea como la boca de un recién nacido. Y una vez más abro de par en par la puerta del copiloto. Corro hacia el horizonte oxidado, huyo de un país hecho para huir. Persigo a mi padre como los muertos persiguen los días. Y aunque aún estoy muy lejos para escucharlo, puedo distinguir, por la forma en la que inclina el cuello hacia un costado, como si estuviera roto, que canta mi canción favorita a sus manos vacías. The Gift a b c a b c a b c She doesn’t know what comes after. So we begin again: a b c a b c a b c But I can see the fourth letter: a strand of black hair—unraveled from the alphabet & written on her cheek. Even now the nail salon will not leave her: isopropyl acetate, ethyl acetate, chloride, sodium lauryl sulfate & sweat fuming through her pink I NY t-shirt. a b c a b c a —the pencil snaps. The b bursting its belly as dark dust blows through a blue-lined sky. Don’t move , she says, as she picks a wing bone of graphite from the yellow carcass, slides it back between my fingers. Again .& again I see it: the strand of hair lifting from her face... how it fell onto the page—& lived with no sound. Like a word. I still hear it. El regalo a b c a b c a b c Ella no sabe qué sigue. Así que volvemos a empezar: a b c a b c a b c Pero puedo ver la cuarta letra: un cabello negro, desatado del alfabeto se escribe en su mejilla. Ni siquiera ahora la abandona el salón de manicure : acetato de isopropilo, acetato de etilo, cloro, lauril sulfato de sodio y sudor trasminan de su camiseta rosa de I NY . a b c a b c a b c a –se quiebra el lápiz. El abdomen de la a revienta mientras un aire oscuro sopla a través de un cielo a rayas azules. No te muevas , dice, mientras saca un grafito delgado como el hueso de un ala de la carcasa amarilla y lo desliza de nuevo entre mis dedos. De nuevo . Y de nuevo aparece: el cabello alzándose de su cara... cómo cayó sobre la página. Y vivió sin sonido. Como una palabra. Aún puedo escucharlo. Self-Portrait as Exit Wounds Instead, let it be the echo to every footstep drowned out by rain, cripple the air like a name flung onto a sinking boat, splash the kapok’s bark through rot & iron of a city trying to forget the bones beneath its sidewalks, then through the refugee camp sick with smoke & half-sung hymns, a shack rusted black & lit with Bà Ngoại’s last candle, the hogs’ faces we held in our hands & mistook for brothers, let it enter a room illuminated with snow, furnished only with laughter, Wonder Bread & mayonnaise raised to cracked lips as testament to a triumph no one recalls, let it brush the newborn’s flushed cheek as he’s lifted in his father’s arms, wreathed with fishgut & Marlboros, everyone cheering as another brown gook crumbles under John Wayne’s M16, Vietnam burning on the screen, let it slide through their ears, clean, like a promise, before piercing the poster of Michael Jackson glistening over the couch, into the supermarket where a Hapa woman is ready to believe every white man possessing her nose is her father, may it sing, briefly, inside her mouth, before laying her down between jars of tomato & blue boxes of pasta, the deep-red apple rolling from her palm, then into the prison cell where her husband sits staring at the moon until he’s convinced it’s the last wafer god refused him, let it hit his jaw like a kiss we’ve forgotten how to give one another, hissing back to ’68, Ha Long Bay: the sky replaced with fire, the sky only the dead look up to, may it reach the grandfather fucking the pregnant farmgirl in the back of his army jeep, his blond hair flickering in napalm-blasted wind, let it pin him down to dust where his future daughters rise, fingers blistered with salt & Agent Orange, let them tear open his olive fatigues, clutch that name hanging from his neck, that name they press to their tongues to relearn the word live, live, live —but if for nothing else, let me weave this deathbeam the way a blind woman stitches a flap of skin back to her daughter’s ribs. Yes—let me believe I was born to cock back this rifle, smooth & slick, like a true Charlie, like the footsteps of ghosts misted through rain as I lower myself between the sights—& pray that nothing moves. Autorretrato como heridas de fuego Más bien, que sea el eco de cada paso ahogado por la lluvia, mutila el aire como un nombre lanzado a un bote que naufraga, salpica el ladrido de la ceiba a través de la podredumbre y el acero de una ciudad que intenta olvidar los huesos bajo sus calles, luego a través del campo de refugiados, enfermo de humo y de himnos susurrados, una choza tiznada que alumbra la última vela de Bà Ngoại, cerdos cuyas cabezas sostuvimos, pensando que eran hermanos nuestros, deja que entre a un cuarto iluminado por la nieve, amueblado sólo por la risa, pan Wonder y mayonesa rozando los labios partidos como el testamento de un triunfo que nadie recuerda, deja que acaricie la mejilla del recién nacido mientras su padre lo levanta con manos ungidas en tripas de peces y Marlboros, todos vitoreando mientras otro amarillo se desploma por la M16 de John Wayne, Vietnam ardiendo en la pantalla, deja que se deslice por sus oídos, limpio, como una promesa, antes de agujerear el póster de Michael Jackson reluciente sobre el sofá, hasta entrar en el supermercado donde una mujer mestiza está lista para creer que cualquier hombre blanco con una nariz como la suya es su padre, que cante, brevemente, dentro de su boca, antes de recostarla entre frascos de tomates y cajas azules de pasta, la manzana profundamente roja cayendo de su palma, y después a la celda de la prisión donde su esposo, sentado, mira la luna hasta que se convence: es la última hostia que le negó dios, deja que golpee su mandíbula como un beso que hemos olvidado cómo darnos, siseando de vuelta al 68, Ha Long Bay: el cielo reemplazado por fuego, el cielo que sólo los muertos admiran, que llegue hasta el abuelo tirándose a la campesina embarazada en la parte trasera de su jeep militar, su pelo rubio cintila en el viento bombardeado por napalm, que lo afiance al polvo del que se levantan sus hijas futuras, dedos que se ampollan por sal y Agent Orange , déjalas desabrochar de un jalón sus pantalones verde oliva, sostenerse al nombre que cuelga de su cuello, ese nombre que presionan contra sus lenguas para aprender de nuevo la palabra vivir, vivir, vivir , pero aunque no sea por otra razón, déjame tejer este rayo mortal así como una ciega sutura un colgajo de piel de vuelta a las costillas de sus hijas. Sí: déjame creer que nací para amartillar este rifle, terso y pulido, como un verdadero Charlie, como los pasos nebulosos de fantasmas a través de la llovizna mientras me inclino entre las visiones y ruega que nada se mueva. Thanksgiving 2006 Brooklyn’s too cold tonight & all my friends are three years away. My mother said I could be anything I wanted—but I chose to live. On the stoop of an old brownstone, a cigarette flares, then fades. I walk to it: a razor sharpened with silence. His jawline etched in smoke. The mouth where I reenter this city. Stranger, palpable echo, here is my hand, filled with blood thin as a widow’s tears. I am ready. I am ready to be every animal you leave behind. Acción de Gracias 2006 Hace demasiado frío en Brooklyn esta noche y todos mis amigos están a tres años de distancia. Mi madre dijo que yo podría ser lo que quisiera, pero decidí vivir. En el rellano de una vieja casa de piedra rojiza un cigarro arde y se disipa. Camino hacia él: una navaja que el silencio afila. El humo esculpe su quijada. La boca por la que vuelvo a entrar en la ciudad. Extraño, eco palpable, aquí está mi mano, llena de sangre delgada como el llanto de una viuda. Estoy listo. Listo para ser cada uno de los animales que dejas atrás. Homewrecker & this is how we danced: our mothers’ white dresses spilling from our feet, late August turning our hands dark red. & this is how we loved: a fifth of vodka & an afternoon in the attic, your fingers through my hair—my hair a wildfire. We covered our ears & your father’s tantrum turned to heartbeats. When our lips touched the day closed into a coffin. In the museum of the heart there are two headless people building a burning house. There was always the shotgun above the fireplace. Always another hour to kill—only to beg some god to give it back. If not the attic, the car. If not the car, the dream. If not the boy, his clothes. If not alive, put down the phone. Because the year is a distance we’ve traveled in circles. Which is to say: this is how we danced: alone in sleeping bodies. Which is to say: this is how we loved: a knife on the tongue turning into a tongue. Rompe hogares Y así fue como bailamos: arrastrando los vestidos blancos de nuestras madres, agosto nos teñía las manos rojo oscuro. Y así amamos: medio litro de vodka y una tarde en el desván, tus dedos acariciando mi pelo, mi pelo un incendio. Nos cubríamos los oídos y los arranques de tu padre se convertían en latidos. Cuando nuestros labios se tocaron el día se cerró como un ataúd. En el museo del corazón dos personas sin cabeza construyen una casa en llamas. La escopeta siempre estuvo sobre la chimenea. Siempre hay tiempo para matar, –sólo para rogarle a un dios que te lo devuelva. Si el desván no, el coche. Si el coche no, el sueño. Si el chico no, su ropa. Si vivo no, cuelga el teléfono. Porque el año es una distancia que hemos recorrido en círculos. Es decir: así bailamos: a solas en cuerpos dormidos. Es decir: así nos amamos: en la lengua un cuchillo que se vuelve lengua. Of Thee I Sing We made it, baby. We’re riding in the back of the black limousine. They have lined the road to shout our names. They have faith in your golden hair & pressed grey suit. They have a good citizen in me. I love my country. I pretend nothing is wrong. I pretend not to see the man & his blond daughter diving for cover, that you’re not saying my name & it’s not coming out like a slaughterhouse. I’m not Jackie O yet & there isn’t a hole in your head, a brief rainbow through a mist of rust. I love my country but who am I kidding? I’m holding your still-hot thoughts in, darling, my sweet, sweet Jack. I’m reaching across the trunk for a shard of your memory, the one where we kiss & the nation glitters. Your slumped back. Your hand letting go. You’re all over the seat now, deepening my fuchsia dress. But I’m a good citizen, surrounded by Jesus & ambulances. I love this country. The twisted faces. My country. The blue sky. Black limousine. My one white glove glistening pink—with all our American dreams. Of Thee I sing 1 Lo logramos, amor. Viajamos a bordo de la limusina negra. Flanquean la calle para gritar tu nombre y el mío. Confían en tu cabello rubio y en tu traje gris recién planchado. Tienen en mí a una buena ciudadana. Amo a mi país. Pretendo que todo está bien. Pretendo no ver al hombre y a su hija rubia echarse pecho a tierra, pretendo que no estás diciendo mi nombre y que no resuena como un matadero. Todavía no soy Jackie O y todavía no hay un agujero en tu cabeza, un breve arcoíris a través de una bruma de óxido. Amo mi país, pero, ¿a quién engaño? Sostengo tus pensamientos aún calientes dentro, querido, mi dulce, dulce Jack. Me echo sobre el maletero para salvar un fragmento de tu memoria, aquel en donde nos besamos y el país reluce. Tu espalda encorvada. Tu mano soltando la mía. Estás por todo el asiento ahora, acentuando el fucsia de mi vestido. Pero soy una buena ciudadana, rodeada de Jesús y de ambulancias. Amo este país. Las caras retorcidas. Mi país. La tarde azul. Negra limusina. Mi único guante blanco brilla en rosa, con todos nuestros American dreams . 1 Referencia a la letra de la canción patriótica estadounidense, My Country, ‘Tis of Thee . Because It’s Summer you ride your bike to the park bruised with 9pm the maples draped with plastic bags shredded from days the cornfield freshly razed & you’ve lied about where you’re going you’re supposed to be out with a woman you can’t find a name for but he’s waiting in the baseball field behind the dugout flecked with newports torn condoms he’s waiting with sticky palms & mint on his breath a cheap haircut & his sister’s levis stench of piss rising from wet grass it’s june after all & you’re young until september he looks different from his picture but it doesn’t matter because you kissed your mother on the cheek before coming this far because the fly’s dark slit is enough to speak through the zipper a thin scream where you plant your mouth to hear the sound of birds hitting water snap of elastic waistbands four hands quickening into dozens: a swarm of want you wear like a bridal veil but you don’t deserve it: the boy & his loneliness the boy who finds you beautiful only because you’re not a mirror because you don’t have enough faces to abandon you’ve come this far to be no one & it’s june until morning you’re young until a pop song plays in a dead kid’s room water spilling in from every corner of summer & you want to tell him it’s okay that the night is also a grave we climb out of but he’s already fixing his collar the cornfield a cruelty steaming with manure you smear your neck with lipstick you dress with shaky hands you say thank you thank you thank you because you haven’t learned the purpose of forgive me because that’s what you say when a stranger steps out of summer & offers you another hour to live Porque es verano te vas en bici hasta el parque amoratado por las 9pm en los arces relucen bolsas de plástico deshechas por los días el maizal recién arrasado y mentiste sobre a dónde vas se supone que saldrías con una mujer a la que no le encuentras un nombre pero él te espera en el campo de béisbol detrás del banco salpicado con cigarros newport condones rotos él te espera con manos pegajosas y menta en el aliento un corte de cabello barato y los levis de su hermana un tufo a orina se levanta del pasto húmedo después de todo es junio y eres joven hasta septiembre él se ve distinto al de la foto pero no importa porque besaste a tu madre en la mejilla antes de venir hasta acá porque la rendija oscura de la bragueta es suficiente para hablar a través del cierre un grito delgado donde plantas tu boca para escuchar el sonido de pájaros que golpean el agua el chasquido elástico de las pretinas cuatro manos apresurándose en docenas: un enjambre de deseo que vistes como velo de novia pero no lo mereces: el chico y su soledad el chico que te encuentra hermoso sólo porque no eres un espejo porque no tienes suficientes rostros para abandonar has venido tan lejos para ser nadie y es junio hasta mañana eres joven hasta que una canción pop suene en el cuarto de un chico muerto el agua filtrándose de cada esquina del verano y tú quieres decirle está bien que la noche también sea una tumba de la que logramos salir pero él ya se está arreglando la camisa el maizal una crueldad que apesta a estiércol te untas el cuello con lápiz labial te vistes con manos temblorosas dices gracias gracias gracias porque todavía no sabes para qué sirve perdóname porque eso es lo que dices cuando un extraño emerge del verano y te ofrece una hora más de vida. Into the Breach The only motive that there ever was was to ... keep them with me as long as possible, even if it meant just keeping a part of them . JEFFREY DAHMER I pull into the field & cut the engine. It’s simple: I just don’t know how to love a man gently. Tenderness a thing to be beaten into. Fireflies strung through sapphired air. You’re so quiet you’re almost tomorrow. The body was made soft to keep us from loneliness. You said that as if the car were filling with river water. Don’t worry. There’s no water. Only your eyes closing. My tongue in the crux of your chest. Little black hairs like the legs of vanished insects. I never wanted the flesh. How it never fails to fail so accurately. But what if I broke through the skin’s thin page anyway & found the heart not the size of a fist but your mouth opening to the width of Jerusalem. What then? To love another man—is to leave no one behind to forgive me. I want to leave no one behind. To keep & be kept. The way a field turns its secrets into peonies. The way light keeps its shadow by swallowing it. En la brecha El único motivo que realmente tuve fue... mantenerlos conmigo el mayor tiempo posible, incluso si eso significara quedarme sólo con una parte de ellos . JEFFREY DAHMER Entro al campo y apago el motor. Es fácil: simplemente no sé cómo amar a un hombre con gentileza. La ternura es algo que te meten a golpes. Luciérnagas ensartadas a través del aire de zafiro. Estás tan callado que casi eres el día de mañana. El cuerpo fue hecho suave para librarnos de la soledad. Tú dijiste eso como si el auto se estuviera llenando de agua dulce. No te preocupes. No hay agua. Sólo tus ojos cerrándose. Mi lengua sobre tu esternón. Pequeños pelos negros como las piernas de insectos desaparecidos. Nunca quise la carne. Que nunca fracasa en fracasar con tanta precisión. Pero qué tal si atravesara la piel esta delgada página de cualquier forma y encontrara que el corazón no es del tamaño de un puño sino el de tu boca abriéndose con la amplitud de Jerusalén. ¿Entonces qué? Amar a otro hombre es no dejar a nadie atrás que me perdone. No quiero dejar a nadie atrás. Quiero poseer y ser poseído. Así como el campo convierte sus secretos en peonías. Así como la luz conserva su sombra al engullirla. Anaphora as Coping Mechanism Can’t sleep so you put on his grey boots—nothing else—& step inside the rain. Even though he’s gone , you think, I still want to be clean . If only the rain were gasoline, your tongue a lit match, & you can change without disappearing. If only he dies the second his name becomes a tooth in your mouth. But he doesn’t. He dies when they wheel him away & the priest ushers you out of the room, your palms two puddles of rain. He dies as your heart beats faster, as another war coppers the sky. He dies each night you close your eyes & hear his slow exhale. Your fist choking the dark. Your fist through the bathroom mirror. He dies at the party where everyone laughs & all you want is to go into the kitchen & make seven omelets before burning down the house. All you want is to run into the woods & beg the wolf to fuck you up. He dies when you wake & it’s November forever. A Hendrix record melted on a rusted needle. He dies the morning he kisses you for two minutes too long, when he says Wait followed by I have something to say & you quickly grab your favorite pink pillow & smother him as he cries into the soft & darkening fabric. You hold still until he’s very quiet, until the walls dissolve & you’re both standing in the crowded train again. Look how it rocks you back & forth like a slow dance seen from the distance of years. You’re still a freshman. You’re still terrified of having only two hands. & he doesn’t know your name yet but he smiles anyway. His teeth reflected in the window reflecting your lips as you mouth Hello —your tongue a lit match. Anáfora como mecanismo de defensa Imposible dormir así que te pones sus botas grises –nada más– y das un paso al interior de la lluvia. Aunque ya no esté , piensas, aun así quiero estar limpio . Si tan sólo la lluvia fuera gasolina, tu lengua un fósforo encendido, y pudieras cambiar sin desaparecer. Si tan sólo él muriera en el momento justo cuando su nombre se convierte en un diente en tu boca. Pero no. Se muere cuando se lo llevan en camilla y el sacerdote te saca del cuarto, las palmas de tus manos dos lagos de lluvia. Se muere mientras tu corazón se acelera, mientras otra guerra cobrea el cielo. Se muere cada noche que cierras los ojos y escuchas su lenta exhalación. Tu puño asfixiando la oscuridad. Tu puño a través del espejo del baño. Se muere en la fiesta donde todos ríen y lo único que deseas es ir a la cocina y cocinar siete huevos antes de prenderle fuego a la casa. Lo único que quieres es correr al bosque y rogarle al lobo que te joda. Se muere cuando despiertas y es noviembre para siempre. Un disco de Hendrix derretido en una aguja de plata. Se muere la mañana en que te besa durante dos minutos más de lo habitual, cuando te dice Espera y enseguida tengo algo que decirte y tú rápidamente tomas tu almohada rosa preferida y lo sofocas mientras él solloza contra la tela suave que se oscurece. Permaneces inmóvil hasta que él se queda muy callado, hasta que se disuelven las paredes y ambos están en el tren atestado de nuevo. Mira cómo nos mece como en una danza lenta vista a años de distancia. Sigues en primer año. Sigues aterrorizado de tener sólo dos manos. Y él aún no sabe tu nombre pero sonríe de cualquier forma. Sus dientes reflejados en la ventana que refleja tus labios mientras dices en silencio Hola –tu lengua un fósforo encendido. Seventh Circle of Earth On April 27, 2011, a gay couple, Michael Humphrey and Clayton Capshaw, was murdered by immolation in their home in Dallas, Texas. Dallas Voice 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 . As if my finger, / tracing your collarbone / behind closed doors, / was enough / to erase myself. To forget / we built this house knowing / it won’t last. How / does anyone stop / regret / without cutting / off his hands? / Another torch 2 . streams through / the kitchen window, / another errant dove. / It’s funny. I always knew / I’d be warmest beside / my man. / But don’t laugh. Understand me / when I say I burn best / when crowned / with your scent: that earth-sweat / & Old Spice I seek out each night / the days 3 . refuse me. / Our faces blackening / in the photographs along the wall. / Don’t laugh. Just tell me the story / again, / of the sparrows who flew from falling Rome, / their blazed wings. / How ruin nested inside each thimbled throat / & made it sing 4 . until the notes threaded to this / smoke rising / from your nostrils. Speak— / until your voice is nothing / but the crackle / of charred 5 . bones. But don’t laugh / when these walls collapse / & only sparks / not sparrows / fly out. / When they come / to sift through these cinders—& pluck my tongue, / this fisted rose, / charcoaled & choked / from your gone 6 . mouth. / Each black petal / blasted / with what’s left / of our laughter. / Laughter ashed / to air / to honey to baby / darling, / look. Look how happy we are / to be no one / & still 7 . American. El séptimo círculo de la Tierra El 27 de abril de 2011, Michael Humphrey y Clayton Capshaw, una pareja homosexual, fue asesinada y calcinada en su casa en Dallas, Texas. Dallas Voice 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 . Como si el trazo que dibuja mi dedo / sobre tu clavícula / a puerta cerrada / fuera suficiente / para borrarme a mí mismo. Para olvidar / que construimos esta casa sabiendo / que no duraría. ¿Cómo / puede alguien detener / el remordimiento / sin cortarse / las manos? / Otra antorcha 2 . Entra por / la ventana de la cocina, / otra paloma errante. / Es curioso. Siempre supe / que estaría más cálido al lado / de mi chico. / Pero no te rías. Entiéndeme / cuando digo que ardo mejor / coronado / por tu aroma: ese sudor terroso / con Old Spice que busco cada noche / que los días 3 . me niegan. / Nuestras caras se ensombrecen / en las fotos colgadas de la pared. / No te rías. Sólo cuéntame la historia / de nuevo, / de los gorriones que huyeron mientras Roma caía, / sus alas encendidas. / Cómo la ruina anidó en el dedal de cada garganta / y la hizo cantar 4 . hasta que las notas se hilaron a este / humo que asciende / de tu nariz. Habla / hasta que tu voz no sea nada / más que el crepitar / de huesos 5 . carbonizados. Pero no te rías / cuando estas paredes se colapsen y salgan / sólo chispas / no gorriones. / Cuando vengan / a cernir estas cenizas / y arrancarme la lengua, / esta rosa en puño, / privada de tu boca / desaparecida por ascuas 6 . y asfixia. / Cada pétalo negro/ destruido / con lo que queda / de nuestra risa. / Risa abrasada / en aire / en querido amor / cariño, / mira. Mira qué felices estamos / de ser nadie / y seguir 7 . siendo Americanos. On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous I Tell me it was for the hunger & nothing less. For hunger is to give the body what it knows it cannot keep. That this amber light whittled down by another war is all that pins my hand to your chest. I You, drowning between my arms— stay. You, pushing your body into the river only to be left with yourself— stay. I I’ll tell you how we’re wrong enough to be forgiven. How one night, after backhanding mother, then taking a chain saw to the kitchen table, my father went to kneel in the bathroom until we heard his muffled cries through the walls. & so I learned—that a man in climax was the closest thing to surrender. I Say surrender. Say alabaster. Switchblade. Honeysuckle. Goldenrod. Say autumn. Say autumn despite the green in your eyes. Beauty despite daylight. Say you’d kill for it. Unbreakable dawn mounting in your throat. My thrashing beneath you like a sparrow stunned with falling. I Dusk: a blade of honey between our shadows, draining. I I wanted to disappear—so I opened the door to a stranger’s car. He was divorced. He was sobbing into his hands (hands that tasted like rust). The pink breast-cancer ribbon on his key chain swayed in the ignition. Don’t we touch each other just to prove we are still here? I was still here once. The moon, distant & flickering, trapped itself in beads of sweat on my neck. I let the fog spill through the cracked window & cover my fangs. When I left, the Buick kept sitting there, a dumb bull in pasture, its eyes searing my shadow onto the side of suburban houses. At home, I threw myself on the bed like a torch & watched the flames gnaw through my mother’s house until the sky appeared, bloodshot & massive. How I wanted to be that sky— to be filled every flight & fall at once. I Say amen. Say amend. Say yes. Say yes anyway. I In the shower, sweating under cold water, I scrubbed & scrubbed. I It’s not too late. Our heads haloed with gnats & summer too early to leave any marks. Your hand under my shirt as static intensifies on the radio. Your other hand pointing your daddy’s revolver to the sky. Stars dropping one by one in the crosshairs. This means I won’t be afraid if we’re already here. Already more than skin can hold. That a boy sleeping beside a boy must make a field full of ticking. That to say your name is to hear the sound of clocks being turned back another hour & morning finds our clothes on your mother’s front porch, shed like week-old lilies. En la tierra, somos brevemente hermosos I Dime que fue por el hambre y nada menos. Pues el hambre es dar al cuerpo lo que sabe imposible de retener. Que esta luz ambarina afilada por otra guerra es lo único que fija mi mano a tu pecho. I Tú, ahogándote entre mis brazos: quédate. Tú, que sumerges tu cuerpo en el río sólo para quedarte solo contigo: quédate. I Te contaré cómo nos equivocamos lo suficiente para ser perdonados. Cómo una noche, después de abofetear a mamá y embestir con una sierra la mesa de la cocina, mi padre se arrodilló en el baño hasta que escuchamos sus gritos amortiguados por las paredes. Y así aprendí que un hombre en el clímax era lo más cercano a la renuncia. I Di renuncia. Di alabastro. Navaja de muelle. Madreselva. Solidago. Di otoño. Di otoño a pesar del verde de tus ojos. Belleza a pesar del mediodía. Di que matarías por ello. Un amanecer inquebrantable se levanta en tu garganta. Y yo me retuerzo debajo de ti como un gorrión aturdido por la caída. I Ocaso: una navaja de miel entre nuestras sombras, vaciándose. I Quería desaparecer, así que entré en el coche de un desconocido. Era divorciado. Sollozaba con el rostro entre las manos (manos con sabor a óxido). El lazo rosa contra el cáncer de mama se balanceaba de su llavero en el switch de encendido. ¿No nos tocamos tan sólo para comprobar que seguimos aquí? Yo seguía aquí alguna vez. La luna, lejana y cintilante, se encerró en las gotas de sudor de mi cuello. Dejé que la niebla se derramara por la ventana entreabierta y me cubriera el flequillo. Cuando me fui, el Buick todavía estaba ahí, un toro tonto en la pradera, sus ojos cauterizaban mi sombra sobre las casas del suburbio. De vuelta en mi cuarto, me lancé como una antorcha sobre la cama y observé las flamas horadar la casa de mi madre hasta que apareció el cielo, masivo, inyectado de sangre. Cómo quería ser ese cielo, estar colmado al mismo tiempo del vuelo y la caída. I Di amén. Di enmienda. Di sí. Di sí de cualquier forma. I En la regadera, sudando bajo el agua fría, me froté y froté. I No es demasiado tarde. Nuestras cabezas coronadas con mosquitos y el verano demasiado incipiente para dejar cualquier marca. Tu mano bajo mi camiseta mientras se intensifica la estática en la radio. Tu otra mano apunta el revólver de tu papi al cielo. Las estrellas caen una por una en el retículo. Esto significa que no tendré miedo si ya estamos aquí. De pronto somos más de lo que la piel puede sostener. Que un chico durmiendo junto a un chico debe construir un campo lleno del tictac de los segundos. Que decir tu nombre es oír el sonido del reloj retrasándose otra hora y la mañana encuentra nuestra ropa en el porche de tu madre, arrojada como lirios de hace una semana. Eurydice It’s more like the sound a doe makes when the arrowhead replaces the day with an answer to the rib’s hollowed hum. We saw it coming but kept walking through the hole in the garden. Because the leaves were pure green & the fire only a pink brushstroke in the distance. It’s not about the light—but how dark it makes you depending on where you stand. Depending on where you stand your name can sound like a full moon shredded in a dead doe’s pelt. Your name changed when touched by gravity. Gravity breaking our kneecaps just to show us the sky. Why did we keep saying Yes — even with all those birds. Who would believe us now? My voice cracking like bones inside the radio. Silly me. I thought love was real & the body imaginary. I thought a little chord was all it took. But here we are— standing in the cold field again. Him calling for the girl. The girl beside him. Frosted grass snapping beneath her hooves. Eurídice Se parece más al sonido de una cierva cuando la punta de la flecha reemplaza el día con una respuesta al zumbido hueco de las costillas. Lo vimos venir pero seguimos atravesando el agujero en el jardín. Porque las hojas eran verde puro y el fuego tan sólo una pincelada rosa en la distancia. No se trata de la luz, sino de cuánto te oscurece dependiendo de dónde te sitúas. Dependiendo de dónde te sitúas tu nombre puede sonar como una luna llena desmenuzada sobre la piel de una cierva muerta. Tu nombre cambió al ser tocado por la gravedad. La gravedad, rompiendo nuestras rótulas sólo para mostrarnos el cielo. Por qué seguimos diciendo Sí , incluso con todos esos pájaros. ¿Quién nos creería ahora? Mi voz se rompe como huesos en las bocinas. Qué tonto. Pensé que el amor era real y el cuerpo imaginario. Pensé que un solo acorde era suficiente. Pero aquí estamos, parados en el campo frío de nuevo. Él llamando a la chica. La chica a su lado. Briznas de hierba congelada se quiebran bajo sus pezuñas. Untitled ( Blue, Green, and Brown ): oil on canvas: Mark Rothko: 1952 The TV said the planes have hit the buildings. & I said Yes because you asked me to stay. Maybe we pray on our knees because god only listens when we’re this close to the devil. There is so much I want to tell you. How my greatest accolade was to walk across the Brooklyn Bridge & not think of flight. How we live like water: wetting a new tongue with no telling what we’ve been through. They say the sky is blue but I know it’s black seen through too much distance. You will always remember what you were doing when it hurts the most. There is so much I need to tell you—but I only earned one life. & I took nothing. Nothing. Like a pair of teeth at the end. The TV kept saying The planes ... The planes ... & I stood waiting in the room made of broken mockingbirds. Their wings throbbing into four blurred walls. & you were there. You were the window. Sin título ( azul, verde y marrón ): óleo sobre lienzo: Mark Rothko: 1952 La televisión dijo que los aviones derribaron los edificios. Y yo dije Sí porque me pediste que me quedara. Tal vez rezamos de rodillas porque dios sólo escucha cuando estamos así de cerca del diablo. Hay tanto que quiero contarte. Que mi mayor logro fue atravesar el puente de Brooklyn y no pensar en la fuga. Que vivimos como el agua: humedeciendo una nueva lengua y no hay forma de decir lo que nos ha sucedido. Dicen que el cielo es azul pero yo sé que es negro visto a demasiada distancia. Siempre recordarás lo que estabas haciendo cuando más duela. Hay tanto que necesito decirte, pero sólo me gané una vida. Y no me llevé nada. Nada. Ni un par de dientes al final. La televisión seguía diciendo Los aviones ... Los aviones ... y yo esperaba en el cuarto hecho de ruiseñores rotos. Sus alas latieron hasta convertirse en cuatro paredes borrosas. Y tú estabas ahí. Tú eras la ventana. Queen Under The Hill I approach a field. A black piano waits at its center. I kneel to play what I can. A single key. A tooth tossed down a well. My fingers sliding the slimy gums. Slick lips. Snout. Not a piano—but a mare draped in a black sheet. White mouth sticking out like a fist. I kneel at my beast. The sheet sunken at her ribs. A dented piano where rain, collected from the night, reflects a blue sky fallen into the side of a horse. Blue thumbprint pressed from above. As if something needed to be snuffed out, leaving this black blossom dropped on a field where I am only a visitor. A word exiled from the prayer, flickering. Wind streaks the pale grass flat around us—the horse & I a watercolor hung too soon & dripping. Green waves surround this black rock where I sit turning bones to sonatas. Fingers blurred, I play what I know from listening to orchards unleash their sweetest wrongs. The dent in this horse wide enough to live by. Puddle of sky on earth. As if to look down on the dead is to look up at my own face, trampled by music. If I lift the sheet I will reveal the heart huge as a stillbirth. If I lift the sheet I will sleep beside her as a four-legged shadow, hoof homed to hoof. If I close my eyes I’m inside the piano again & only. If I close my eyes no one can hurt me. La reina bajo la colina Me acerco a una pradera. Un piano negro aguarda en el centro. Me arrodillo para tocar lo que pueda. Una sola nota. Un diente arrojado a un pozo. Mis dedos se deslizan por encías resbalosas. Labios lisos. Hocico. No es un piano, sino una yegua cubierta con una sábana oscura. La boca blanca sobresale como un puño. Me arrodillo ante mi bestia. La sábana hendida en sus costillas. Un piano abollado donde restos de lluvia nocturna reflejan el cielo azul caído en un flanco del caballo. Azul huella impresa desde lo alto. Como si algo necesitara apagarse, dejando este oscuro florecer abandonado en una pradera donde sólo soy un visitante. Una palabra exiliada de la plegaria, titilante. El viento mancha la palidez del pasto en torno nuestro. El caballo y yo: una acuarela colgada aún fresca, goteando. Olas verdes bordean esta roca negra donde me siento a convertir huesos en sonatas. Con dedos borrosos, toco lo que he aprendido de los huertos cuando desatan sus más dulces males. La abolladura en este caballo tan ancha como para vivir de ella. Charco de cielo en la tierra. Como si mirar a los muertos bajo nosotros fuese alzar la vista y encontrar mi propio rostro, pisoteado por la música. Si levanto la sábana develaré el corazón enorme como un bebé muerto. Si levanto la sábana dormiré junto a ella como una sombra de cuatro patas, pezuña contra pezuña. Si cierro los ojos estoy dentro del piano otra vez y sólo. Si cierro los ojos nadie puede lastimarme. Torso of Air Suppose you do change your life. & the body is more than a portion of night—sealed with bruises. Suppose you woke & found your shadow replaced by a black wolf. The boy, beautiful & gone. So you take the knife to the wall instead. You carve & carve until a coin of light appears & you get to look in, at last, on happiness. The eye staring back from the other side— waiting. Torso de aire Supongamos que sí cambias tu vida. Y el cuerpo es más que una porción de la noche, sellada con moretones. Supongamos que despiertas y encuentras tu sombra reemplazada por un lobo negro. El chico, hermoso y perdido. Entonces llevas el cuchillo a la pared. Escarbas y escarbas hasta que encuentras una moneda de luz y puedes asomarte, por fin, a la felicidad. El ojo te mira de vuelta desde el otro lado, esperando. Prayer for the Newly Damned Dearest Father, forgive me for I have seen. Behind the wooden fence, a field lit with summer, a man pressing a shank to another man’s throat. Steel turning to light on sweat-slick neck. Forgive me for not twisting this tongue into the shape of Your name. For thinking: this must be how every prayer begins—the word Please cleaving the wind into fragments, into what a boy hears in his need to know how pain blesses the body back to its sinner. The hour suddenly stilled. The man, his lips pressed to the black boot. Am I wrong to love those eyes, to see something so clear & blue—beg to remain clear & blue? Did my cheek twitch when the wet shadow bloomed from his crotch & trickled into ochre dirt? How quickly the blade becomes You. But let me begin again: There’s a boy kneeling in a house with every door kicked open to summer. There’s a question corroding his tongue. A knife touching Your finger lodged inside the throat. Dearest Father, what becomes of the boy no longer a boy? Please— what becomes of the shepherd when the sheep are cannibals? Oración por los recién condenados Querido Padre, perdóname porque he visto. Detrás de la cerca de madera, el prado se enciende con el verano, un hombre aprieta una varilla contra la garganta de otro hombre. El acero se vuelve luz sobre ese cuello resbaloso de sudor. Perdóname por no dar a esta lengua la forma de Tu nombre. Por pensar: así debería iniciar toda oración, las palabras Te lo ruego partiendo el aire en fragmentos, en lo que un chico escucha en su necesidad de saber cómo el dolor bendice el cuerpo de vuelta a su pecador. La hora de pronto detenida. El hombre, sus labios contra la bota negra. ¿Es un error amar esos ojos, ver en ellos algo tan claro y tan azul, implorar que permanezca claro y azul? ¿Se crispó mi mejilla al florecer entre sus piernas la húmeda sombra que goteó sobre la tierra ocre? Qué rápido la navaja se convierte en Ti. Pero déjame empezar de nuevo: Hay un chico arrodillado en una casa con todas las puertas abiertas por fuerza al verano. Hay una pregunta que corroe su lengua. Un cuchillo que toca Tu dedo instalado en la garganta. Querido Padre, ¿en qué se convierte un chico que ya no es un chico? Te lo ruego – ¿qué le sucede al pastor cuando las ovejas son caníbales? To My Father / To My Future Son The stars are not hereditary. EMILY DICKINSON There was a door & then a door surrounded by a forest. Look, my eyes are not your eyes. You move through me like rain heard from another country. Yes, you have a country. Someday, they will find it while searching for lost ships... Once, I fell in love during a slow-motion car crash. We looked so peaceful, the cigarette floating from his lips as our heads whiplashed back into the dream & all was forgiven. Because what you heard, or will hear, is true: I wrote a better hour onto the page & watched the fire take it back. Something was always burning. Do you understand? I closed my mouth but could still taste the ash because my eyes were open. From men, I learned to praise the thickness of walls. From women, I learned to praise. If you are given my body, put it down. If you are given anything be sure to leave no tracks in the snow. Know that I never chose which way the seasons turned. That it was always October in my throat & you: every leaf refusing to rust. Quick. Can you see the red dark shifting? This means I am touching you. This means you are not alone—even as you are not. If you get there before me, if you think of nothing & my face appears rippling like a torn flag—turn back. Turn back & find the book I left for us, filled with all the colors of the sky forgotten by gravediggers. Use it. Use it to prove how the stars were always what we knew they were: the exit wounds of every misfired word. A mi padre / a mi hijo futuro Las estrellas no son hereditarias. EMILY DICKINSON Había una puerta y después una puerta bordeada por un bosque Mira, mis ojos no son tus ojos. Me atraviesas como lluvia escuchada desde otro país. Sí, tienes un país. Algún día, lo encontrarán buscando barcos extraviados... Una vez me enamoré durante un accidente de coche a cámara lenta. Parecíamos tan tranquilos, el cigarrillo suspendido de sus labios mientras nuestras cabezas se golpeaban hacia atrás del sueño y todo era perdonado. Porque lo que escuchaste, o escucharás, es cierto: yo escribí una hora mejor en la página y vi al fuego desdecirla. Algo siempre estaba en llamas. ¿Entiendes? Cerré la boca pero seguía el sabor de la ceniza porque mis ojos estaban abiertos. De los hombres aprendí a elogiar el ancho de las paredes. De las mujeres, a elogiar. Si te dan mi cuerpo, declínalo. Si te dan cualquier cosa procura irte sin dejar huellas en la nieve. Debes saber que nunca escogí hacia dónde iban las estaciones. Que siempre fue octubre en mi garganta y tú: cada hoja que se negaba a oxidarse. De prisa. ¿Puedes ver el rojo oscureciendo? Significa que estoy tocándote. Significa que no estás solo, incluso si no estás. Si llegas antes que yo, si piensas en nada y mi rostro aparece ondeando como una bandera deshilada –vuélvete. Vuelve y encuentra el libro que dejé para nosotros, saturado con todos los colores del cielo, olvidado por los sepultureros. Úsalo. Úsalo para probar cómo las estrellas siempre fueron lo que sabíamos que eran: las heridas de fuego de cada palabra disparada por error. Deto(nation) There’s a joke that ends with—huh? It’s the bomb saying here is your father. Now here is your father inside your lungs. Look how lighter the earth is—afterward. To even write father is to carve a portion of the day out of a bomb-bright page. There’s enough light to drown in but never enough to enter the bones & stay. Don’t stay here , he said, my boy broken by the names of flowers. Don’t cry anymore . So I ran. I ran into the night. The night: my shadow growing toward my father Deto(nación) Hay un chiste que termina con: ¿eh? Es la bomba que dice aquí está tu padre. Y ahora aquí está tu padre dentro de tus pulmones. Mira qué ligera es la tierra después. Incluso escribir padre es labrar una porción del día a partir de una página, deslumbrante bomba. Hay suficiente luz para ahogarse pero nunca la suficiente para entrar en los huesos y quedarse. No te quedes aquí , dijo, mi niño roto por los nombres de las flores. No llores más . Entonces corrí. Me interné en la noche. La noche: mi sombra creciendo hacia mi padre Ode to Masturbation because you were never holy only beautiful enough to be found with a hook in your mouth water shook like sparks when they pulled you out & sometimes your hand is all you have to hold yourself to this world & it’s the sound not the prayer that enters the thunder not the lightning that wakes you in the backseat midnight’s neon parking lot holy water smeared between your thighs where no man ever drowned from too much thirst the cumshot an art -iculation of chewed stars so lift the joy -crusted thumb & teach the tongue of unbridled nourishment to be lost in an image is to find within it a door so close your eyes & open reach down with every rib humming the desperation of unstruck piano keys some call this being human but you already know it’s the briefest form of forever yes even the saints remember this the if under every utterance beneath the breath brimmed like cherry blossoms foaming into no one’s springtime how often these lines resemble claw marks of your brothers being dragged away from you you whose name not heard by the ear but the smallest bones in the graves you who ignite the april air with all your petals’ here here here you who twist through barbed -wired light despite knowing how color beckons decapitation i reach down looking for you in american dirt in towns with names like hope celebration success & sweet lips like little saigon laramie money & sanford towns whose trees know the weight of history can bend their branches to breaking lines whose roots burrow through stones & hard facts gathering the memory of rust & iron mandibles & amethyst yes touch yourself like this part the softest hurt’s unhealable hunger after all the lord cut you here to remind us where he came from pin this antlered heartbeat back to earth cry out until the dark fluents each faceless beast banished from the ark as you scrape the salt off the cock-clit & call it daylight don’t be afraid to be this luminous to be so bright so empty the bullets pass right through you thinking they have found the sky as you reach down press a hand to this blood -warm body like a word being nailed to its meaning & lives Oda a la masturbación porque tú nunca fuiste sagrado sólo hermoso lo suficiente para encontrarte con un anzuelo en la boca el agua estremecida como chispas cuando te sacaron y a veces tu mano es todo lo que tienes para aferrarte a este mundo y es el sonido no la plegaria lo que entra el trueno no el relámpago lo que te despierta en el asiento de atrás bajo el neón del estacionamiento a medianoche agua bendita embarrada entre tus muslos donde ningún hombre se ha ahogado de demasiada sed la venida una art -iculación de estrellas mordisqueadas así que alza el pulgar recubierto de alegría y enseña a la lengua de sustento desbocado a perderse en una imagen y en ella encontrar una puerta así que cierra los ojos y abre hurga con cada costilla canturreando la desesperación de las teclas no tocadas de un piano algunos le llaman a esto ser humanos pero tú ya sabes que es la forma más breve de un sí para siempre aun los santos recuerdan esto del si bajo cada enunciado al ras de cada hálito rebosante como cerezos en flor haciendo espuma en la primavera de nadie cuán seguido estas líneas semejan arañazos de tus hermanos arrancados de ti por la fuerza de ti cuyo nombre no registra el oído sino los huesos más pequeños en las tumbas de ti que enciendes el aire de abril con todo el aquí aquí aquí de tus pétalos de ti que sorteas la iluminada cerca de púas a pesar de saber cómo el color invoca la decapitación hurgo en el fango americano buscándote en pueblos con nombres como esperanza éxito celebración y dulces labios como un pequeño saigón como laramie dinero y sanford pueblos 2 cuyos árboles conocen que el peso de la historia puede doblar sus ramas hasta quebrarlas líneas cuyas raíces escarban entre piedras y datos duros que cultivan la memoria del óxido y de las mandíbulas de hierro y amatista sí tócate de esta forma separa el hambre incurable de este dolor tan suave después de todo el señor te cortó aquí para recordarnos desde dónde se vino afianza este latido cornamentado de vuelta a la tierra grita hasta que la oscuridad haga fluir cada bestia sin rostro desterrada del arca mientras raspas la sal del pítoris y la llamas luz de día no temas ser así de luminoso ser tan brillante tan vacío que las balas te atraviesen pensando que han hallado el cielo mientras hurgas presionas con una mano este cuerpo de sangre tibia como una palabra clavada a su significado y vive 2 En estas dos estrofas, Vuong se refiere a ciudades reales de Estados Unidos: Hope (Arkansas), Success (Kansas), Celebration (Missouri), Sweet Home (Oregón) y Little Saigon (California). También incluye Laramie (Wyoming), Money (Mississipi) y Sanford (Florida). Notebook Fragments A scar’s width of warmth on a worn man’s neck. That’s all I wanted to be. Sometimes I ask for too much just to feel my mouth overflow. Discovery: My longest pubic hair is 1.2 inches. Good or bad? 7:18 a.m. Kevin overdosed last night. His sister left a message. Couldn’t listen to all of it. That makes three this year. I promise to stop soon. Spilled orange juice all over the table this morning. Sudden sunlight I couldn’t wipe away. My hands were daylight all through the night. Woke at 1 a.m and, for no reason, ran through Duffy’s cornfield. Boxers only. Corn was dry. I sounded like a fire, for no reason. Grandma said In the war they would grab a baby, a soldier at each ankle, and pull ... Just like that . It’s finally spring! Daffodils everywhere. Just like that. There are over 13,000 unidentified body parts from the World Trade Center being stored in an underground repository in New York City. Good or bad? Shouldn’t heaven be superheavy by now? Maybe the rain is “sweet” because it falls through so much of the world. Even sweetness can scratch the throat, so stir the sugar well .—Grandma 4:37 a.m. How come depression makes me feel more alive? Life is funny. Note to self: If a guy tells you his favorite poet is Jack Kerouac, there’s a very good chance he’s a douchebag. Note to self: If Orpheus were a woman I wouldn’t be stuck down here. Why do all my books leave me empty-handed? In Vietnamese, the word for grenade is “bom,” from the French “pomme,” meaning “apple.” Or was it American for “bomb”? Woke up screaming with no sound. The room filling with a bluish water called dawn. Went to kiss grandma on the forehead just in case. An American soldier fucked a Vietnamese farmgirl. Thus my mother exists. Thus I exist. Thus no bombs = no family = no me. Yikes. 9:47 a.m. Jerked off four times already. My arm kills. Eggplant = cà pháo = “grenade tomato.” Thus nourishment defined by extinction. I met a man tonight. A high school English teacher from the next town. A small town. Maybe I shouldn’t have, but he had the hands of someone I used to know. Someone I was used to. The way they formed brief churches over the table as he searched for the right words. I met a man, not you. In his room the Bibles shook on the shelf from candlelight. His scrotum a bruised fruit. I kissed it lightly, the way one might kiss a grenade before hurling it into the night’s mouth. Maybe the tongue is also a key. Yikes. I could eat you he said, brushing my cheek with his knuckles. I think I love my mom very much. Some grenades explode with a vision of white flowers. Baby’s breath blooming in a darkened sky, across my chest. Maybe the tongue is also a pin. I’m gonna lose it when Whitney Houston dies. I met a man. I promise to stop. A pillaged village is a fine example of perfect rhyme. He said that. He was white. Or maybe, I was just beside myself, next to him. Either way, I forgot his name by heart. I wonder what it feels like to move at the speed of thirst—if it’s fast as lying on the kitchen floor with the lights off. (Kristopher) 6:24 a.m. Greyhound station. One-way ticket to New York City: $36.75. 6:57 a.m. I love you, mom. When the prison guards burned his manuscripts, Nguyễn Chí Thiện couldn’t stop laughing—the 283 poems already inside him. I dreamed I walked barefoot all the way to your house in the snow. Everything was the blue of smudged ink and you were still alive. There was even a light the shade of sunrise inside your window. God must be a season , grandma said, looking out at the blizzard drowning her garden. My footsteps on the sidewalk were the smallest flights. Dear god, if you are a season, let it be the one I passed through to get here. Here. That’s all I wanted to be. I promise. Fragmentos de un cuaderno Calidez del ancho de una cicatriz en el cuello percudido de un hombre. Es todo lo que quise ser. A veces pido demasiado sólo para sentir mi boca desbordarse. Hallazgo: mi pelo púbico más largo mide 3 centímetros. ¿Eso es bueno o malo? 7:18 a.m. Kevin murió de una sobredosis ayer por la noche. Su hermana dejó un mensaje. No pude escucharlo todo. De esto hace ya tres años. Prometo dejarlo pronto. Derramé jugo de naranja sobre la mesa esta mañana. Súbita luz que no pude limpiar. Mis manos fueron luz de día a lo largo de la noche. Desperté a la 1 a.m. y, sin razón, corrí a través del maizal de Duffy. En bóxers. El maíz estaba seco. Yo parecía un incendio, sin ninguna razón. La abuela dijo Durante la guerra tomaban a un bebé, un soldado de cada tobillo y tiraban ... Así nada más . ¡Finalmente es primavera! Narcisos por todas partes. Así nada más. Hay más de 13 000 partes de cuerpos no identificados en un depósito subterráneo del World Trade Center en Nueva York. ¿Eso es bueno o malo? ¿No debería estar súper cargado el cielo a estas alturas? Tal vez la lluvia es «dulce» porque cae a través de tanto mundo. Incluso lo dulce puede raspar la garganta, así que revuelve bien el azúcar . –La abuela 4:37 a.m. ¿Cómo es posible que la depresión me haga sentir más vivo? La vida es graciosa. Nota a mí mismo: Si un tipo te dice que su poeta favorito es Jack Kerouac, las posibilidades de que sea un idiota son altas. Nota a mí mismo: Si Orfeo fuera mujer, yo no estaría atrapado aquí abajo. ¿Por qué todos mis libros me dejan con las manos vacías? En vietnamita, la palabra granada se dice «bom», del francés «pomme», que significa «manzana». ¿O viene del inglés «bomb»? Me desperté gritando sin sonido. El cuarto llenándose de esa agua azul llamada amanecer. Fui a besar a la abuela en la frente por si acaso. Un soldado americano se tiró a una campesina vietnamita. Por lo tanto, mi madre existe. Por lo tanto, yo existo. Por lo tanto, sin bombas = no hay familia = yo no existo. Caray. 9:47 a.m. Ya me masturbé cuatro veces. El brazo me está matando. Berenjena = cà pháo = «tomate granada». Por lo tanto, la alimentación se define por la extinción. Conocí a un hombre esta noche. Da clases de literatura en una preparatoria del pueblo de al lado. Un pueblo pequeño. Quizá no debería haberlo hecho, pero sus manos eran como las de alguien que solía conocer. Alguien a quien estaba acostumbrado. La forma en que esas manos construían breves iglesias sobre la mesa mientras buscaba las palabras correctas. Conocí a un hombre, no eras tú. En su cuarto, sobre las repisas, temblaban las Biblias bajo la luz de las velas. Su escroto era una fruta magullada. Lo besé suavemente, como uno podría besar una granada antes de lanzarla a la boca de la noche. Tal vez la lengua también sea una llave. Caray. Podría comerte , dijo, mientras acariciaba mi mejilla con sus nudillos. Creo que quiero mucho a mi mamá. Algunas granadas explotan con una visión de flores blancas. El aliento de un bebé aflorando en el cielo oscurecido, a través de mi pecho. Tal vez la lengua también sea un alfiler. Voy a perder la cabeza cuando se muera Whitney Houston. Conocí a un hombre. Prometo dejarlo. Saquea una aldea es un excelente ejemplo de una rima perfecta. Eso dijo. Era blanco. O tal vez, a su lado, yo sólo me ausentaba de mí mismo. De cualquier manera, olvidé su nombre de memoria. Me pregunto cómo se siente moverse a la velocidad de la sed, si es rápido como estar recostado en el suelo de la cocina con la luz apagada. (Kristopher) 6:24 a.m. Estación de autobuses. Un boleto de ida a Nueva York: $36.75. 6:57 a.m. Te quiero, mamá. Cuando los guardias de la cárcel quemaron sus manuscritos, Nguyễn Chí Thiện no podía dejar de reír: los 283 poemas ya estaban dentro de él. Soñé que recorría descalzo sobre la nieve el camino a tu casa. Todo era color azul como una mancha de tinta y tú todavía estabas vivo. Incluso había una luz con la sombra del amanecer en tu ventana. Dios debe ser una estación , dijo la abuela, mirando la tormenta que ahogaba su jardín. Mis pasos en la acera eran las huidas más pequeñas. Querido dios, si eres una estación, ojalá seas la que atravesé para llegar a donde estoy. Aquí. Eso es todo lo que quería ser. Lo prometo. The Smallest Measure Behind the fallen oak, the Winchester rattles in a boy’s early hands. A copper beard grazes his ear. Go ahead . She’s all yours ... Heavy with summer, I am the doe whose one hoof cocks like a question ready to open roots. & like any god -forsaken thing, I want nothing more than my breaths. To lift this snout, carved from centuries of hunger, toward the next low peach bruising in the season’s clutch. Go ahead , the voice thicker now, drive her home . But the boy is crying into the carcass of a tree—cheeks smeared with snot & chipped bark. Once, I came near enough to a man to smell a woman’s scent in his quiet praying— as some will do before raising their weapons closer to the sky. But through the grained mist that makes this morning’s minutes, this smallest measure of distance, I see two arms unhinging the rifle from the boy’s grip, its metallic shine sharpened through wet leaves. I see the rifle... the rifle coming down, then gone. I see an orange cap touching an orange cap. No, a man bending over his son the way the hunted, for centuries, must bend over its own reflection to drink. La menor medida Detrás del roble caído, el Winchester cascabelea en las manos tempranas de un niño. Una barba cobriza raspa su oreja. Vamos . Es toda tuya ... Cargando el verano, yo soy la cierva cuya pezuña se arquea como una pregunta lista para abrir raíces. Y como cualquier cosa olvidada de dios, no quiero más que mi propio aliento. Alzar este hocico, labrado por siglos de hambre, hacia el siguiente durazno bajo, mallugándose en el puño de la estación. Vamos , la voz ahora más gruesa, hazlo ya . Pero el niño llora contra el cadáver de un árbol, las mejillas embarradas de mocos y corteza astillada. Una vez, me acerqué lo suficiente a un hombre para percibir una esencia de mujer en su muda plegaria – como hacen algunos antes de levantar sus armas más cerca del cielo. Pero a través de la bruma granulada que da forma a los minutos de esta mañana, ésta menor medida de la distancia, veo dos brazos desarticular el rifle del niño, su brillo metálico afilado entre hojas húmedas. Veo el rifle... el rifle que comienza a caer y luego desaparece. Veo una gorra naranja tocando una gorra naranja. No, a un hombre inclinándose sobre su hijo como las presas, durante siglos, deben inclinarse sobre sus propios reflejos para beber. Daily Bread Củ Chi, Vietnam Red is only black remembering. Early dark & the baker wakes to press what’s left of the year into flour & water. Or rather, he’s reshaping the curve of her pale calf atmosphered by a landmine left over from the war he can’t recall. A fistful of hay & the oven scarlets. Alfalfa. Forsythia. Foxglove. Bubbling dough. When it’s done, he’ll tear open the yeasty steam only to find his palms—the same as when he was young. When heaviness was not measured by weight but distance. He’ll climb the spiral staircase & call her name. He’ll imagine the softness of bread as he peels back the wool blanket, raises her phantom limb to his lips as each kiss dissolves down her air-light ankles. & he will never see the pleasure this brings to her face. Never her face. Because in my hurry to make her real, make her here, I will forget to write a bit of light into the room. Because my hands were always brief & dim as my father’s. & it will start to rain. I won’t even think to put a roof over the house— her prosthetic leg on the nightstand, the clack clack as it fills to the brim. Listen, the year is gone. I know nothing of my country. I write things down. I build a life & tear it apart & the sun keeps shining. Crescent wave. Salt-spray. Tsunami. I have enough ink to give you the sea but not the ships, but it’s my book & I’ll say anything just to stay inside this skin. Sassafras. Douglas fir. Sextant & compass. Let’s call this autumn where my father sits in a $40 motel outside Fresno, rattling from the whiskey again. His fingers blurred like a photograph. Marvin on the stereo pleading brother, brother .& how could I have known, that by pressing this pen to paper, I was touching us back from extinction? That we were more than black ink on the bone -white backs of angels facedown in the blazing orchard. Ink poured into the shape of a woman’s calf. A woman I could go back & erase & erase but I won’t. I won’t tell you how the mouth will never be honest as its teeth. How this bread, daily broken, dipped in honey—& lifted with exodus tongues, like any other lie—is only true as your trust in hunger. How my father, all famine & fissure, will wake at 4 a.m. in a windowless room & not remember his legs. Go head, baby , he will say, put yor han on mai bak , because he will believe I am really there, that his son has been standing behind him all these years. Put yor hans on mai showduh , he will say to the cigarette smoke swirling into the ghost of a boy, Now flap. Yeah, lye dat, baby . Flap lye yu waving gootbai. See? I telling yu... I telling yu. Yor daddy? He fly . El pan de cada día Củ Chi, Vietnam El rojo es sólo el negro recordando. Madrugada oscura y se despierta el panadero para amasar lo que resta del año en harina y agua. O, más bien, de nuevo está dando forma a la curva pálida de esa pierna pulverizada por una mina oculta de una guerra que él no recuerda. Un puñado de heno y el horno se escarlata. Alfalfa. Digital. Forsitia. Masa hirviendo. Cuando esté lista, romperá de lleno el vapor de la levadura sólo para encontrar las palmas de sus manos, igual que cuando era joven. Cuando el peso no se medía por kilo sino por kilómetro. Subirá la escalera de caracol y dirá su nombre. Imaginará la suavidad del pan mientras retira la manta de lana, acerca a sus labios el miembro fantasma y cada beso se disuelve a lo largo de sus tobillos de aire. Y nunca verá el placer que él enciende en su cara. Nunca en su cara. Porque en mi prisa por volverla real, hacerla aquí, olvidaré escribir algo de luz en la habitación. Porque mis manos fueron siempre breves y tenues como las de mi padre. Y comenzará a llover. Ni siquiera pensaré en poner un techo sobre la casa. Su pierna prostética en la mesa de noche, su clac clac mientras se llena hasta el borde. Escucha, ya terminó ese año. No sé nada de mi país. Escribo cosas en el papel. Construyo una vida, la destruyo y el sol no deja de brillar. Ola creciente. Niebla salina. Tsunami. Tengo suficiente tinta para entregarte el mar pero no sus barcos, pero es mi libro y diré lo que sea sólo para quedarme dentro de esta piel. Sasafrás. Abeto. Sextante y brújula. Digamos que es otoño, ahí está mi padre sentado en un motel de 40 dólares en las afueras de Fresno, tomando whisky a sorbos de nuevo. Sus dedos borrosos como una fotografía. Marvin en el estéreo rogando hermano, hermano . Y cómo podría haber sabido que al presionar esta pluma contra el papel, ese contacto nos regresaría de la extinción. Que éramos más que tinta negra sobre el hueso blanco en las alas de ángeles tirados bocabajo en el huerto incendiado. Tinta vertida en forma de una pierna de mujer. Una mujer a la cual podría volver y borrar y borrar pero no lo haré. No te diré cómo la boca nunca será tan honesta como sus dientes. Cómo este pan, cada día roto, sopeado en miel –y elevado con las lenguas del éxodo– como cualquier otra mentira–, es tan verdadero como tu fe en el hambre. Cómo mi padre, todo hambruna y fisura, se despertará a las 4 de la mañana en un cuarto sin ventanas y no recordará sus piernas. Vamos, pequeño , dirá, pon tu mano en mi espalda , porque creerá que realmente estoy ahí, que su hijo ha estado detrás de él todos estos años. Pon tus manos en mi homblo , le dirá al humo de cigarro que gira en remolinos y se convierte en el fantasma de un niño, Ahola, el aleteo . Ey, así, nene. Aletea como si te estuvielas despidiendo. ¿Ves? Yo diciendo... Yo diciendo ¿Tu papá? Él vuela. Odysseus Redux He entered my room like a shepherd stepping out of a Caravaggio. All that remains of the sentence is a line of black hair stranded at my feet. Back from the wind, he called to me with a mouthful of crickets— smoke & jasmine rising from his hair. I waited for the night to wane into decades—before reaching for his hands. Then we danced without knowing it: my shadow deepening his on the shag. Outside, the sun kept rising. One of its red petals fell through the window—& caught on his tongue. I tried to pluck it out but was stopped by my own face, the mirror, its cracking, the crickets, every syllable spilling through. Odiseo regresa Entró en mi habitación como un pastor salido de un Caravaggio. Lo único que queda de la frase es una línea de pelo negro enredada a mis pies. Después del viento, dijo mi nombre con la boca llena de grillos. Humo y jazmín emanaban de su cabello. Esperé a que la noche menguara en décadas antes de buscar sus manos con la mía. Entonces bailamos sin saberlo: mi sombra acentuaba la suya en la alfombra. Afuera, el sol seguía ascendiendo. Uno de sus pétalos rojos cayó por la ventana y prendió fuego en su lengua. Traté de arrancarlo pero me detuvo mi propio rostro, el espejo, su grieta, los grillos, cada sílaba derramándose. Logophobia Afterward, I woke into the red dark to write gia đình on this yellow pad. Looking through the letters I can see into the earth below, the blue blur of bones. Quickly— I drill the ink into a period. The deepest hole, where the bullet, after piercing my father’s back, has come to rest. Quickly—I climb inside. I enter my life the way words entered me— by falling through the silence of this wide open mouth Logofobia Y después, desperté en la oscuridad roja para escribir gia đình en este bloc amarillo. A través de las letras puedo ver dentro de la tierra bajo nosotros, el azul turbio de huesos. Rápido taladro un punto de tinta. El agujero más profundo, donde la bala, después de perforar la espalda de mi padre, ha llegado a detenerse. Rápido subo y entro. Entro en mi vida como las palabras entraron en mí: cayendo a través del silencio de esta boca bien abierta Someday I’ll Love Ocean Vuong Ocean, don’t be afraid. The end of the road is so far ahead it is already behind us. Don’t worry. Your father is only your father until one of you forgets. Like how the spine won’t remember its wings no matter how many times our knees kiss the pavement. Ocean, are you listening? The most beautiful part of your body is wherever your mother’s shadow falls. Here’s the house with childhood whittled down to a single red trip wire. Don’t worry. Just call it horizon & you’ll never reach it. Here’s today. Jump. I promise it’s not a lifeboat. Here’s the man whose arms are wide enough to gather your leaving. & here the moment, just after the lights go out, when you can still see the faint torch between his legs. How you use it again & again to find your own hands. You asked for a second chance & are given a mouth to empty out of. Don’t be afraid, the gunfire is only the sound of people trying to live a little longer & failing. Ocean. Ocean— get up. The most beautiful part of your body is where it’s headed. & remember, loneliness is still time spent with the world. Here’s the room with everyone in it. Your dead friends passing through you like wind through a wind chime. Here’s a desk with the gimp leg & a brick to make it last. Yes, here’s a room so warm & blood-close, I swear, you will wake— & mistake these walls for skin. Algún día amaré a Ocean Vuong Ocean, no tengas miedo. El final del camino está tan adelante que ya lo dejamos atrás. No te preocupes. Tu padre sólo es tu padre hasta que uno de los dos lo olvide. Así como tu columna no recordará sus alas sin importar cuántas veces nuestras rodillas besen el pavimento. Ocean, ¿me escuchas? La parte más hermosa de tu cuerpo es donde cae la sombra de tu madre. Aquí está la casa con la niñez reducida a una cerca de alambre rojo. No te preocupes. Sólo llámala horizonte y nunca la alcanzarás. Aquí está hoy. Salta. Te prometo que no es un bote salvavidas. Aquí está el hombre cuyos brazos amplios pueden abarcar tu partida. Y aquí el momento, justo al apagarse las luces, cuando aún puedes ver la débil antorcha entre sus piernas. Cómo la usas una y otra vez para encontrar tus manos. Pediste una segunda oportunidad y te han dado una boca donde vaciarte. No tengas miedo, los disparos son sólo el sonido de la gente tratando de vivir un poco más y fracasando. Ocean. Ocean, levántate. La parte más hermosa de tu cuerpo es adonde se dirige. Y recuerda, incluso la soledad es tiempo que pasas con el mundo. Aquí está el cuarto con todos dentro. Tus amigos muertos atravesándote como el viento, las campanas de viento. Aquí un escritorio con una pata coja y un ladrillo que la sostiene. Sí, aquí hay un cuarto tan cálido y tan cerca de la sangre que, te juro, al despertar tomas estas paredes por piel. Devotion Instead, the year begins with my knees scraping hardwood, another man leaving into my throat. Fresh snow crackling on the window, each flake a letter from an alphabet I’ve shut out for good. Because the difference between prayer & mercy is how you move the tongue. I press mine to the navel’s familiar whorl, molasses threads descending toward devotion. & there’s nothing more holy than holding a man’s heartbeat between your teeth, sharpened with too much air. This mouth the last entry into January, silenced with fresh snow crackling on the window. & so what—if my feathers are burning. I never asked for flight. Only to feel this fully, this entire, the way snow touches bare skin—& is, suddenly, snow no longer. Devoción En cambio, el año empieza con mis rodillas raspándose contra el piso de madera, otro hombre yéndose en mi garganta. Nieve fresca crepita en la ventana, cada copo una letra de un alfabeto que he rechazado para siempre. Porque la diferencia entre plegaria y compasión es cómo mueves la lengua. Presiono la mía a la espiral conocida del ombligo, hilos de melaza descienden hacia la devoción. Y no hay nada más sagrado que sostener el pulso de un hombre entre los dientes, afilado por el demasiado aire. Esta boca, la última puerta de enero, silenciada con nieve fresca cruje en la ventana. Y qué si mis plumas están en llamas. Yo nunca pedí el vuelo. Sólo sentir esto plenamente, esto entero, el modo en que la nieve toca la piel desnuda y, de pronto, deja de ser nieve. Notas del autor «Umbral» toma prestada y altera una frase del poema «Parable» [Parábola] de Carl Philips. «Alborada con ciudad en llamas» toma prestada la letra de Blanca Navidad , una canción escrita por Irving Berlin. El epígrafe de «Haibun Inmigrante» proviene de El libro de las preguntas de Edmond Jabès. «El regalo» está escrito a partir de Li-Young Lee. El título «Always & Forever» también es el de la canción favorita de mi papá, en la interpretación Luther Vandross. «Anáfora como mecanismo de defensa» está dedicado a L. D. P. El título «La reina bajo la colina» es un verso del poema de Robert Duncan, «Often I am Permitted to Return to a Meadow» [A menudo se me permite regresar a un prado]. «La reina bajo la colina» toma prestado y altera frases del poema de Eduardo Corral «Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome» [Síndrome de Inmunodeficiencia Humana]. «Fragmentos de un cuaderno» toma prestada una frase de «The Dark World» [El mundo oscuro] de Sandra Lim; Nguyễn Chí Thiện fue un poeta disidente de Vietnam que pasó en total veintisiete años en prisión por sus escritos. Mientras estuvo encarcelado, sin papel ni pluma, compuso y memorizó sus poemas. El título «Algún día amaré a Ocean Vuong» remite a Frank O’Hara y Roger Reeves. «Devoción» está dedicado a Peter Bienkowski. Agradecimientos Gracias a mis queridos amigos, maestros y editores por su ayuda. Gracias, Peter, para Peter. Expediente X. V. Peña, Christian 9788412195811 104 P � ginas C � mpralo y empieza a leer La poesía de Christian Peña se ha consolidado a golpe de versos en la lírica mexicana. Desde su primer libro, ha logrado crearse un estilo y una manera de hallazgo poético que ya reconocen sus lectores. Ya sea que escriba sobre el mito, la enfermedad o el arte, la producción poética de Peña, cimentada en la experimentación formal y las reinvenciones textuales , es siempre biográfica y no obstante literaria, es personal y es extranjera. Por eso sus personajes siempre nos resultan próximos, humanos, traspasados por la equivocación o el miedo. Expediente X.V . puede leerse como un libro de poemas, como una novela policiaca o como un perfecto teatro de sombras. En estas páginas el poeta es una suerte de Sherlock Holmes que, atormentado por su propio pasado, investiga la muerte del poeta mexicano Xavier Villaurrutia. Todos los sospechosos son llamados a declarar. Las pistas y documentos que el autor encuentra durante su investigación conforman una suerte de expediente policíaco. Así, valiéndose del verso y de la prosa por igual, el investigador hace un análisis profundo de la obra poética de Villaurrutia, pero en lugar de encontrar algún indicio que pueda explicar la muerte del poeta, encuentra sus viejas obsesiones, su pasado, su propia nostalgia de la muerte. C � mpralo y empieza a leer Yo maté a Sherezade Haddad, Joumana 9788412163803 128 P � ginas C � mpralo y empieza a leer En Yo maté a Sherezade la autora muestra como, desde el nacimiento, el cuerpo de la mujer se ve atrapado en un contexto social que lleva a la mujer incluso a la esclavitud. Su voz canta en una reafirmación de la vida , un viaje perpetuo, un acto disruptivo para las mujeres árabes (y la mujer como tal) tengan acceso a algo más. La verdad de esta autora no puede ocultarse. Habla con libertad y "mata" a Sherezade para liberarse de lo que trae la opresión. Hay algo más grande que el feminismo: la mujer que busca su libertad , mira lo que es y se atreve a serlo sin detener el impulso que este deseo genera. C � mpralo y empieza a leer Falstaff Bloom, Harold 9788412163889 184 P � ginas C � mpralo y empieza a leer Harold Bloom realiza un acercamiento literario, crítico y ante todo humanista a los personajes que considera más relevantes de Shakespeare . El primero: Falstaff . Harold Bloom declaró sentirse especialmente identificado con Falstaff ("cuando era joven y estaba menos cansado, yo fantaseaba con ser Falstaff") y con su forma de amar la vida. No es de extrañar que dedicara, por tanto, el primer libro de esta colección a uno de los personajes tragicómicos más complejos y eternos de Shakespeare. C � mpralo y empieza a leer Del crear y lo creado 1 Mujica, Hugo 9788412163896 560 P � ginas C � mpralo y empieza a leer La poesía completa de Hugo Mujica desde el año 1983 hasta 2011. Este volumen reúne la poesía que Hugo Mujica ha dado a la imprenta desde la aparición, en 1983, de Brasa blanca. Es la suya una escritura que ha sabido despojarse de todo lo accesorio, de toda distracción y ornamento, para interpelar los ejes de la condición humana con una seductora convergencia de lirismo y metafísica, elegancia verbal y lucidez existencial. Su poesía se acerca al silencio para mejor escucharlo y entenderlo, para incorporar su lección y entrañarlo en su abordaje al mundo, esa "lluvia del mundo" que da título a uno de sus libros. Lo metafísico en Mujica es una disciplina del pensar y una escenografía: una grieta en la pared, un ruido en la cocina, una calle vacía donde brilla débilmente una farola... Llevando el lenguaje a su esencia, esta poesía logra dar voz a lo esencial de la vida misma, el misterio en que se asienta. C � mpralo y empieza a leer Como un tren sobre el abismo Skliar, Carlos 9788412191028 120 P � ginas C � mpralo y empieza a leer Carlos Skliar aboga por hacer un parón, salir de la inercia y la falsa noción de éxito que la sociedad impone, exaltando los valores de la buena pereza. Frente a la aceleración del tiempo, el elogio a la lentitud y a la pereza ; contra la urgencia, cierta parsimonia; para disputarle el sentido a una existencia agobiada y desteñida, la reparación poética; ante la búsqueda desesperada del provecho, la celebración de la inutilidad. El ensayo de Carlos Skliar no procura el consuelo y la salvación meramente individual, que viene de la mano de falsas promesas y falsos profetas, sino las redes posibles de amistad, de soledad, de escritura y de lectura que podrían componer otra vida común para otro mundo distinto donde vuelvan a recuperar su aire palabras tan maltratadas como libertad, época, conversación, vida. C � mpralo y empieza a leer Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. Official Telegram channel Z-Access https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library z-library.sk z-lib.gs z-lib.fm go-to-library.sk This file was downloaded from Z-Library project ED 404 618 AUTHOR TITLE INSTITUTION REPORT NO PUB DATE NOTE AVAILABLE FROM PUB TYPE EDRS PRICE DESCRIPTORS DOCUMENT RESUME CS 012 714 Padgett, Ron Creative Reading: What It Is, How To Do It, and Why. National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, Ill. ISBN-0-8141-0906-3 97 178p. National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 09063-3050: $16.95 members, $22.95 nonmembers). Viewpoints (Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120)GuidesNon-Classroom Use (055) MF01/PC08 Plus Postage. *Creative Thinking; *Critical Reading; Higher Education; Imagination; *Reading Attitudes; Reading Habits; *Reading Instruction; *Reading Strategies; *Reading Writing Relationship; Recreational Reading; Secondary Education IDENTIFIERSAesthetic Reading; *Reading Uses; Text Factors; Typography ABSTRACT This book aims to enlarge the possibilities of reading by suggesting ways to make reading more imaginative and by encouraging a new attitude toward the act of reading. The book discusses the mystery of learning to read, the physiology and psychology of reading, the ongoing contests between various methods of instruction. It guides readers through their own personal histories with a series of questions related to their reading habits before beginning school, in school, and after completing their formal educations. After a brief discussion of common reading errors that can be used creatively, the central chapter of the book, "Creative Reading Techniques," suggests exercises that make reading an adventure, highly interactive, and imaginative, using both classic and modern literature in ways that blend reading and writing. Along the way, among other things, the book talks about the influence of typography, movies, and television on reading, the joys of misunderstanding, the music of Spike Jones, skywriting, Dada poetry, reading in dreams, the way words sound in the reader's head, and the setting in which text is read. (NKA) ********************************************************************** Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made from the original document. *********************************************************************** 0 r4.0.c, ' 101.Alb 44 A mA_ 111 . 4tor-- , 411,1,,Nr 0.5:0,16.' t tit.,.,esgst24'ff,, camtt-411., _ I ...., ---0-6.,4, il, 1,..,--1,.... z 4 3,_.-..caat-,,:%'4'9 -0" 0,.., W 43:11f 0'716 a .,1..,,. G. 9,"..;Is--.all.VIV. T-ir.:. _ 6 tb:;.4,v,',.6:.44 _,...,.., a._1,',..-' P 11- 4 -' ,v4e60 or,dit.....,0-4. 7- , f* 0*4'4-1.,44/ .42' 699.. i$ 6"EP1 ., ....._;,vit,''-0.' 11''..*zh.4,1,..... 4 f.' I:).4'',..* ' t, .:441k 47 -.e.'t-..,,,,.A."`v'''''"frA 1*..,,,..,P(::,7.. r4......''._ ,..,.. 64 v-4,01.0' -,..p..,4,,.. ah0 adgett2.tA 6V6'*''41.''*......A1---JalL-Z,,,:i." '''''''' v6,'0*Ak 'P-6-,.?4.-.,4,!: - ..,.. :-,- 5. i --- GsiU.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 1 PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE ANDk- - DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIALiOffice of Educational Research and Improvement ikEDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATIONpI HAS BEEN GRANTED BY.4? (04ellisdocument nas been reproduced as/II-/q,f11.14g4' .'" 'e CENTER (ERIC) ....,r--.t.,ece.veafrom the person or Organization ...'...... Ul*.-%.,-,' 0,c Originating itA r 0 Minor Changes nave oeen made to irnprOwe reproduction quality.1 4,-a!rigii:,,il I 'Points of view Or opinionS Staled in this dOCuTO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES. men? 00 not necessarily represent official..INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)' 4. eitek,OE RI 00Sition Or pOliCy . i-,1" .----,- --'w --"'7',, 04,:-.,. -0.--.., r, 4,. c/If-.,,,,' Ltt_-,,..;..! 11, 'A47.- ii :40.. 6.-4,,,t.I-''..-4*.--il'BEST COPY AVAILABLE2.4f.b.-71....,,4,4110cr-t2J-IF 4431,. 01, Creative Reading 3 M tssEDNA ofP4roAll HAS NEVER READA (took- 04 HER LIFE, YET SHE HAS LICKED EVERY PAGE ofShetkespeareisCorniokie Works STILT 4 Creative Reading What It Is, How to Do It, and Why Ron Padgett National Council of Teachers of English 1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 NCTE Editorial Board: Pat Cordeiro, Colette Daiute, Hazel Davis, Bobbi Fisher, Brenda Greene, Richard Luckert, Al leen Pace Nilsen, Jerrie Cobb Scott, Karen Smith, Chair, ex officio, Dawn Boyer, ex officio Permissions Glen Baxter for his frontispiece drawing, from The Works (Wyrd Press, 1977). Ron Loewinsohn, for his poem "Semi-colon; for Philip Whalen" from his book Meat Air. The New York Times for permission to reproduce a portion of the front page of its July 6, 1986, issue, copyright © 1986 by The New York Times Co. Reprinted by permission. Judith Steinbergh and Wampeter Press for use of Ramah McKay's poem. Emmett Williams, editor of Anthology of Concrete Poetry, for use of Paul DeVree's poem in that collection. Portions of this book appeared in Teachers & Writers magazine, Vol. 21, No. 5; I Live to Read & Write, Vermont Department of Education, 1991; and Educating the Imagination, edited by Christopher Edgar and Ron Padgett, published by Teachers & Writers Collaborative in 1994. Manuscript Editor: Hilary Taylor Holbrook Production Editor: Michelle Sanden Johlas Cover Designer: Christopher Edgar Interior Book Designer: Doug Burnett NCTE Stock Number 09063-3050 © 1997 by Ron Padgett. It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching of En- glish and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point of view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the Board of Direc- tors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of policy, where such endorsement is clearly specified. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Padgett, Ron. Creative reading : what it is, how to do it, and why / Ron Padgett. p.cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 0-8141-0906-3 (pbk.) 1. Reading. 2. Creation (Literary, artistic, etc.). 3. Reading, Psychology of. I. Title. LB1050.2.P351997 372.41dc2196-38010 6 This book is dedicated, with admiration, gratitude, and affection, to Kenneth Koch. Contents Table of Figuresviii Acknowledgmentsxi Prefacexiii 1.Taking a Ride on the Reading1 2. My Personal History7 3. Your Personal History31 4. Unconscious Errors in Reading38 5. Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes42 6.Creative Reading Techniques56 7.Other Voices110 8. New Reading124 9.Reading in Unusual Situations129 10. Other Faces133 Appendix: Skywriting141 Notes 145 Bibliography149 Index 155 Author161 Figures 1. From Think-and-Do Book.9 2. The alphabet (printed).13 3. How letters are made, using printing.14 4. The alphabet (script).15 5. How letters are made, using script.16 6: From Using Words.18 7.Front page of My Weekly Reader.23 8."Reading" a painting.44 9.Trickle down example 1.63 10. Trickle down example 2.64 11. A "river."65 12. Edge blur.66 13. Two columns example.75 14. Front page of the New York Times.76 15. Fold-in example.84 16. Pattern for reading fold-in example in Figure 15.85 17. Grid example.92 18. Four reading patterns.97 19. Spanish comic.98 20. Cherry comic strip by Joe Brainard and Ron Padgett.99 21. Cussing man.119 22. Ron Loewinsohn poem.120 23. Paul de Vree poem.121 24. Apollinaire's "It's Raining" calligram.126 25. Marinetti's "Parole in liberta."127 26. Long lines example.137 27. Cars at intersection.139 viii 9 Outside of a dog, reading is a man's best friend. Inside a dog it's too dark to read. Groucho Marx 0 1 0 Acknowledgments I'd like to thank the patient and helpful librarians at Teachers College, Columbia University; Butler Library, Columbia University; the Research Division of the New York Public Library; the Kellogg-Hubbard Library, Montpelier, Vermont; and John Donohue and the librarians at the New Yorker. I owe a great debt of gratitude to others who helped me invent this book: the late John Waldman, friend and reading specialist; my colleagues over the years at Teachers & Writers Collaborative, particularly Chris Edgar; the wise editorial board of the National Council of Teachers of En- glish; Dawn Boyer, Michelle Sanden Joh las, and Mario Welshons, astute and cheerful editors at NCTE; my junior high school teacher Lillie Roberts, who awakened my interest in reading; my students in Imagina- tive Writing at Columbia University; the late Lewis Meyer, the Tulsa book- seller who showed me great kindness when I was in my teens; my friend George Schneeman for reading an early draft and helping with Italian translation; my agent Robert Cornfield; and fellow writers David Antin, Ted Berrigan, Geof Hewitt, Gary Moore, Judith Steinbergh, Tom Veitch, James Wan less, Emmett Williams, and Larry Zirlin. I also thank my friend Glen Baxter for use of his drawing as a frontispiece, and fellow poet Ron Loewinsohn for use of his poem "Semicolon; for Philip Whalen." I hope that some of the joy of having collaborated with artist Joe Brainard is evi- dent in our comic strip in this book. Most of all, I thank my wife Patricia, sine qua non. xi 11 Preface Afew years ago, it struck me that I couldn't remember ever having learned to read. How had I learned? How do others learn to read? How would I teach someone else? The more I thought about read- ing, the more it seemed a kind of miracle, and it was my growing fascina- tion with this miracle that led me to examine my ideas about it. At a certain point, I saw that these ideas led to a particular approach, which I've called creative reading, a corollary to creative writing. In this book, I define creative reading, tell how to do it and why. I discuss various types of reading errors and tell how to capitalize on them. The most experimental parts of the book (Chapters 6 and 7) pre- sent specific methods and exercises for creative reading, exercises involv- ing classic and modern literature, writing, listening, thinking, teaching, and learning. I offer ways to retrace your own reading history, so you can see what has made you the kind of reader you are. To make doing so eas- ier, I summarize the principal methods of reading instruction in American schools during the past 75 years. Along the way, I also discuss, among other things, the role of the unconscious in reading, intentional mishear- ing, the music of Spike Jones, skywriting, Dada poetry, and time travel. Perhaps I should say a few words about what this book doesn't in- tend to do. It doesn't tell how to teach beginners to read. It doesn't com- prehensively survey the vast literature of the pedagogy of reading. And although many of its ideas are practical, it does not propose a formal "method." It is the view of a poet who prefers ideas and images when they first materialize, still trailing clouds of mystery, before the life gets squeezed out of them by codification. It is a book either for people who have learned to readperhaps even wellin conventional ways, but who sense a creeping staleness in their reading, or for those who have a taste for literary adventure. It is emphatically not an attack on conven- tional reading, nor is it an outgrowth of deconstruction, an intellectual trend that I heard of long after I had formed the ideas I present here. The general aim of the book is simply to enlarge the possibilities of reading, by demonstrating ways to make reading more flexible, various, and imaginative, and by suggesting a new, more inventive attitude toward the act of reading. This new attitude is one that encourages the integra- tion of reading and writing. In fact, the book's underlying assumption is that reading and writing should be seen as two sides of the same coin, not as disciplines connected only by the fact that both use words. 12 xiv Preface That's what happens too often in school: we have our students study reading for a while, then close their books and work on spelling, grammar, and punctuation. What's worse, we administer standardized tests that purport to measure progress in quantitative terms. All too often, the test scores become more important than what they were meant to measure, and we begin to "teach for the test." At the same time, we break down reading and writing into smaller units, known as "skills." The skills approach has been characterized as the "closed" system, best understood if contrasted with the "open" system (Lee and Allen 4-5). In the open sys- tem, reading instruction begins with the learner's recognition that his or her own talk can be put into written form; in the closed system, the learner begins with learning to read print. In the open system, reading is integrated with writing, and the instruction honors the students' inter- ests; in the closed, the emphasis is on a preset sequence of reading skills established by reading experts. In the open system, students' progress is measured by students' enthusiasm for reading and self-expression; in the closed, by standardized tests. And so on. Skills and drills go hand in hand with achievement tests. The trou- ble with the skills approach is that it is boring and artificial. It makes read- ing and writing harder to learnand far less enjoyablethan they should be. If we were taught to talk the way we're taught to read, most of us would be mute. On top of it all, for more than 20 years we have had "experts" telling us that we as a nation are "at risk" because our students don't do well enough on tests: International comparisons of student achievement... reveal that on 19 academic tests American students were never first or second and, in comparison with other industrialized nations, were last seven times. (National Commission on Excellence in Education 6) This failure poses a threat to "American prosperity, security, and civility" (5), presumably in that order. We haven't even competed well against our- selves. According to one reading expert, "SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test) scores, particularly the verbal scores, have declined steadily from 1967 to 1980," then levelled off (Chall, Stages 6). By 1992, among 17-year-olds the average proficiency in reading had risen slightly, but among college- bound twelfth graders, the level was still well below that of 1972 (Smith et al. 68; National Center for Education Statistics 113). If poor test scores mean that children are reading less and less well, we should be alarmed. It's a serious matter. But what do we mean by "reading less and less well"? And why do we always hear government offi- cials, social workers, and even educators telling us that a good education 13 Creative Readingxv is important because it enables us to get a "better job"? Such a statement is not simply an exhortation to the potential high school dropout. It ex- emplifies a philosophy of life. A Nation at Risk treats reading and other academic subjects as if they were forms of the gross national product. But do we always learn to read and write and compute primarily to get a bet- ter job? What is a "better" job? One with more money, more prestige, more security? And do we teach our children to read mainly so they can get a "higher" score or a "better" gradethat is, to "succeed"? If we do, we forget the point of learning, and there is something lacking: quality of life. In terms of reading, what is lacking is the warmth of learning about the world, other people, and oneself, of learning to live more fully and variously, with greater understanding, clarity, and compassion, as well as beauty and good humor. I'm not quite brazen enough to promise that this book will put any- one in immediate possession of these qualities, but my hope is that it will set us off in their general direction. 14 1 Taking a Ride onthe Reading My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him. Song of Solomon, 5:4, King James Version Iremember, in playing the game of Monopoly as a child, picking up a Chance card, the one that depicted the mustachioed gentleman in top hat and tails astride a locomotive, alongside the instruction, "Take a ride on the Reading." Those words would induce in me the momentary feeling that this railway (pronounced "Redding") had something to do with booksperhaps a mobile library. Like many such misunderstand- ings, this one had its particular moment of crazy wisdom: one of the great joys of books is the way they transport us, through space and time. We take a ride on the reading. I also misunderstood the title of Oscar Wilde's poem "The Ballad of Reading Gaol." In addition to reading, it has the additional problem of gaol, which I thought sounded like "gale" spoken in a strong southern ac- cent. When I learned it was pronounced "jail," I still misunderstoodthe title, fearing that it referred to a penal institution for bad readers. These unfortunates would be sent to Reading Jail, while the gifted would take a ride on the Reading.* English abounds with such pitfalls of misunderstanding, some of which, such as the biblical quotation at the start of this chapter, can be quite funny. It is amazing that non-English-speaking people learn to speak and read English as well as they do. Growing up in America, I found noth- ing odd in the fact that rough was pronounced "ruff," and that adding a th in front of it changed the whole thing to "throo. " The rules of English pho- netics and spelling are riddled with exceptions. Such nooks and crannies *Even the big computerized catalog of the New York Public Library confuses the various meanings of "reading." In doing research for this book, I asked the computer to list every new book (since 1972) on the subject of reading. It listed 684 items, including studiesof Reading, Pennsylvania, mind reading, and Reading, England. What appeared to be a his- tory of reading (Reading As It Was) turned out to be a history of the American city. One title was particularly intriguing: The Library That Would Not Die: The Turbulent History of the Reading Public Library. 15 2 Taking a Ride on the Reading of a language, such fickleness and variability, such trap doors, such odd moments in what otherwise appears to be a consistent systemthese are the monkey wrenches that give languages something ofa human caste, a fallibility. We forgive our language for these "flaws," justas we hope we can be forgiven for our lack of mastery over it. But the idea of "mastery" dominates our language instruction. The decades continue to roll by with school texts and drill books with titles along the lines of Mastering English, Drills to Ensure Mastery, and Mas- tering the Skills of Reading, all providing us with "word-attack skills." Such titles suggest that the teacher is a drill sergeant and the studentsare little recruits who must be regimented into the proper patterns of phon- ics, word recognition, and comprehension, who must be taught to sound off properly. Researchers in reading instruction have gone (and continue to go) to great lengths to learn what reading is, why some learn to do it well and others don't, and what are the best ways to teach all our children to read. Since the turn of the century, this research has led to interesting discover- ies, but too often, by the time the research filters down into the class- room, it has been made into a rigid system that nullifies much of its initial value. Constance Weaver identifies six approaches to the teaching of read- ing: the phonics approach, the linguistics approach, the "look-say"ap- proach, the basal reader approach, the language experience approach, and the whole language approach (4-46). To my thinking and inmy expe- rience, the whole language approach makes the most sense by far, but even whole language, that most generous of approaches, can become for- mulaic and mechanistic in the hands of a cold or narrow-minded teacher. And any approachespecially an approach that isn't very warm in the first placecan be dehumanized by a zealot. Phonics zombiesare partic- ularly scary. The coldest of all instruments in the teaching of reading is the test. For some time now, the effectiveness of reading instruction has been measured by methods that yield quantitative results: a child can be tested and said to be reading below, at, or above grade level. Although such tests can do what they set out to do, they can also be misleading or even highly pernicious. There is something missing in most of the research andcommen- tary on reading and in the way reading is taught: a quirky, private, creative, playful, and even wilfull streak that runs through us all, a part of ourselves that quietly but steadily goes about remaking the world to suit ourselves. 16 Creative Reading3 Artists and creative thinkers nurture this part of themselves. (Poet Dick Higgins even founded an Institute for Creative Misunderstanding.) It is the element in us that corresponds to those odd moments when the rules of our language temporarily break down, those organic, surprising, confus- ing twists that make words so free, as if they had a will of their own. It is generally conceded that creativity in writing is a good thing. In our universities, we now have what amounts to a creative writing indus- try; it is possible to obtain a master's degree in poetry writing. Many high schools offer courses in creative writing. Creative writing is now a regular part of countless elementary school curricula. As a writer who has taught poetry writing to children and teachers, I think this is wonderful for many reasons, not the least of which is that creative writing helps people take charge of themselves, to be less passive. Writing is considered to be an active activity. In this essentially true but oversimplified view, the words flow from the writer out onto the paper. Writers know, however, that what really happens is that the words originate either inside or outside the writer, go into the writer's conscious mind, move out onto the paper, and then affect what words come next, forming a kind of rolling cycle. For example, I just wrote the word cycle, and for an instant I had an image of the Harley-Davidson motorcycle my father rode as a young man. Normally, this image would have been only vaguely sensed and certainly not mentioned, but it would have affected what I wrote next, possibly a reminiscence of my childhood. I might have gone on to discuss how I learned to write, what it was like being in the first grade in 1948, and so on. The point here is that writing is not unidi- rectional, from the writer out; it is at least bidirectional, both out and in at the same time. It is like a conversation, but with oneself. In any case, writ- ing is fundamentally active. Reading, in the oversimplified view, is seen as comparatively pas- sive: the words travel from the page (or screen or whatever) and into us, who sit there receiving. We allow the words to light up certain areas of the brain, to revive memories, to create scenes and excite emotions, even to make us wonder, but in some fundamental way, we are under the control of the words coming in. Sometimes we have to work to in- terpret them, but they have a sovereignty that makes them inviolate to our tampering. Louise Rosenblatt describes the act of reading as intrinsically ac- tive. She views it as a transaction between reader and text, in which the reader participates in the creation of the work of literature, which by defi- nition is different for each reader, and even for the same reader at differ- 17 4 Taking a Ride on the Reading ent times. Her view, which makes perfect sense to me, echoes one ex- pressed by Fernando Pessoa in his Book of Disquiet: I have never been able to read a single book to which I give myself over entirely; at each step, always, the incessant commentary of in- telligence and imagination interrupted the thread of the narrative. After a few minutes, it was I who was writing the bookand what I wrote nowhere existed. (57) Most readers seem to feel that they have the opposite experience, in which reader and author remain distinct and separate, and the printed word radiates an unassailable aura of power. An essay in print feels far more authoritative than the same essay in typescript. Every time a manu- script I have edited is set in type, I say to myself, "This stuff is even better than I thought!" Bind it in hardcover: it looks even more imposing. Call it something like The Oxford Book of Reading and it takes on an even greater aura of authority. Imprimatur.* From an early age, we are instilled with respect for the printed word. Those of us who, for some reason or another, do not learn to read easily can begin to resent this obligatory respect, while fast learners, re- warded for their facility, feed more and more off their own success, in- creasing their respect for the system of printed words that is so gratifying to them. In the former case, the child doesn't learn to read well or at all, and at an early age is defeated by reading: it is too difficult to master, too powerful. In the latter case, the child can begin to worship that same power. Whether feared or revered, the printed word emerges as powerful. Infants love to make marks on paper (and walls)pencil marks, felt- tip pen marks, crayon marks. If they see older children and adults writing, they too will "write" by making scribble marks. Sometimes they will draw a picture and scribble a caption below it. You can't read their writing, for it belongs to no known system of writing, but they can. They will tell you that it means that "the horse is taking a nap," for instance. Theygo to school taking pleasure in their writing. Then things begin to change. They learn that there is a right way and a wrong way. They learn that there are rules, and the rules have to be learned. They becomemore aware of their classmates, whose esteem they want and with whom they feel they must compete. Their writing is graded. The teacher marks the mistakes on their papers. They realize that their handwriting is faulty, their spelling is terrible, that no matter how hard they try, they will never, *Referring to detective novels, though, writer and artist Joe Brainard said, "Some books are better in paperback." 18 Creative Reading5 ever write a perfect essay. Their writing cries out for improvement.Even those who go on to college will do so hating the dreaded term paper, the essay question, the book report, any form of writing that requires more than a true-false or multiple-choice response. This attitude explains why their writing improves so slowly, and why so few adults outside of school write anything at all: no one wants to produce something they will see only as flawed. Why bother? Reading is a different matter. Printed words seem perfect. Think back to when you were little, struggling to spell words such as "cat." Can you remember how awesome the big words looked then? I can remember thinking that "antidisestablishmentarianism" was the longest word in the world and therefore one that could be spelled only by a genius. (It still looks pretty impressive, for an English word, like a battleship gliding slowly into an estuary.) Can you remember ever seeing a misspelling in a school reader or textbook? They must be few and far between. Further- more, the schoolbooks are the ones that are laying down the law to us, so it is natural for us to assume that they know what they're talking about. The rules of reading and writing are set out in sober black ink on no-non- sense white paper, which confirms their authority. Printed words are never wrong. "How do you know?" "I read it in a book." Or: "Look, let's settle this question once and for all. Let's call the library." Of course books are filled with all sorts of great information and misinformation, and reading is more than the receiving of information. The point here is that printed words have such authority that they seem chiseled in stone. We are rarely, if ever, taught that printed words might be changed, played with, bounced around, or cut in half: in short, that we could read as actively as we write, that we could read creatively. This lack of permissionand of techniques for doing so once permission is grantedmay prove to have been a barrier to our learning how to bring more of ourselves to what we read. We may have been reading all these years with only half a brain. Creative Reading explores this other side of reading, presents some methods of reading creatively, and explains how they work and why. It grew out of years of wondering why Ia writerhadn't been tak- ing greater pleasure in reading. My friends were always raving about some "wonderful" book they were reading, a book I was "sure to love." Every once in a great while they were right, but all too often I'd trot back from 19 6 Taking a Ride on the Reading the bookstore or library with said treasure in hand, only to find, part way through it, that it was not as advertised. I wouldn't know whether to blame my friends or myself. It just seemed that I didn't get deeply ab- sorbed in reading, I didn't find myself reading in great long lost stretches of time, I wasn't getting enough nourishment from what I read. If my eyes strayed from the printed page over to the window, I found the view out- side much more satisfying: I preferred "reading" the cornice against the blue sky across the street. Surely there was something wrong with me. Why didn't I like to read more? If there was a problem, it must have its ori- gin in the past, perhaps in my childhood. Had I been taught to read in the wrong way? My autobiographical inquiry eventually led me to realize that such inquiry could be interesting for others to pursue, too. 20 2 My Personal History The bear the lion the chimpanzee the rattlesnake taught me how to read. Blaise Cendrars Istarted at the beginning, trying to recall my first experiences with read- ing. I naively hoped that I would be able to recall my first encounter with a letter of the alphabet. Under hypnosis, I tried to regress to that first letter. My quest for this primal alphabetical experience was mis- guided, because the memory of such an experience would have been transformed again and again by subsequent experiences with the alpha- bet. It would have become a memory of a memory of a memory of a memory etc. of an experience, with the experience so many steps re- moved, altered by each removal, unrecoverable in its pure state. It was like trying to understand a tree by first studying an electron of a seed. Likewise, I doubt that I will ever be able to recall recognizing and reading those initial words such as daddy, cat, and no. Hypnosis was helpful, though, in opening up old memory cells in the brain. It helped me remember being able to read comic books (called "funny books" in Oklahoma, where I grew up, in the 1940s) before I ever attended school. My mother claims that one day I started reading all by myself. Of course this just doesn't happen: she or others had shown me, inadvertently perhaps, which way books are held, in which direction the pages are read, that the black marks represent words, that written words have sounds, that in comic books the words go with pictures in the same frame, and so on. Of course, the pictures showed me which way was right-side-up. What my mother meant is that she didn't formally instruct me. She read to me, no doubt with her finger skimming along under the words and then pointing to the pictures, and I began to recognize certain simple words. There came, though, a magic moment when it all jelled, and I could read "by myself." It doesn't matter that I skipped some of the words and misread others: the whole act of reading by myself made sense. Learning to read was like learning to ride a bicycle. My father ran along- side the bike, pushing and holding it steady untilbingoI wobbled off down the street by myself. Years later, when I asked him about it, he groaned about having to propel me around the house, day after day, until he was about to drop. The funny thing is that I recall his doing it only a 21 8 My Personal History few minutes before I took off on my own. It's likely that my impression of my mother's reading to me only a few times is equally foreshortened. I also learned to read by riding in a car. My parents took great pride in their cars, keeping them clean, polished, and serviced. Like many other families in those days, we would sometimes simply go out for a ride. In All about Our Baby, our family baby album, my mother wrote that by the age of one, I "liked to ride in car an awful lot." By the time I was five, I could identify every make of car on the road. It seems to me that children in the 1940s were excited to go riding in a car; they looked eagerly out the window a lot more than children do now. (Now children look in the TV window.) When I was a preschooler, one of my favorite things to do in a car was to read the signs. "STOP" was a natural, as were "EAT," "GAS," and "HAMBURGERS." Equally compelling and not much more difficult for me was the cool blue neon that spelled out "MORRIS'S SUNDRY STORE," my prime source of funny books and chocolate malts. And later, when we drove down Route 66 to Texas to visit my aunt, I read signs along the way: "El Reno," "Elk City," "Sayre," "Welcome to Texas," "Shamrock," "Amarillo." And all along, my mother, without knowing it, was teaching me to read. After I started school, she let the teachers handle my reading. Read- ing instruction began, in the first grade, with the Scott, Foresman basic reader and workbook program, better known as "Dick and Jane." These readers have long since been rightly excoriated for their narrow images of race and class, but they seem to me to have been well-thought-out for teaching some basic concepts of reading. Notice that I said teaching concepts. Look at Figure 1. It shows a page from my workbook that went with one of the first readers, We Look and See. The page's four panels show Dick playing with his toy train. Each panel contains a caption. The note to the teacher explains that the aim of this exercise is to "promote the ability to interpret a picture-story se- quence; to give practice in associating pictures and text; to give practice in comparing one-line reading units of familiar words." Already a devourer of comic books whose narratives and panels were far more complex and in- teresting than those of "Dick and Jane," I had no trouble fulfilling the first two stated aims. The third aim seems to have eluded me at panel three, where I neglected to underline any of the phrases (perhaps because the identical phrases were not consecutive, as they were in the other three panels). I finished the exercise by coloring in Dick's shirt and the train. I find it hard to imagine what reading pleasure I could have gotten from such materials. I got pleasure from completing an assigned task; I got pleasure from being praised for doing so; and I got pleasure from the challenges in problem-solving that such workbooks presented. But I did 22 Creative Reading9 Oh, oh, look. Oh, look, look. Oh, oh, look. Figure 1. From Think-and-Do Book. 23 10 My Personal History not get pleasure in reading, because the subject matter, compared to that of Plastic Man or even Nancy & Sluggo, was less than pedestrian. The narrative anemia of the Dick and Jane scenarios caused the words to lose their interest. I learned the words and did the exercises, but not because they excited or engaged me. I did them because the teacher told me to. Thus, for the first time, my reading became disconnected from my real interests. Reading became a part of my school life and my school self, and when I went home at the end of the day I pretty much left that self at school, preferring instead to play or daydream or listen to radio serials (and a few years later, to watch television). I don't think my experience of disconnected reading is all that different from those of my classmate then, or from those of many kids today. My teachers used a combination of what reading specialists call word recognition and phonics. Here is the gist of each method. With word recognition, the teacher shows the child a word and says it aloud: "cat." The child learns to recognize the word as a whole. With phonics, the student learns how individual letters usually sound, so he or she can "sound out" the letters and blend them into words: "c-a-t." Both methods have variations and sophistications, described by Jeanne S. Chall in her study, Learning to Read: The Great Debate. According to Chall, the phonics method of instruction was domi- nant during the period 1890-1920. From 1920 to 1935, schools empha- sized the word recognition method. From 1935 to 1955, the phonics method made a gradual return. Of course, these trends affected some parts of the country more than others, some types of schools (parochial, public) more than others, some teachers (new, veteran, rigid, experimen- tal, etc.) more than others. It is probable that an inflexible, veteran teacher in a small, conservative town still would have been teaching phonics until 1935, that is, straight through the word recognition period. My wife was first taught to read in 1943 in a parochial school that used the word recognition method. Only a few blocks away and five years later, I was taught to read in a public school that combined phonics and word recognition. My school's approach was probably that of William S. Gray, described by Jeanne Chall as the "acknowledged leader of,and spokesman for, reading experts for four decades; major summarizer and interpreter of research; and author of America's leading basal-reader se- ries" (Chall, Learning to Read, 96). He advocated a sight-recognition-first, phonics-later approach. The combined approach was the result of the work of many re- searchers and teachers, all trying their hardest to figure out the best way to teach children to read.' The combination of look-say and phonics 24 Creative Reading11 methods has its virtues, but it doesn't go far enough. It failed, in my case and in many others', not because I didn't learn to read, but because I did- n't learn to love to read. The authors of "Dick and Jane" and other basic readers seemed to have had no idea what might interest a child. The "Dick and Jane" authors' claim, that the Think-and-Do Book "contains much new and interesting reading material to...contribute to [the stu- dent's] enjoyment of the new experience of reading," rings utterly hollow (Gray and Monroe, inside front cover). Much the same can be said about instruction in writing, despite several encouraging trendswriters-in-the-schools, the use of the "writ- ing process," and whole languageover the past few decades. At the same time as we are taught to read in school, we are taught to write. It is possible, of course, to learn to read without learning to write; without being able to form a single letter of the alphabet, toddlers can learn to read at a very early age.2 But there is no doubt that reading and writing re- inforce each other, just as reading silently and reading aloud reinforce each other. But when writing is taught poorly, the effect of the reinforce- ment is negative. Dismal writing assignments that parallel dismal reading matter send too many students away from school convinced that the last thing they want to do is read or write. They come to see reading and writ- ing as boring work, and boring work is hard to do, and when it is forced on students, they feel crushed, defeated, resentful, apathetic, or guilty. These reactions reflect many students' sense of failure and weakness: the written word is just too difficult, too powerful for them to handle.3 When I was learning to write, my teachers put a great premium on penmanship. In the first grade, we were shown how to print. We used wide-ruled paper whose solid light-blue lines were divided in half by dot- ted lines to help us proportion the letters. I liked learning to print. I liked the way the letters looked when they were formed neatly, and for some reason I enjoyed trying to make the unattainable, perfect 0. The only thing I didn't like was getting writer's cramp, and having the pencil make a dent in the middle finger of my writing hand. I had never had dents in my body before, and at first I wasn't sure they would go away. We wrote with extra-thick Laddy pencils. I've always wondered why children with small hands were given such an unwieldy instrument. In any case, our penmanship drills consisted of copying the individual letters over and over, until we learned them. The same materials were used in teaching us to write script: in our case, a variant of the Palmer Method. Script, with its slanted letters and curlicues, seemed less visually attractive to me, but it was faster, and it had a more grown-up feel to it"little" kids didn't know how to do it. The 25 12 My Personal History rules for the formation of the letters in script were exact, and the teachers marked off for any variation. We were never told that this was just one sys- tem among manythat handwriting styles come and goso that when I first saw reproductions of the Declaration of Independence and The Bill of Rights, I suspected that our founding fathers had been weird, perhaps un- American, so crazed, bizarre, and illegible did their handwriting look. Nor were we told that handwriting varied from country to country. Asian cal- ligraphy was so far off the graph that it was never even mentioned. Hand- writing was presented as a monolithic set of rules: you do it this way, and that's all there is to it. (See Figures 2-5, which show the flyleaf pages, front and back of Using Words, my second-grade spelling textbook.) We were also given the impression that punctuation had existed from time immemorial. It took me about 30 years to ask myself, "Who in- vented the question mark?" It turns out that our system of punctuation has been in effect for only around 400 years. In ancient Greece, for instance, the words tended to be run together with virtually no punctuation, though there were paragraph divisions. Occasionally, there was some punctuation: in a third-century B.c. text, for instance, the double point (:) served as a period. The single point, placed high on the line, also indi- cated a period. The same point, placed in the middle of the line, indicated a comma. "Our" comma appeared around the ninth century. But it wasn't until the end of the fifteenth century and the beginning of the sixteenth that our system of word separation and punctuation was standardized.4 Even the pronunciation of the alphabet has changed. Until the last century, we Americans called the z in the British manner ("zed"). We also concluded the recitation of the alphabet by saying "... x, y, zand per se and." The per se and indicated the symbol &, now called the "amper- sand."5 Nowadays we say "zee" and don't include the ampersand. My teachers always gave the impression that punctuation and the alphabet were absolute and unchanging. It was the same with spelling. There was no sense that any word had ever been spelled any differently from the way we were being taught to spell itthese words were cut in stone in the great dictionary of eter- nity. They never had been any different and they never would be, and if we didn't learn to spell them correctly, we would be deemed ignorant and unkempt forever, like the boy in our school who arrived each morn- ing with his hair askew and his shirttail hanging out on one side. My teachers seemed not to have known that Shakespeare and his contempo- raries used variant spellings of even their own names. Although researchers have found that there is no correlation be- tween spelling ability and general intelligencenot to mention greatness: 26 Creative Reading13 How Letters Are Made See how these letters begin and end. oacd9 9See how the letters below begin. Always dot i. The letter m has two parts; n has one part. m n The first five letters below are tall.The letters d and t are shorter. Always cross t. I6.1-1k-rd See how e begins.Look at s.The letters p, j, g, q go below the line.Always keep them short. e sP J9The letters below have slanting lines in them. VWX y z Look at the letters in these words. ballfoen Figure 2. The alphabet (printed). 27 14 My Personal History The Alphabet The alphabet has all the letters we use in words. Below are two ways of writing the alphabet. 1. These are called "small letters." alocdefik Imn opugr stuvwxyz 2. These are called "capital letters." ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRST-ITVWXYZ- Figure 3. How letters are made, using printing. 28 Creative Reading15 The Alphabet The alphabet has all the letters we use in words. Below are two ways of writing the alphabet. 1. These are called "small letters." Azir 17//$0-19/A, .4144Al, A// 2. These are called "capital letters." ArgrAps, Figure 4. The alphabet (script). 29 16 My Personal History How Letters Are Made See how a and o end. Look at d. The letter u is open; e is a loop; i is closed and dotted. Q/ 6P--_6(1 The letter s is closed at the line; r is open. There are three parts in m, two in n. Cross t. Look at c. See how b, v, w end. The lines in x cross. These are the tall letters.Look at the last part of h, k. The letter f is closed at the line. These letters go below the line.Always keep them short below the line. ArffrirSee how these letters are put together into words. Figure 5. How letters are made, using script. 30 Creative Reading17 Beethoven, Yeats, and Shaw were poor spellersmy teachers still placed a great premium on correct spelling. To conform to the standards of or- thography, by the third grade we were required to learn to spell 10 to 15 new words per week. On Monday, the teacher would write the new words on the board, and we would copy them on our notebook paper. Through the week, the words would be pronounced, defined, and copied over and over, in preparation for the weekly Friday test. Words misspelled on the test would have to be copied over and over and over, until it was hard to get them wrong. This was similar to using writing as a form of punishment, as in having students stay after school and write 100 times, "I will not talk in class." A similar week-by-week system can be seen in Using Words:An En- riched Spelling Program (Second Year) (See Figure 6 a-d). In this pro- gram, a "story" is followed by a list of "new" words and instructions on what to do with them. In the first place, it's stretching a definition to call the collection of sentences about Dan, Spot, and Dad a "story." By grade two, most children have a much fuller and more interesting idea of what a story is. In the second place, the words dog, in, at, me, and it are hardly new. It's patronizing to call them "new" words when most kids will have been using them since long before they started school. And what makes them "your" new words? I never wanted them. It's like being given a pair of brown socks at Christmas. Thanks a lot. But there's more. On the second day, we got to have "Fun with [Our] New Words." Authors of textbooks such as these have always had the most peculiar sense of what might be "fun" for a child. Students know this isn't "fun," and it's irksome to be told that it is fun. But the teacher and the textbook have authority, because they possess knowledge, and this knowledge is a source of power that children want, too. So, in re- sponse to number 1 under "Fun with Your New Words," we would write the word dog and tell ourselves that, well, that was sort of not un-fun. Es- pecially if we got it right and the teacher praised us. If we didn't, we had to enter the incorrect word into what the text- book author called "My Own Word Book." What a backward idea, to give the students the words they can't spell, all for their very own! Who would want such troublesome words, such a collection of personal failures? It's like giving someone an album filled with unflattering photographs of themselves. Something to keep alongside the brown socks. I suspect that one learns to spell correctly not by doing exercises, but by reading, reading, and reading words that are spelled correctly, until the eye automatically recognizes and can confirm whether or not a word 31 18 My Personal History ,4r:IPL4r I. Spot Some dogs like to swim. Dan has a little dog called Spot. Spot likes to swim in the pond near the barn. One day Dan said, "Look at Spot, Father. He will bring my ball to me." Dan threw his ball into the pond.Spot jumped into the water.He got the ball and took it to Dan. Your New Words doginatmeit First Day 1. Read the story.Your teacher will help you. 2. Your teacher will say Your New Words. Look at each word and say it after her. 3. Find each of Your New Words in the story. Write each word on a piece of paper. [2] Figure 6a. From Using Words. 32 Creative Reading19 II. Fun with Your New Words Second Day In this week's work Fun with Your New Words has five parts.Whenever you do Fun with Your New Words, always write the num- ber of each part on your paper. 1. Look at the picture.Write the name of the animal beside number 1 on your paper. 2. In Your New Words find the word that sounds like pin.Write it beside number 2 on your paper. 3. Beside number 3 on your paper write the word that sounds like cat. 4. Beside number 4 write the word that begins with m. 5. Beside number 5 write the word that sounds like sit. [3] Figure 6b. 33 20 My Personal History Testing Yourself Third Day 1. Count Your New Words. Number one line on your paper for each new word. 2. Your teacher will say each of Your New Words. Write each new word beside a number. 3. Lay your paper beside your book.Look at Your New Words in your book.(In this lesson Your New Words were dog, in, at, me, it.)If you missed a word, draw a line through it on your paper.Write it again beside the word that is wrong.Spell it right.Save your paper. IV. Studying the Words You Missed Fourth Day Look at the paper you saved.Yesterday you crossed out each word you missed. Study the words you missed.This is the way to study a word : 1. Look at the word in Your New Words. Say it to yourself.Say each letter in the word.Close your eyes and say each letter. 2. Look at the word again. [4] Figure 6c. 34 Creative Reading21 3. Write the word without looking at Your New Words. Then look at Your New Words. See if you spelled the word right. 4. Cover the word and write it again. Do this until you can spell the word right. V. Testing Yourself Again Fifth Day 1. Your teacher will tell you how to number your paper. 2. Your teacher will say each of Your New Words. Write each word beside a number. 3. Look at Your New Words. Put a check like this (X) on your paper beside each word you missed. Your score is the number of words you spelled right.Write your score. Making a Word Book Your teacher will help you make a little book.You will use it every week.Print "My Own Word Book" and your name on the cover. If you missed any words in your test, write them in MY OWN WORD BOOK. Above the words write "Week 1." [5J Figure 6d. 35 22 My Personal History is spelled correctly. Better to spend valuable school time in meaningful and enjoyable reading than in tedious and disconnected drills. So that our spelling words would have at least some relation to something other than themselves, we were required to use them in sen- tences, one sentence for each new word. Along with the perennial "How I Spent My Summer Vacation," this exercise was the only "creative" writ- ing we were assigned. Except, of course, that it wasn't very creative. We weren't encouraged to invent; nor were we discouraged. We were just told to use each word in a sentence. So, to discharge the obligation, I usu- ally wrote brief and acceptable sentences. "America is a great country." "I like cereal." "Be very careful." "Tables are very useful." The sentences were unrelated, except in their brevity and blandness. We were never told, for example, to use all the new words in a story or paragraph, as is sometimes done now; that would have forced us to be inventive, and in- vention was not what school was about. It was about learning rules and following them, or suffering the consequences. But if school held the threat of punishment over us, it also held out the carrot of pleasure, albeit a rather withered carrot. Such had not al- ways been the case. Early American primers contained material that chil- dren ought to know, much of it from adult sources, such as the Bible. Gradually, schoolbooks became more and more "child-centered," in an at- tempt to appeal to students. Our school "reading material" was child-centered, but it always seemed to have been prepared on an erroneous assumption of what chil- dren like. For example, despite an occasionally amusing cartoon or inter- esting story, My Weekly Reader, subtitled The Children's Newspaper, routinely carried articles such as the one in Figure 7 that concludes, "Chil- dren are proud of their new schools." Excuse me? There was little in our school reading to inspire wonder or stir the imagination, for we were not learning to think, we were receiving an indoctrination in how we were to behave and what we were to think. Brought up in a family that lived in some measure by its own standards, I found such "reading material" numbing, goody-goody, and preachy, but my desire to succeed in school caused me to repress my antipathy. I read what I was supposed to, but, aside from comic books, not much else. This is partly why I missed out on "children's literature." I didn't read nursery rhymes, fairy tales, or traditional stories. I didn't read Ander- sen, Perreault, or the Brothers Grimm. I didn't read the "modern classics," such as Charlotte's Web or the Oz books. I didn't even read the Hardy Boys. What I knew of children's literature was through retellirigs in comic books, records, animated cartoons, and Walt Disney films. 36 Creative Reading23 Vol. XIX0Wook of May 22-26,19500No. THE CHILDREN'S NEWSPAPER Some Children Have New Schools l!fli*140114* tillifilkiltaifinstStisulie.tok Motu' ,gg Thh now schoolroom Is light and chowful. in new, buildings. Some boys and girls go to school The new schools have big windows. The rooms are light and cheerful. The walls are painted pretty colors. The floors are colored, too.. The rooms are big. Children have lots of room for, work and pliy. In some places, workmen make old schools look like new. They make dark rooms bright and cheerful. Children are proud of their The "blackboard" In thIsfilow_oltoel Isnew schools.ATTENTION MAU: Bosom° Mrallroad strilso, tho last two Issues of My Woo6ly Reader have boon delayed In roach/nu you. This Is the lost Issue for this year. Figure 7. Front page of My Weekly Reader. BEST COPYAVAILABLE37 24 My Personal History The only three books I can remember owning were a novel by Fran Striker called something like The Lone Ranger and the Lost City of Gold; a turn-of-the-century dog novel called Bob, Son of Battle, by Alfred 011i- vant; and The Mickey Mantle Story, which was one of those "as told to" jobs. I think I read the Lone Ranger novel partly because I associated the characters with their movie and TV incarnations. Clayton Moore and Jay Silverheels, who played the Lone Ranger and Tonto (Spanish for "stu- pid"), had distinctive voices. Especially Silverheels. So for me, the dia- logue in the novel was a breeze. It was as if the characters were reading their lines aloud to me.6 This type of reading could have been a nice tran- sitional stage between my being a lukewarm reader and becoming an avid one, but things didn't turn out that way. Not only did I need more sus- tained encouragement to read, I needed better stories. This Lone Ranger story, one in what must have been a long, tired series, was very thin. Bob, Son of Battle didn't fill the bill, either. All I can remember about it was a lot of straining and heroism on the part of Bob: overcoming insurmountable obstacles, showing selfless loyalty, that sort of thing. I guess I wasn't sentimental enough to be deeply moved by canine hero- ism. I never cared all that much for dogs like Lassie. Too "uplifting." And not dog-like, not like our bird-dog Dixie, for instance. Now that was a dog. Scratch Bob. I wouldn't have read The Mickey Mantle Story if Mickey Mantle hadn't been my hero. I played shortstop in little league ball; Mantle had started out as a shortstop. I was growing up in Oklahoma; Mantle had grown up there too. My dad even knew a guy up in Spavinaw who had been like an uncle to Mickey. One night, we went out to the local ballpark to watch a major league exhibition game. Mantle, after shagging a fly against the right field fence, threw a perfect bullet to home plate on the fly, and my jaw dropped. After the game, my dad's friend got us into the locker room, where we met the young "Commerce Comet," fresh from the shower and wearing nothing but a white towel and looking to me like the god Apollo himself. If all this didn't inspire me to read about his life, nothing would. My parents must have given me The Mickey Mantle Story. Like a re- ligious zealot who reads little tracts only to feed his or her fanaticism, I in- haled the book. I thought it was wonderful. In this biography, Mantle's rise to success was a foregone conclusion; therefore, everything he did was right. Also, needless to say, he led an exemplary life. He had no vices. He just played baseball and was great. Now, as an inspiration for reading other biographies, this book was a poor model. It was thoroughly ordi- 38 Creative Reading25 nary. It had no grit, no particularity of character. It should have aspired to have been as good in its way as Mantle was in his, but it didn't. It was sim- ply a commercial property about another commercial property. In other words, it was empty. Like The Lone Ranger and Bob, Son of Battle, it did not lead me to other books. The school library didn't help, either. To me, it was just some old books on low shelves against the cafeteria walls. The librarian was a stern, tight-lipped, perpetually angry woman who trotted around the room like a doberman pinscher on the prowl, as we read silently from "the book of our choice." If she noticed anyone transgressing any of her many rules, she would slam the face of her ping-pong paddle flat against the nearest wooden table, so resoundingly that some children would actually scream. From time to time she read to us. One selection, perhaps from tales of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, described a slain knight who had been placed in state and floated down-river "on a bier." I burst out laughing: the image of a dead knight floating down a river atop a glass of beerI had never heard of a "bier"was delightful. My misunderstand- ing was a consequence of trying to translate the story's antiquated diction into something I could understand. The language seemed hazy with cob- webs and dust, the language of going part-way to sleep, unable to fix on a thought or to control one's attention. This language barrier, the pre-nau- sea smell of the school lunch being prepared in the adjacent kitchen, the smell of spilled milk endemic to every elementary school cafeteria, the smell of musty books lining the walls, and the formidable presence of Mrs. Schultz, all combined to make the library period less than appetizing. This tale of woe now takes an upswing, as far as reading is con- cerned, anyway. I went to junior high school, where I had the same En- glish teacher for three years. One of the first things she did was give each of us a "reading wheel," a chart designed to encourage variety and balance in our choice of books. The wheel was divided into pie wedges, and at the outer edge of each was a subject heading, such as Fiction, Sports, Bi- ography, History, or Science. Each wedge was filled with little circles. In each circle was space for a number to be keyed to a list sheet attached to the wheel. When you read a book, you wrote its title and author on the list sheet, with its numbered lines. You then wrote its number in one of the circles in the appropriate subject division on the wheel, beginning near the center of the wheel and working outward. Thus, the wheel graphically displayed one's reading patterns. If you tended to read only one type of book, the wheel looked lopsided. Our teacher encouraged us to read for pleasure, but to try to create a balanced wheel. We were re- quired to read at least three books each semester. 39 26 My Personal History The first semester, I read the minimum, or rather, less: two books about hot rods, to which I added, on the reading wheel, The Mickey Man- tle Story. At least the hot rod books were about something that genuinely interested me. From there, over the remaining five semesters, my reading followed my interests, through astronomy and physics to literature. Even some of the assigned reading at school was interesting. This general intel- lectual awakening coincided with the onset of puberty and the arrival of eyeglasses, and with my increasingly playing the role of a school "brain- boy." But my English teacher played a large role in making me aware of the importance and pleasures of words. At age 13, I began writing poetry and short fiction, and sporadically keeping a journal, all for myself and, from time to time, for a few friends. Despite the dramatic improvement, I had trouble reading in long stretches. After a while, my mind would wander or my body feel uncom- fortable. I was easily distracted. My best friend, Dickie Gallup, had the same problem, and together we set out to solve it. We decided that we should first remove all the external distractions, to create what we only half ironically called a "nirvana." This meant lots of soft pillows, an oscil- lating fan, good lighting, soft music, a DO NOT DISTURB sign on the door, and a pitcher of some cool beverage at hand, along with a box of Lorna Doone shortbread cookies, perhaps. We also rearranged the furniture in our rooms, for optimum efficiency and as a barrier to intruders (our par- ents). The only problem with our nirvanas was that they were so comfort- able that we fell asleep. Eventually, I dispensed with all the paraphernalia and went back to reading propped up in bed, with my knees drawn up. As long as I was locked in that position, I could keep reading. Once I stretched out my legs, though, such a soothing sensation came over me that I fell asleep immediately. From there, through high school, I was set in my ways: I read for myself, either philosophy, because of the content, or literature, because of the style. At age 16, I devoured Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, be- cause for me they combined the two. I got a job in a bookstore and started a small literary magazine, even publishing Kerouac, Ginsberg, and others, including myself, and I took a sacred vow, under the elms in our front yard one starry night, to be a poet. In a little over four years I had gone from being an indifferent reader to a writer, editor, and bookseller! When asked what I wanted for Christmas, I said, "A giant bookshelf." In college, it was the same, only more so: I could pick many of my courses, and thus closely match up, for the first time, my school reading with my "outside" reading. I majored in English and comparative litera- ture, and I was lucky to have a few extraordinary teachers. Suddenly, 10 Creative Reading27 there was the great literature of the world spread out before me, and I read enormously, as if to make up for what I had missed as a child. I never went anywhere without a book. In fact, after a friend and I were picked up by the Providence, Rhode Island, police on suspicion of armed robbery (we had in fact gone out for a meatball sandwich), we sat in the police station readinghe, Shakespeare's sonnets and I, a play by Shaw. The salient fact here is not that we were detained by the police, but that we both had taken books with us when we went out for a sandwich! When most people get out of school, their reading declines or stops. The general idea is that after graduation you go out into the "real" world, for which school was the preparation. You have to get a job, earn money, raise a family, pursue a career. Unless your profession calls for it, you aren't expected to read books. You are too busy or too tired, so if you read anything, you read magazines or the newspaper. Or maybe just a menu. This diminution of reading is part of the strange idea that one's early years are for learning and the later years are for living. Many who do continue to read limit themselves to escapist fiction or job-related nonfiction. Because I am a writer, my reading has had no such sharp distinctions between job-related or escapist. But somehow, be- tween the ages of 23 and 43, my good reading patterns gradually eroded, so gradually that it was undetectable. Ironically, it was diminishing eye- sight that made me notice this erosion. One day I realized I couldn't make out the names in the phone book. My immediate suspicion was that the telephone company was using a smaller typeface. Some weeks later, reading the newspaper late at night, I realized that I was having more and more trouble reading moder- ately small type. If this continued, I wouldn't be able to read at all. There were two results of this experience. First, I went to my op- . tometrist, who prescribed reading glasses. Second, I started thinking about reading, which I had always taken for granted. At the moment when there arose the suggestion that at some point I might lose the abil- ity to read, reading seemed suddenly valuable, wonderful, and even miraculous. Now I suddenly wanted to read and to know more about this ability that had become so familiar to me as to go virtually unnoticed, un- appreciated, and underdeveloped. I realized that for some time I had been unhappy with my reading. I read too sporadically, too little, and with wavering attention. What I read 41 28 My Personal History with greatest interest was often quirky and personal: a chainsaw manual, practical how-to books on carpentry, magic catalogues, foreign text- books, a pamphlet on Larbaud mineral water, a British magazine called Pig Farming, tennis magazines, issues of House Beautiful from the 1940s and '50s, articles on topiary gardening, and so on. I was simply following my interests, whether in the content or the style of the reading matter. I enjoyed the clarity of a few of the how-to books, and the inanity of com- mercial magazine writing. The broken English of owners' manuals from Taiwan and Hong Kong was especially delightful. My idiosyncratic read- ing reminds me of something Rimbaud wrote in A Season in Hell: I loved idiotic paintings, frieze panels, stage-sets, jugglers' backdrops, signs, popular colored prints, old-fashioned literature, Church Latin, badly-spelled pornography, the novels of our grandmothers, fairy tales, children's storybooks, old operas, silly refrains, ingenuous rhythms. (61) My reading was light, disposable, and useful for the ways it made me read more creatively. The chainsaw manual, for instance, engaged my ability to translate written instructions into action. And since my arms and legs depended on following the instructions, I was highly attentive. I appreciated the manual's well-conceived structure, its clear and concise style, and its illustrations that matched perfectly the look of the chainsaw (I just typed "chinsaw" by mistake! Ouch!). I enjoyed translating the in- structions into real life. The old issues of House Beautiful, with their marvelous, faded color photographs of interiors that existed only in the most perfect world, caused me to dream up scenarios for them, complete with charac-. ters and incidents, some of them rather incongruent: through the open door that gives onto the verandah that overlooks the smooth green lawn that slopes gently down to the distant pond, I would have a gorilla enter, cross the room, sit down at the Steinway, and play the piano music of Erik Satie. The texts that accompanied the photographs evoked various imagi- nary authors for me, usually a cross between Hedda Hopper and George Sanders, whose words I would hear instead of read, as they conducted me on a guided tour of the residence. Such a Hollywood fantasy was prob- ably not unlike those my mother might have had, looking at the same is- sues when they were new. When looking at Pig Farming, I'd imagine myself an English farmer, sitting in his easy chair after dinner wondering if he could improve his hus- bandry by ordering one of these newfangled castration devices. Despite the technical vocabulary, the articles were so geared to a specific audience that it became easier to imagine oneself a member of that audience. 42 Creative Reading29 These reading materials, as idiosyncratic as they might seem, were serving a purpose. In some oblique way, they were feeding into the po- etry and fiction I was writing, by providing a sense of form and a certain remote imagery I found attractive. But as reading, their value was slight. I was getting a lot of pleasure and a certain amount of instruction, but it was not edifying. Because the mental games I played with this type of reading came naturally, they pre- sented no great challenge. I wasn't confronted with difficult material, or required to think abstractly about difficult subjects. I read virtually no metaphysics, no psychology, no philosophy. I was able to evaluate what I read, to sense its tone, to summarize its content, to criticize it, and even to parody it, only because it was lightweight material. When I realized how one-sided my reading had become and I finally returned to reading more difficult material, I saw that in some ways I had become a mental weakling. A book such as Kierkegaard's Fear and Trembling, which I had always wanted to read simply because of the title, was exasperatingly hard to follow at first. I had also pretty much stopped reading fiction, especially "serious" fiction. I had never had much patience for description; I seemed to resent being told what someone or something looked like. I preferred to imag- ine it myself. Also, stories tended to bother me by the way they had to end; only rarely did I feel that they had a satisfying resolution, that things finally fell into place in a way that was convincing, fitting, and yet fresh. I lacked the patience to give a long, wordy novel time to get its hooks into me, so that novels such as Vanity Fair were out of the question. Gradually I did more and more professional reading. Because I am a poet, a teacher of poetry writing to children, and an editor of books on creative teaching, I read a lot of contemporary poetry, book reviews, cre- ative writing books, and general books on education, mostly to keep up with what was current, to see if anything of extraordinary interest had popped up. Not a whole lot had. The great amount of new material caused me to become more proficient at skim reading. I was reading a lot more and paying less attention to it, but worse than that was the way it narrowed my field of vision. As someone remarked, "Editors are the least well-read people I know: the only thing they read is what comes across their desks." In short, I had become a typically educated, adult, bad reader. What I had forgotten was that the "classics," even in mediocre translation, were created by people who looked at life squarely and had something wise or beautiful to say about it, with freshness and originality. For instance, you assume that the great Montaigne's essays are going to be stuffy, high- 43 30 My Personal History minded, or abstract. Read his essay "On Cannibalism" and disabuse your- self. You think that Ariosto's epic poem Orlando Furioso is going to be too baroque and long-winded; in fact it is a wonderfully original and in- ventive work. The classics are never what you think they're going to be, even when you're reading them for the second time. As Maurice Blanchot says, with typically French serieux, The book whose source is art has no guarantee in the world, and when it is read, it has never been read before; it only attains its presence as a work in the space opened by this unique reading, each time the first reading and each time the only reading. (95) I've gone into such detail about myself as a reader because I wanted to present a model you can use in thinking about yourself as a reader. Ask yourself these questions: How does your reading history compare to mine? What are your reading attitudes and habits? Where did they come from? Are they holding you back? Are you a "passive reader"? Could you be reading better books? Could you be reading better? 44 3 Your Personal History If reading is one of the most valuable things we do, then we should try to help it develop, deepen, and grow more expansive, fluid, compre- hensive, and various. To do so, it helps enormously to understand what kinds of readers we are, how our reading patterns and attitudes have been formed, and what the history of our reading has been. In short, we need to know how we got to where we are, so we can see where we might go. What follows are some basic ideas, techniques, and questions that will help you get a better idea of your history as a reader (you'll find other questions, dealing with our idiosyncracies as readers, in Chapter 5). The questions are arranged under the headings of "Before School," "At School," and "After School" because school is usually the pivotal point in our reading experience. Before School Try to remember what experiences you had with written words before you ever went to school. 1. Did your parents or someone else read to you or tell you bed- time stories? Did you like it? What kinds of books did they read to you? Picture books? Did you have favorites? What were they? 2. Were there favorite anecdotes that were often told at family get- togethers? 3. Were there books and magazines in your house? Who read them? Did you see your parents reading? 4. Did you play with alphabet blocks? 5. Did you go to a nursery school, a Head Start center, or a local li- brary where stories were read aloud to you? Who read them? Did you like the stories? Did you like the reader? 6. Did you watch the reading segments on educational television shows such as Sesame Street? Did you enjoy them? Did you pay attention and follow the instructions? 7. What other kinds of shows did you watch? Did you watch the commercials? Which do you still remember? Do you remember any of the jingles? 31 45 32 Your Personal History 8. Did you listen to stories on the radio? Were they mysteries, cow- boy shows, situation comedies, or dramas? 9. Did anyone make an active, conscious effort to teach you to read? Did anyone help you read when you asked for help? If so, who? If you asked what a sign meant, did you get a positive reaction? 10. Were you taken to the library and shown how to check out books? 11. Were you given books as presents or rewards? 12. Were you encouraged to talk? Did your parents listen to you? Did they look at you when you talked to them? In your family, did one speaker often interrupt another? 13. Were you able to read? What kinds of things, and how well? These questions are hard to answer right off the bat. For most of us, memories of our early years are locked away in distant, dusty brain cells. It takes a while to get at them. Here are some specific techniques that might help. 1. Look at photographs taken during your early years. The family album, if there is one, is a palace of windows onto the pastnot only how things looked, but how they felt. Noticing the set of your uncle's jaw could remind you of how forbidding he seemed when you were little. Seeing a photograph of your dog can remind you what it felt like to roll around on the grass with him and have him lick your face. If you look at old photographs and sort of let yourself go, sometimes you can "fall" into them for a momentthat is, the feeling in them comes back to you. 2. Make a list, including addresses, of all the places you lived. Draw a map of the street, the area directly around the house or apartment, and a floor plan of each place. On the floor plan, mark where the doors, win- dows, and closets were. Include furniture and appliances, especially the television, radio, and telephone. Mark the area where your family usually put holiday decorations such as the Christmas tree or menorah. Also mark spots where books and magazines were kept: shelves, cases, tables, and racks. It helps to close your eyes and take a slow mental walk through and around the various rooms. Turn on the lights as you go. 3. Do the same for other houses you visited often, such as granny's or a neighbor's. 4. Talk to your relatives about your early years. Ask your parents or grandparents if they read to you, bought you books or magazines, or 46 Creative Reading33 helped you learn to read. Ask them whether or not you were curious about signs in the street and along the road. Ask them what they used to read, and what their favorite radio and television shows were. At School For some of us, the jump from home to school was so momentous that we are unable to recall exactly how it happened. First and second grades, when we're learning to read by school methods, are particularly hard to remember. Learning to read is so subtle and gradual that it's as if there were no starting point, as if, for instance, we've always known that though and rough, despite their similar spellings, do not rhyme. The questions below are designed to help you recall a surprising amount about how you were taught to read in school. 1. Who were the teachers who taught you to read? Did you like them? What were their names, and what did they look like? Can you re- member any of their voices? What else? 2. Try to remember how they taught you. Did they use the "look- say" (word recognition) method? Did they use the phonics method? Both? Did they use what is now called a whole language approach? 3. Did your teachers read to you? At a certain grade level, did they stop reading to you? Did they ever talk about what they read at home? 4. Was there a classroom library? What was in it? Were there any books by students? Did your teacher show you how to make your own books? 5. Did you enjoy reading in school, or did you read just because it was assigned? 6. Do you recall having to read aloud in front of the class? How did you feel? Did you do well? Did it make you nervous? Proud? 7. What did the school libraryor, as they're sometimes called now, the "media center" look like? What did it smell like? Was it attrac- tive? Why did you go there? Did you feel comfortable? Welcome? Did you check out books and read them just because you wanted to? 8. Think back to junior and senior high. Did your reading habits change? Did you have a summer vacation or a school year in which you suddenly began reading a lot more books? What books were they? Why the sudden change? Or did you read less and less? 47 34 Your Personal History 9. How did your school reading compare with your home reading? Did your friends read? Was there peer pressure on you to read, or not to read? Did your social life take a lot of time away from reading? 10. Did you have reading guidance from a parent, a teacher, or a li- brarian, someone who made a difference? 11. Did you read books that were considered "over your head"? Or did you read books that were intended for a younger reader? Or both? 12. Did you at any point begin to find it harder to read in long stretches? Or easier? 13. Did you read books so that they would take you away from re- ality and into another world? Or did you read books about the everyday world? 14. Did you have favorite writers whose books you devoured? Did you have favorite books that you read over and over? Here are some ways that might help you answer the questions above. 1. Make a list of the school(s) you attended. Draw their floor plans, as best you can. Start with the lunch room or auditorium, or any room you used year after year and therefore remember best. 2. Try to locate your school photos, the ones taken every year. If possible, arrange them in chronological order. 3. Try to locate your report cards. These are particularly valuable because they have your grades in reading and the language arts, your at- tendance figures, your teachers' names, your parent's signature, and sometimes what the teachers wanted your parents to know about how you were doing in school. Just holding a report card in your hand and looking at it will give you a feel for those days: the size and shape of the card, the typeface, the teacher's handwriting, all are powerful stimuli, as powerful now as they were then. If you can't find your report cards, ask the board of education for your school transcripts. 4. Try to find your school notebooks, papers, artwork, and text- booksthe older the better. In these times of increased social mobility and new houses without attics, such things tend to get thrown out. You may be surprised by what you find, though, if you scrounge around. Ask your parents and other relatives. (Mothers tend to cherish keepsakes more than fathers.) Maybe your cousins used the same textbooks as you 48 Creative Reading35 did. Look in the old cardboard boxes sitting up there on the garage joists. To find old textbooks, comb the used book stores, the thrift shops, and the lawn sales around where you went to school. Also, keep in mind that the same textbooks are sometimes usedand therefore can be foundin disparate parts of the country. (At a library sale in Vermont, I found the first-grade speller we had used in Oklahoma 38 years ago.) The classified ads in the New York Times Book Review (available at your library) usually include booksellers who will search for old books for you. 5. Visit your old school. Sit in on a class in one of your rooms. Find out if any of your teachers are still there, and if so, talk with them about how they taught reading. 6. Talk to your old classmates about your early schooling. These conversations sometimes start slowly, but they can build momentum and lead to memories that would otherwise remain inaccessible. If you're not in contact with any classmates, find out if your high school reunion com- mittee has a current list of names and addresses; if you grew up in the same town, it's possible that some of your high school classmates also at- tended elementary school with you. 7. Use hypnosis as a way of "regressing" to your early days. Tell the hypnotist what you want to remember. After School By "after school" I mean after you got out of school "for good." 1. Did you feel that your education was complete, and so there was no need to read as much? Or was the habit of reading so rewarding and in- grained that you kept on reading at the same rate or at an increased rate? 2. Do you have friends who read, and with whom you talk about what you read? 3. Do you have bookshelves? Do they have books on them? What kinds of books? What kinds don't you have? 4. If you have children, did you read to them when they were lit- tle? Did you buy them books? 5. Have you ever belonged to a national or local book club? A read- ing group? 6. Have you ever served as a reading volunteer for a school or other organization? 49 36 Your Personal History 7. Did you ever study speed reading? Did it make you a more versa- tile reader? Did it stick? Do you think it was useful? 8. Does reading seem less important, as important, or more impor- tant than it used to? How? 9. Do your eyes tire more easily than they used to? Do you use reading glasses? 10. Do you read more than one book at the same time? Doyou have a tendency to abandon one book in favor of starting another, only to abandon it in turn, and so on? 11. Are there books you've always wanted to read, or told yourself you ought to read, but never have? Make a list of them. Do they naturally fall into certain categories? If so, do the categories tell you anything? Why do you think you've never read any of them? 12. After a hard day at work, do you find it easier to come home and watch television than to read? Or, like a jogger who needs torun every day, do you get up early so you can read for an hour each morning before you go to work? 13. Do you buy books and keep them? Do you have a particular bookshop you always look forward to? Do you underline certainpassages and make marginal notes? Do you set coffee cups and drinking glasseson your books? 14. Do you use the library? Do you use it only as a last resort? Do you go there for a particular book, or to browse around and take out whatever looks appealing? Do you sometimes browseamong books whose subject matter doesn't particularly interest you? Doyou take care of library books as well as you take care of your own? 15. Do you read in a language other than your native language? 16. When you're alone, do you ever read aloud to yourself? 17. In response to a book, have you ever written to its authoror publisher? 18. Have you ever written a book (published or unpublished)? Have you thought about writing one, or started one but never finished it? These barrages of questions and procedures might seemover- whelming. Take them individually, allowing yourself plenty of time to mull them over. Some of them will come clear only with time. Others, whose answers seem obvious at first, become richer and more complex 50 Creative Reading37 in light of the answers to other questions. The more you put into thinking about them, the more you will get out of them. The purpose of the questions is to help you establish a chronology of your feelings about reading, based on the facts of your reading history. You might want to make a time line of your reading history, and add to it when you remember something new. To make a time line, get a long sheet of paper (or tape several sheets together) and turn it sideways. Draw a horizontal line across the middle. At the left, put the date of your birth. At the right, put the present date. Using answers from the questions above (and any others you might think of), fill it in with relevant dates and events in your reading history. A good sense of yourself as a readerhow you got to where you are as a reader todaywill not only make the exercises inlater chapters more fruitful for you, it will also help you identify and understand any de- ficiencies in your reading methods, and thus give you some sense of how to develop and improve those methods. 51 4 Unconscious Errors in Reading While your eyes go down the printed page, your mind will be going between the lines, in and out and under and beyond the words. John Waldman My recollections of being taught to read in school are echoed by Bruno Bettelheim and Karen Zelan in their book, On Learning to Read: The Child's Fascination with Meaning. These authors be- lieve that children are alienated from reading because the basal readers used in school are dull, pointless, vacuous, and therefore patronizing, and that a child's (oral, and perhaps silent) reading mistakes are often anun- conscious reaction to the tedium of the material in general or to a particu- lar word that is too emotionally charged to be read correctly. Bettelheim and Zelan urge textbook authors and publishers to make preprimers and primers more commensurate with the intelligence of students; they urge educators not to see children's reading mistakes simply as errors in de- coding (the use of phonics), but to understand the psychological signifi- cance of such errors. Of particular interest to Bettelheim, whose background is in psy- choanalysis, is the role of the unconscious in reading: A vast literature is devoted to the problem of how a writer's or an artist's unconscious influences his work. Equally as important is the share the unconscious plays in shaping the reader's apprecia- tion of a work of literature. The unconscious of the reader signifi- cantly shapes his responses to the work he is reading, but so far this phenomenon has received little attention, although its investi- gation would help us to understand why some people derive great benefit from reading while others remain indifferent to it. Any piece of writing contains overt and covert messages. The per- son who is reading it responds to both types of messages with both conscious and unconscious reactions. In consequence, the mean- ings intended by an author and those which the reader derives from what the author has written are by no means identical. (40) This last point is particularly true of writingsuch as modern po- etrythat is by nature allusive or suggestive, rather than explicit or 38 52 Creative Reading39 strictly informative. It is also true of writing from distant cultures and an- cient times, wherein the original context is so fragmentary that we can only guess at what it all means. So, in these cases, we rely on our intuition to a greater degree than normal. We allow our unconscious selves to take a larger part in the reading. The mainstream, traditional attitude implies that readers should try to derive from a piece of writing exactly what the author intended to communicate. Such a task is unrealistic because it is impossible. In the first place, the author doesn't always know exactly what he or she in- tended to communicate. Much printed material is filled with hazy phrases, thoughtless clichés, and dubious word choices that belie the au- thor's inability to write or think precisely. Some authors sort of know what they intended, and the result is more or less clear writing. In the second place, authors sometimes are unaware that their motives may be other than they think; unconscious motives or moments have a way of in- sinuating themselves into the fiber of the work. (As one of John Ashbery's poems says, "He'd tell 'em by their syntax.") How is the reader to know if what was intended was the same as what was expressed? College litera- ture classes are filled with students, some of them quite bright, who ana- lyze a work of literature on the basis of intentions they ascribe to the author, and then measure the work against those presumed intentions. Quite often the author is then faulted for not doing or doing poorly what he or she never intended to do. As Aristotle put it: We should think how best we shall avoid the fault described by Glaucon when he says that critics make unreasonable presupposi- tions, and go on to draw conclusions from their own adverse com- ments on the poet; if his words conflict with the conclusions they have thus reached, they censure him as though he had actually said what they ascribe to him. (72-73) Even trying to evaluate authors' stated intentions is tricky business; sometimes there's a big difference between what authors intended and what they say they intended. Of course, there are simpler cases in which the author's intention is clear. If an author writes "The doctor looked down her throat," we are startled to hear a student read it aloud as "The doctor looked down the road." In terms of decoding, the disparity between intention and interpre- tation is blatant. Such an error might well be caused by an unconscious reaction on the child's part. Bettelheim and Zelan remind us that children are more susceptible than adults to having their emotions affect their per- ceptions; they are more subjective, less able to prevent the unconscious from "distorting" more objective versions of reality. (A positive way of 40 Unconscious Errors in Reading stating this is to say that children are in closer touch with their imagina- tions.) The child, by modifying what he or she is reading, "actively mas- ters in personal ways that which otherwise he would only passively be taking in" (Bettelheim and Zelan 42). (I should interject here that the more sophisticated view of reading as transactional, in which the reader actively participates in creating the meaning of the text, rejects any no- tion of passivity in reading.) Bettelheim and Zelan go on to say that "whether a child will de- velop a deep and lasting commitment to reading will be strongly influ- enced by whether he views reading as something imposed on him from the outside, or as something in the creation of which he actually partici- pates" (43). Bettelheim and Zelan are not claiming that unconscious mistakes ("modifying") in reading make children better readers, only that we ought to understand the role of unconscious mistakes so they can be overcome. In On Learning to Read, many of the examples follow the same pattern: the child misreads a word, the observer (Bettelheim or a colleague) calls attention to the misreading in a neutral or positive way, the child ac- knowledges the mistake and sometimes realizes what personal experi- ence ultimately contributed to the mistake, and then, having brought this unconscious feeling to light, goes on to read the word correctly. This pro- cedure sounds a bit too tidy, but it has its uses. It would be nice if all teachers were sensitive to such a technique; it would be nice if, being so sensitive, they had the time to devote this much attention to each student. The way things are, perhaps the best one can hope for now is that all reading teachers be made aware that "mis- cues" in reading are not always caused by disabilities or poor decoding skills. In fact, according to Ken Goodman, good readers make some types of miscues more often than poor readers, but miscues that are harmless, such as those involving function words and pronouns (Weaver 126). Bettelheim and Zelan see a hidden bonus in unconscious errors: It is a strange fact that in our teaching of reading to beginners we neglect their active manipulation of reading [their meaningful mis- takes], which would and could make it a significant personal expe- rience for them. We involve only the child's intellect in the process of learning to read, and we exclude his unconscious life from par- ticipating in it. (43) In terms of the present work, I would change "unconscious" to "creative." Freudians (such as Bettelheim and Zelan) value the uncon- scious, poets (such as myself) value the creative. And there is a difference. It is one thing to have a nightmare, it is another to write like Kafka. So 54 Creative Reading41 when Bettelheim and Zelan recommend that we involve the child's "total personality in the process of reading," I would argue that such an involve- ment, as desirable as it is, is in fact only partial. It is not artistic. It does not encourage the child (or adult) to become a really active reader, a reader who feels free to rearrange, reinterpret, rebuild the text, following his or her most subjective or imaginative or whimsical impulse. This artistic, active, "aggressive" (root meaning: to go toward) atti- tude can help prepare the reader to meet head-on the swelling wave of poorly written books, newspapers, magazines, film and television scripts, newsletters, memoranda, and other materials that issue forth from a country whose verbal ability seems to have declinedif we are to believe the sinking numbers scored by students on national reading and writing tests, or if we are to believe college teachers who say that today's students are far less literate than those of, say, 30 years ago. You can blame it all on television, on drugs, on rock 'n' roll, on the family (or lack of it), on the schools, or on anything else you choose, but it will not alter the fact that an increasing amount of what is published these days is so slipshod or vacuous that, in self-defense, you will have to change it or half ignore it as you read, just so you can get to the parts that have that little something you were looking for. You have to be more aggressive in reading bad or mediocre books, or they will flatten you out and roll right over you with their relentless momentum. Take the mediocre mystery novel. John Waldman, a speed-reading specialist, told me that when he was a soldier, in the Second World War, he passed the slack time reading mystery novels, no matter how trashy, but the first time through he read only the odd-numbered pages, the sec- ond time through, a few weeks later, only the even-numbered. He did so merely to break his habit of feeling he had to read every word of every page in a book, but a side-effect was that the stories became more chal- lenging and interesting: he had to help fill in the missing parts. This pro- cedure engaged him creatively in the reading; and in effect, he got two books for the price of one. John was intentionally misreading those mystery novels. He was cultivating the creative use of what would ordinarily be considered a mis- take. But what about reading mistakes that are neither intentional (like Waldman's) nor unconscious (like those described by Bettelheim and Zelan)? Some of these otherand much more commonreading mis- takes are discussed in the next chapter. 55 5 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes Jumping across, eyes read a book. Edwin Denby At this very moment, your eyes are doing something strange and wonderful. They are skipping along these black marks and sending signals to your brain, where something even stranger and more wonderful is happening. You are reading. This is obvious. But the way you do it is not obvious at all. Nor is the way you don't do it. You read well or you read poorly, or you read some things well and others poorly, or you read well sometimes and poorly at others. All this you know, more or less consciously, from having gone to school, where you were tested, tested, tested, and where you got a sense of your reading ability. But what is reading ability? In the traditional definition, it is a com- bination of comprehension and speed: the more you understand of what you read, and the quicker you do it, the better you are at it. Comprehen- sion means more than just being able to say what each individual word means, or each individual phrase, or each individual sentence. Compre- hension includes being able to sense nuance, changes of tone, and the au- thor's "voice"; to make reasonable assumptions about what the author might mean but does not say explicitly; and to relate what you read to what you know. Speed means more than velocity. It also encompasses flu- idity and ease, which enable the reader to read quickly for extended peri- ods, without tiring. It also means knowing when to skip or skim over those parts of a text that are not relevant to your purposes. Imparting comprehension and speed is the goal of the traditional reading teacher. In working toward comprehension and speed, however, we read- ers make mistakes. Among these are the ones I'll call visual (specialists in- clude them under the broad heading of "the psychology of reading"). To understand those visual mistakes, we have to go back to the fundamentals of the act of reading: eyeball on page of type. In reading English, we usually follow our written symbols in a par- ticular sequence: we go from left to right on each line, from the top to the bottom of each page, and from front to back in each book. Other Ian- 42 56 Creative Reading43 guages are read in other directionsChinese (classically top to bottom) and Hebrew (right to left), for instance. Sometimes English is read other- wise, as in vertical signs. Using sophisticated methods, reading specialists discovered that the eye gazes on a group of letters in a line, takes them in, and then jumps to the next group of letters. Each time the eye stops and gazes is called a fixation. A jump between fixations is called a saccade (from a French word meaning a start, jerk, or jolt). At the end of each line, the eye sweeps back to the beginning of the next line.' When the eye stops and goes back to reread something, it is called a regression. Better readers take in more characters per fixation, spend less time doing it, and have fewer regressions. According to researchers, average twelfth graders spend one-quarter of a second on each fixation, during which they take in 1.3 words, for a reading rate of 250 words per minute (Taylor et al.). Spe- cialists have devised any number of ingenious experiments to discover what happens when our eyes read, but it all boils down to the fact that our reading is parcelled out in horizontal bar-shapes: I I It's almost as if we're looking at the page through slits. CLOG It can be argued that not everyone follows this pattern: the Chinese do not have one eye directly above the other. Still, most of us who were brought up reading English (and other languages with similar directional patterns) habitually perceive words in these horizontal bar-shapes. It's possible that this structure of seeing affects the way we "read" other thingsstreets, landscapes, and art. This isa thorny subject that branches off into other disciplines. In any case, my opthalmologist tells me our eyes do function better moving side to side than they do moving up and down. Advertisers know this. F a r m e r is harder to read than farmer and 57 44 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes r e m r a f is harder still. Advertisers, who need to lock into our ingrained habits as quickly and surely as possible, stick pretty much to the horizontal bar- shape. Our eyes do a different kind of reading when looking at works of art. There is no one way to "read" a painting, though the painting sug- geststhrough its lines, masses, tones, and spatial relationshipsa way or ways of reading it. If we just relax and gaze upon a painting, the paint- ing will often "tell" our eyes where to go and at what pace. (See Figure 8.) Seen thus, no two paintings will be read following the same pattern. Moreover, on subsequent viewings, the eye will find a different starting point, so that the painting will not be read the same way as the first time. There are any number of equally good starting points in a painting, Figure 8. "Reading" a painting. 58 Creative Reading45 which is one of the reasons art stays fresh: the same piece never looks quite the same. Gertrude Stein said something similar about writing: you can't say the same thing twice. The second time it sounds different precisely be- cause it is the second time. The echoes of sound and sense change the feel of the thing said. For example, read every word in the following poem silently: Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. Nothing in that drawer. (Padgett, Great Balls of Fire 3) Did every nothing feel the same? Every in, that, and drawer? Is the tone of each line exactly the same as that of every other line? It can't be. Now read the poem aloud, and ask yourself the same questions. The difference will be more obvious. For me there are more noticeable tonal changes in two of the four words: nothing jumps out in certain lines, that is more heavily emphasized in others. In addition, from start to finish, there is a tonal curve. For me, the poem begins in a quiet, normal manner, the way a casual search does, but by line 6 the tone becomes a lit- tle irritated and even frenetic from this fruitless search; by line 10 it has become exasperated; by line 12 the pace slows, with a sense of resigna- tion that gradually slows us toward the final line, where the tone of clo- sure seems to say "well, that's that, there's no more I can do." For you, the poem may have a different set of tonesanother example of the idea that you can't say the same thing twice. Another way to sense the impossibility of a perfectly uniform repe- tition is to do what you probably did as a child: repeat any word over and over and over and over. Pick a work, any word. Now say it aloud for five minutes. Actually do this now. 59 46 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes Did you cheat and keep reading? If so, you are as contrary as I am. And you will have missed something. You will have missed the disorient- ing experience of seeing a word gradually drained of its meaning, reduced to its acoustical properties, to abstraction, to virtual nonsense. What may have started out as the name of your beloved might well have ended up as gibberisha transformation from the most meaningful to the least. And yet, through all these changes, it was the "same" word. You will also have missed noticing how your attention varied. It might have been fixed first on repeating the word at regular intervals; then on how the word sounded; then how your tongue, teeth, and lips were moving to form its various parts; then on how nutty the exercise seems; then suddenly back on the word as a signifier of something out there in the real world, with rain water dripping from its leaves and branches, and so on. So, if you cheated, go back now and repeat aloud the same word for five minutes. The point of all this is that the perceiving mind is constantly shift- ing and wavering, like a distant radio station.2 Our perceptual power fades in and out: we simply cannot bring a perfectly steady attention to bear on each and every word, sentence, and paragraph, page after page. Even if we could, the words themselves would not be equally engaging. Sometimes, through no fault of our eye or mind, we find ourselves read- ing the wrong word. There is a whole group of reading errors that have little or nothing to do either with errors in decoding or with emotional disruption: in other words, errors that are not wholly due to a simple in- ability to read or a bugaboo in the unconscious. Few people talk about these glitches in so-called normal reading, and yet such glitches happen frequently. See if you've experienced any of the nine mistakes listed below. 1. The single word error. Poet Paul Hoover has written, "When- ever I see New Haven, I often say/New Heaven" (55). The price sticker covers the s on my can of shaving soap, so it reads: "New Noxema / have / Heavy Beard." The neon sign at the corner is half burned out, changing Victor's Meat Market into Victor's Me. The word olfactory breaks into two parts, creating an image of closed steel mills or auto plants. The weatherman makes a droll report: "Outside the humility is at 43 percent." As an adolescent, I consistently misread "realty" as "reality." I was entering puberty and, appropriately enough, had just learned the word reality. I was fascinated that there even could be such a thing as reality. It had never occurred to me. Suddenly, all over town, I noticed little signs 60 Creative Reading47 advertising Farmer Reality, Mudd Reality, Home Reality, Admiral Reality, and so on. Of course I knew that there was no such thing as a reality com- pany, and I knew that there was another word there, but it gave me great delight nonetheless to transform, for a moment, these commonplace signs into symbols of phenomenology. It reminds me of how my grandfather used his failing hearing: he heard pretty much what he wanted to hear. Sometimes he pretended not to have heard at all. Other times, he'd repeat, in slightly different words, what had just been said to him. If my grandmother would say, "Noah, go to the store and buy a gallon of milk," he might answer, "You want me to buy a gal some milk?" His mishearing was vaguely intentional, but perhaps not to the extent that he was always aware of its being so. I've known other elderly people who heard selectively, but not many who replied with such deadpan distortions of what they'd just heard. This type of character is more often seen in movie comedies made in the 1930s and 1940s, when the comedy of errors blossomed in so many forms, includ- ing the misheard one-liner. The British novelist Henry Green also seems to have had a pen- chant for mishearing, as in his Paris Review interview:3 Interviewer: I've heard it remarked that your work is "too sophis- ticated" for American readers, in that it offers no scenes of violenceand "too subtle," in that its message is somewhat veiled. What do you say? Mr. Green: Unlike the wilds of Texas, there is very little violence over here. A bit of child-killing of course, but no straight shootin'. After fifty, one ceases to digest; as someone once said: "I just ferment my food now." Most of us walk crabwise to meals and everything else. The oblique approach in middle- age is the safest thing. The unusual at this period is to get any- where at allGod damn! Interviewer: And how about "subtle"? Mr. Green: I don't follow. Suttee, as I understand it, is the suicide now forbiddenof a Hindu wife on her husband's flaming bier. I don't want my wife to do that when my time comesand with great respect, as I know her, she won't. .. . Interviewer: I'm sorry, you misheard me; I said, "subtle"that the message was too subtle. Mr. Green: Oh, subtle. How dull! (Green 64-65) I suspect that Green, who earlier in the interview had claimed to be "a tri- fle hard of hearing," used his disability selectively, in this case as a "veiled" response to a "dull" question (Kermode 13). 61 48 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes Freud discusses misreading and its oral equivalent, the slip of the tongue, in his essay, "Psychopathology of Everyday Life": Both irritating and laughable is a lapse in reading to which I am fre- quently subject when I walk through the streets of a strange city during my vacation. I then read antiquities on every shop sign that shows the slightest resemblance to the word...." (88) Later in the same essay he claims, somewhat broadly, that "back of every error is a repression" (142). Not all of my reading "mistakes" (such as "reality" for "realty") are the result of unconscious repression. Like those of Henry Green and my grandfather, they are a mechanism of evasion, but they are semi-con- scious. Recently I let myself go, reading a New York Times article about the universe: One of these problems arose from the fact that the observable uni- verse is remarkably smooth; it looks essentially the same in all di- rections and from all directions. Another problem is that the universe seems to contain just about the right density of matter to exert the gravity needed to slow the universal expansion and bring it to an eventual halt. The possibility that random chance alone could account for this precise density of matter strikes many cos- metologists as extremely unlikely. (April 14, 1987, p. C4) A slip of the eye turned cosmologists into beauticians. 2. Jumping a line. Sometimes in sweeping back to the left -hand margin of a text,I inadvertently skip a line. This is particularly true when two consecutive lines begin with the same word or string of words. When two consecutive lines begin with the same words as they just did, the eyes are like the drunk who staggers down his street, which is lined with identical homes. If he chooses the wrong one, funny things can happen. But even funnier things happen when the eyes skip one line and continue with another that makes a perfect grammatical blend. Here's an example (without, however, the duplicate words at the beginning of each line): In the wild 1927 season, the great Babe Ruth hit 60 home runs. It made him a national hero, an odd idol for women. Which is odd, because normally he wasn't the. ... If your sweep left jumps from line 1 to line 3, "women" becomes the ob- ject of the verb "hit," creating an image of Babe Ruth not as a batter but as a batterer. These are special instances. Generally, line jumping doesn't seem to have these psychological provocations. It happens more often when the lines are too long, or when we're too tired or harried to concentrate. 62 Creative Reading49 3. Looping a line. This is another wrong line-number routine. In- stead of jumping from line 1 to line 3, the eye sweeps from the end of line 1 to what should be line 2, but is in fact back at line 1 again. Example: I was walking down the street, daydreaming that you were there with me, that it was the start. ... Line 1, accidentally read twice, begins to form a series of Chinese boxes, mirrors reflecting mirrors, a sort of déjà lu. Such looping seems to occur more often when the line spacing is tight (when there isn't much white space between the lines) or when the lines are quite long. 4. Transposing up. In transposing up, we take a word from the next line and bring it up into the line we're reading. This happens more often when the word transposed up resembles one in the line above it, as in He is a man who acts in good conscience and whose perspicacity makes him conscious of those perceptions that are sometimes erroneous. There are two main transposition trouble spots in this example: it's easy for the eye to replace conscience with conscious and perspicacity with perceptions. This is because the eye, although fixated on a single line, takes in much more, in its peripheral vision. Certain words "catch" our eye, causing us to jump lines. The ado- lescent eye will pick up words such as sex several lines ahead of time. Our own names seem to jump out at us, as shown in Freud's quotation of the German psychologist Bleu ler: While reading, I once had the intellectual feeling of seeing my name two lines below. To my astonishment, I found only the words blood corpuscles. Of the many thousands of lapses in reading in the peripheral as well as in the central field of vision that I have an- alyzed, this was the most striking case. Whenever I imagined that I saw my name, the word that induced this illusion usually showed a greater resemblance to my name than the words blood corpuscles. In most cases, all the letters of my name had to be close together before I could commit such an error. (142) The power of one's own name, of course, is extraordinary. How many times have you heard your name called, only to turn and find that some- one had said something else? How is it that we can sleep soundly while another person's name is spoken, but wake right up when our own is pronounced? There is another, non-psychological reason for transposing up: an- ticipation. Anticipation is essential for good reading.4 Poor readers go from word to word, as if stepping across a stream, pausing at each and 63 50 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes every rock. Good readers are able to "see" ahead to get a pretty good idea of what's coming, in essence, to be able to step on only the best rocks for a smooth crossing. Anticipation comes with more experience with lan- guage. I know that nine is going to come at the end of "A stitch in time saves...." A second grader who can read all the words in that proverb, but who has never heard it, would not of course be able to anticipate the final word. The greater our sophistication, the further our anticipation ex- tends, and the further it extends, the hazier it becomes, and the more likely we are to make mistakes up ahead. Good readers don't have to focus on every word: they "know" some words by their shapes, their positions in particular sentences, and by the probability of their being there. For instance, good readers read the word the without paying much attention to it. You paid less attention to the first occurrence of the in the previous sentence than you did to the second, partly because the latter was italicized, partly because it is un- usual to see the in front of a preposition"the word" is a much more common pattern than "the without." Good readers quickly recognize usual word patterns because they anticipate them, both visually and con- textually. By that I mean that a good reader sees them out of the corner of his or her eye and out of the corner of his or her mind. For example, take the following sentence: I am proud to be a citizen of the United States. It can be read in what seems to be one smooth gulp, because it consists of simple words in predictable patterns and it expresses a commonplace sentiment. When altered, it reads less easilyand more interestingly: I am proud to be a denizen of the United States. (One word change. Denizen isn't the kind of word you'd expect in such a sentence.) I am proud to be the citizen of a United States. (Transposi- tion of the articles a and the.) I am united to be a state of the proud citizen. (Transposition of nouns and adjectives. In making States singular and lower case, I cheated a little.) I am to be the United States. (Removal of words turns the sentence into an utterance by Walt Whitman or a contempo- rary would-be Louis "L'etat, c'est moi" XIV.) I am of the states united to be a proud citizen. (Multiple transpositions causes the sentence to sound like those spo- ken by members of Congress, when the unnatural formality 6 Creative Reading51 of their public discourse causes them to misplace their prepositional phrases.) States united the of citizen a be to proud am I. (Reversal of word order.) Notice that even in the previous example you might feel little movements toward normal syntax and meaning, as if there might be some kind of per- son classified as an "of citizen"; as if the words a and to are typographical errors for and and too; as if the sentence were being said in dialect, per- haps by someone who had become an "of" citizen: States united the "of" citizen and be too proud, am I. The least readable permutation avoids the usual syntactical pat- terns, as in: Citizen the a states to proud I united am be of. Interestingly, this permutation was the most difficult for me to come up with. Good readers are so locked into formal patterns that they find it hard and even nerve-wracking to try to function outside of such patterns. The patterns provide an order to our reading, one that parallels the order we sense simply in knowing who we are. These and other patterns in our lives are so strong that they enable us to continue functioning smoothly when parts of the patterns are missing. Look at the following example. Today was Betty's sixteenth birth, so she felt she had theright to take a little nap before din. Then the phstarted ring- ing. She knew her mr was in the kitchen, her hands sticky from kneading the bread dough, so she hopped out of band hurried down the ss. Betty picked up the receiver and said, "H, this is Bspeaking. It was her f. "Oh, hi"she said. "Where are? It's 5:30." "I'm still at the," he complained. "I thought I'd be home by now," he continued, "but the way things are, I don't think I'll get out of here for anotheror so. You andcan go ahead and havewithout me." So far, you probably haven't had much trouble filling in the blanks with reasonable possibilities. The syntax and context are conventional, and the words omitted are far fewer than those given. (In Reading without Non- sense, Frank Smith says that "texts that are comprehensible in the first placethat are not nonsenseremain comprehensible even if up to one word in five is completely obliterated" [62].) See what happens now when more words are omitted and the story takes a surreal turn: 65 52 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes At that moment the house started to tree, where the amazinghad under. And Betty's lookingwithout , and Betty flew into a started to to Pennsylvania. Dante cucumber. Even more pernicious (or challenging, depending on your point of view) is material such as the following: Santa Claus was dressed in his usual red band sported his tra- ditional white z, around which were assembled the b that pulled his dthrough the sky. In this example, the hints confound rather than help us, because they take advantage of our expectations. What article of clothing starts with b, is red, and is normally worn by Santa? Not his belt, which is black. Not a bowtie, babuska, bandolier, bikini, or Borsalino. Even worse is his "tradi- tional white z." A zither? Certainly not a Zulu. The text becomes rather fantastical and poetic if we insert beehive, zephyr, bananas, and devastation into the slots. 5. Edge blur. My eyes tend to misread the words near the begin- nings and ends of the lines. I misread words at the end of the line because, being a heavy anticipator, I sweep too early. I miss words at the start of the line because I'm too hasty about recovering from the sweep and getting on with it, trying too hard to sustain my forward momentum. In both cases the fixation is rushed. Thus, the nearer to the center of the line a word is, the more likely I am to read it correctly. All the above applies equally to the whole page: I foul up more often with the first and last few words. 6. Page skips. Page skipping is caused by turning two or more leaves instead of one. Imagine an open book, with page 37 on the right- hand side (as it always is, being an odd-numbered page). Normally, after finishing page 37, you'd turn the leaf over to page 38 (on the left side of the next two-page spread). But if you turn two leaves, page 40 is on the left. As in jumping a line (#2 above), the result can be interesting, espe- cially when there is a perfect grammatical dovetail between the end of one page and the beginning of the next. Even when the fit is poor, its very incongruity can be tonic, due to the sudden switch from ordinary, proper syntax to a jagged, nonsyntactical leap. Sometimes I'm shocked by how long it takes me to realize that such a leap has taken place; I'll be three or four lines down the page before a little bell goes off in my head to remind me that something wasn't quite right, up there at the start of the page. 7. Page repeats are the opposite of page skips. Repeats usually happen only when we return to a book after being away from the page 66 Creative Reading53 for a long while. The longer we're away from it, the less well we remem- ber it, and hence we're more likely to reread it without realizing we're doing so. There are those moments, though, when we close a book for an hour, pick it up, and read deep into a passage, until it dawns on us that this is the same part we read only an hour ago. We're embarrassed, but re- lieved that there were no witnesses. 8. Eye-mind split. The eye can recognize wordsand we can pro- nounce them correctlywithout our having any idea of what they mean. Normally our attention is sustained by meaning. What happens to the mind during those moments when it "reads" but doesn't understand a word or phrase? Sometimes it makes inferences from the context. Some- times it goes blank. Sometimes it fills in with a standard I-ought-to-look- that-up-someday reaction, then goes on. Whatever it does, it momentarily splits away from the meaning of the word or phrase. For example, I used to have trouble with the word atavism. I could never remember what it meant, no matter how often I looked it up, and its context never seemed to provide a sufficient clue as to its meaning. I didn't know its root meaning, and I was never able to come up with the right mnemonic device for it. Instead, as soon as my eye hit the word, I froze. Then I would tell myself to relax and just let my mind go: surely the meaning will come to me. I began to free-associate. In my mind's eye, I would see a large jungle clearing at night, with a group of primitive people hopping up and down in front of a bonfire dedicated to the carved image of their deity, a totem pole with pointed head and almond eyes curling upwards at the outer points. The muffled, guttural growl of their tribal chant was reverberating out into the darkness around them. Their blood sacrifice was being de- layed because they had no victim, yet. I panicked: would they see me? I opened my eyes. In my hands, I was still holding the book. I reread the sentence in question, projecting my fantasy onto the word atavistic. It didn't quite fit, so I consulted the dictionary and then reread the sentence, which made perfect sense. But within 10 minutes atavism began to fade again. After many years of this, I finally wrote about it, and as soon as I did, the problem vanished. Eye-mind split also happens to good readers who have good vocab- ularies and who are reading perfectly understandable material: the eyes move along the words, but the mind is elsewhere. It happens when we write, too, because the fingers are slower than the mind. The mind doesn't like to wait around too much, so it fills in the slack periods with miscellaneous material, from fleeting images to full- blown fantasies. For example, two sentences above, when I was writing 67 54 Two Normal Eyes and Nine Everyday Mistakes "the mind is somewhere else," my mind was somewhere else, remember- ing the time that my tennis partner played an unusually poor game and explained his lack of concentration with "I was on a beach in Florida." When absorbed in reading, we listen single-mindedly to the words of the author, as if no other external stimuli were affecting us. The truth is, though, that we can't maintain such constant absorption indefinitely. Our attention wavers in and out, sometimes so far out that our eyes keep mov- ing over the words while our minds are a few inches (or a million miles) away. This fluctuation seems normal to me. I wonder why teachers don't mention it. It would help students become aware of when their minds have wandered too far, and enable them to "return" to the text, again and again if need be. If the mind wanders because of some uncontrollable external stim- ulusthe neighbor's stereo is blasting, the smell of popcorn is wafting in from the kitchen, or the heat and humidity are oppressiveit takes an ef- fort of will to block it out. In those cases when you can't block out the distraction, no matter how hard you try, it's best to close the book and rest a moment. Or buy your neighbor some earphones, or dash into the kitchen to claim your share of the popcorn, or take a cold shower. Mindfulness can be developed. The anxious tennis player who takes his or her eyes off the ball can repeat "ball, ball, ball, ball" all the way through a couple of points to reestablish an unbroken contact between eyes and ball. The meditating Buddhist has to be sensitive to when the beautifully empty mind has wandered onto a subject or fantasy, so that it can be called back to the desired emptiness. When I can't fall asleep quickly, I use my own version of counting sheep. I call up a visual image of a white lawn chair, and I mentally examine its parts from various an- gles, being careful to exclude other objectsand particularly people from the scene. If people do enter, I stop the fantasy and start over with the white chair, no matter how many times it takes. The more I've prac- ticed this procedure, the more effective it's become. I'm usually fast asleep within a few minutes. The more we detect the eye-mind split in reading, the more we can redirect our attention to what we read. 9. Column confusion. Magazines and newspapers are produced in multiple columns. This format gives them greater flexibility than that of the usual book page, which is, in effect, printed in a single column (or block) of type. Magazines and newspapers are often produced in great haste, with last-minute editorial revisions, on-the-spot solutions to graphic problems, and mounting deadline hysteria. This haste can result in the columns of type being laid out in a pattern confusing to the reader, partic- 68 Creative Reading55 ularly when the bottom of the column of a magazine article on plumbing says "Continued on p. 69," and when you continue on page69 it's about eye shadow. I happen to enjoy these confusions. It's refreshing tothe mind to experience such surprises and leaps. Sometimes I've gone on to the next column, discovered it's the wrong one, but continued to read it because it turned out to be more interesting than the one I was reading. Let's face it, by the time you have to turn to page 69, the article has probably shot its bolt anyway. The fact that the typeface on page 69 is smaller tells you something, as does the fact that the words are now sur- rounded by small, black-and-white advertisements. How can you read about saving your soul when the little box next to the words urges you to earn big money at home in your spare time by stuffing envelopes? Actually, I like these little ads. The older the magazine is, the more interesting they areunlike the feature articles, which tend to age badly. But now I've gotten off the subjectappropriately enough, since it was about getting shunted into the wrong column. All nine of these reading errors can be minimized by practicing mindful- ness: gently but firmly drawing one's attention back to the material at hand. But if you want to go further, to learn to use these errors creatively, Chapter 6 is for you. 69 6 Creative Reading Techniques One must be an inventor to read well.... Then there is creative reading as well as creative writing. Emerson Reading creatively involves an aggressive attitude toward the material at hand: the book is there for you to use as you see fit. It may have content that you want to extract, it may be in a writing style you want to learn, it may lend itself to self-parody, or it may invite radical revi- sion, rearrangement, or complete transformation. In all these cases, the book is raw material for you to shape. When you come to it ready to take it apart and put it back together, it has lost its inviolability, its implied claim to immutability, its intimidating authority. You become the new au- thor. You assume authority. The first time you underline a passage or make a marginal note, you take a first step toward getting on top of the material. You begin to cast off the restriction, placed on us at an early age, against "defacing" books. As children, we are not supposed to "mess up" books, especially school readers, in which our names are inscribed at the start of the year, along with a description of the book's condition, for which we are re- sponsible. The ostensible reason for keeping a book clean is that it's thrifty: the school needs that copy for students in subsequent years. Be- sides, it's worthwhile to teach children how to take care of objects. Fine and good. When it comes to books, though, such a taboo has the effect of reinforcing the power of the printed word. We are forbidden to deface the sacred tablets. In college, though, where we are required to own our textbooks, underlining is encouraged, as an aid to study. Underlining is, in effect, a form of notetaking; instead of copying out a long passage into our note- books, we simply underline it in pencil or ink, or lay a thick band of trans- parent ink over it with a fat Magic Marker. Our marginal notes tell us what we felt to be important in the material, and why. And if, at the end of the course, we sell the book back to the college bookstore, we see it join large stacks of the same title, all underlined, notated, and personalized. Seen simply as physical object, the book has lost its inviolability. 56 70 Creative Reading57 Of course, serious students know that what is important is not nec- essarily the physical object, but the information and sometimes the wis- dom it imparts. Serious students will consume a good book the way they wolf down a great dinner. If, in the process, the book becomes marked up and unfit for anyone else, it is due not to negligence or vandalism, but to the nourishing of the mind and spirit. Marking up a book is also a step in the direction of creative reading. But it's surprising how many young people never learn that books can be read in many different ways, depending on one's purpose. They pick up a book, read the title page, the table of contents, the acknowl- edgements, the foreword, the preface, the introduction, and only then begin the trek from chapter to chapter, reading every word along the way. And when they get to the end, they read (or at least look at) the bibliogra- phy and index. Their intentions are good but their method is rigid. This is similar to the attitude of the infant who demands that every word of his or her favorite bedtime story be read in exactly the same order every time. More sophisticated students know how to get from a book what they need. They learn this from a teacher, from a course or book on how to study, or from their own experience. It is tremendously liberating to learn that you don't have to read a book from cover to cover. So, in read- ing for information, it is much more efficient to take the following steps: 1. Ask yourself what you need from the book. 2. To sense whether or not the book will give you what you need, think for a moment about its title and subtitle. 3. Carefully read the table of contents. A good table of contents gives you an outline or brief overview of the book. 4. Scan the preface or introduction. Often these will tell you why the author wrote the book and what its general message is. 5. Scan the index. A good index can give you an immediate and more specific sense of the book's contents. 6. Turn through the book, chapter by chapter, scanning the first and last few paragraphs of each. You might also read the first and last sentences in some of the paragraphs that catch your eye. 7. Go back and read the table of contents again. By now it will make more sense to you, and you should be able to add a little meat to its skeleton. Going back to the table of contents helps tie it all together. 8. Finally, ask yourself these questions: Does the book seem to have in it what you need? Is it pleasant to look at and hold? Does the type look nice, or at least unobtrusive? When necessary, does it have suitable and interesting illustrations? Is the author's style clear? Do you have a gut feeling you're going to like this book? 71 58 Creative Reading Techniques If the answers are all yes, eureka, you've discovered the right book for you at that moment. If the answers are mostly no, then look else- where, or, if it's assigned reading, read it with the foreknowledge that you probably won't enjoy it as much as you might have. It's a great advantage to understand this in advanceotherwise, your irritation can get in the way of learning whatever it is you have to learn from the book. This preliminary scanning takes only a few minutes, but saves you a lot of grief and misery. It will help you figure out which parts are more rel- evant and valuable for your course of study, enabling you to skim or skip parts that are of little or no use to you. Reading tips such as the above have been repeatedif not always heededfor generations. It was always understood that this method ap- plies to textbooks, nonfiction, and the like; it was an aid to study. No one has suggested that other types of material be read in a similar fashion. No one has suggested that we read only the first and last lines of each poem in a collection of poetry, or the first and last paragraphs of each chapter of a novel. Poetry and fiction are Art, which is not to be tampered with. Oh? The exercises that follow offer some ways to read anything cre- atively. Some are more radical than others, but underlying them all are four beliefs: 1. We perceive something better by knowing what it isn't. (Some- times when you aren't quite sure how to spell a word, don't you write out its incorrect spellings, just to confirm the correct one?) 2. We make surprising discoveries by using surprising methods. (As William Blake said, "If the fool would persist in his folly, he would become wise" and "The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.") 3. All words have magical properties that we should experience and explore. 4. Play is healthy. The first nine exercises below are what might be called the posi- tive side of the nine reading mistakes discussed in Chapter 5. The other exercises are corollaries or extensions of the first nine, or, in some cases, are just bolts from the blue. 1. Changing single words. This involves changing one word in a sentence in such a way as to keep the grammar intact but to give the 72 Creative Reading59 sentence a whole new meaning. The change will sometimes give the old sentence a new sparkle. As Aristotle said, "Aeschuylus and Euripides wrote the same line. ..with the change only of a single word; an unfamil- iar word was substituted for an ordinary one, and the new line is beautiful where the old was commonplace" (Dorsch 64). Take, for example, the way I revised The Motor Maids across the Continent, one book in a series of inane novels for adolescent girls. It was written by Katherine Stokes and published in 1911. I found it in a used book shop in 1964. At that time, I was in the habit of making myself read certain books solely because they were the type I would never read. It turned out that I wouldn't exactly read Motor Maids either, not the way the author had intended, anyway. The book opens with the preparations for a trip some young girls and their sententious chaperone, Mrs. Wilhelmina Campbell, are to take across the United States by car. Early in their trip, they see a small airplane make a crash landing in a field alongside the highway, and they rush to the aid of the aeroplanist. When he regains consciousness, he finds him- self surrounded by the Motor Maids and the redoubtable Mrs. Campbell. "Are you better now?" asked Mrs. Campbell, applying her smelling salts to his nose. With a pencil marked out ing salts, so that the sentence reads, "Are you better now?" asked Mrs. Campbell, applying her smell to his nose. Later the girls load their car with a heavy box of provisions. Some- thing in me clicked, and I changed provisions to visions. Immediately the book took on a different caste. These young girls were visionaries! And vi- sionaries who kept their 'visions in a box! The story became immeasur- ably more interesting. Anytime it lagged a bit, I searched around for another key word and changed it, too. The more I read, the more changes I made, until the Motor Maids found themselves going through a series of mysterious and often humorous adventures. I went through the entire book this way, and then I typed up my version of Motor Maids, which in effect had become a posthumous col- laboration with the original author. Later, I revised this new version, fol- lowing traditional methods and, again, the new method. My friend Ted Berrigan used the same method in creating his novel Clear the Range, a metaphysical western. Of course you don't have to rewrite an entire book. You can just hit here and there. Many authors have pet words they use over and over; it's 73_ Go Creative Reading Techniques fun to detect them and substitute another word. Or, if you don't want to be so methodical, simply change a word every once in a while, when the text becomes dull. Some people will find this procedure jejune or delinquent. They will liken it to drawing a moustache on every face that appears in a maga- zine or on a billboard. The difference between transforming words and drawing moustaches is that the latter soon loses its appeal and is seen as the visual cliché that it is, whereas the former is infinitely various, be- cause it can be based on widely different texts and it challenges the reader's ingenuity. A corollary procedure involves a more extensive transformation. Take a brief text (a lyric poem will do nicely) and remove, say, all its nouns. Using any method you want, compile a list of other nouns. From this list, select nouns at random, and, in the order of selection, put them in the vacated noun-slots in the poem. (The Oulipo group in France has long used a similar method, which they call S + 7. The S is an abbreviation for the French word for "noun," and the seven indicates how many nouns down in the dictionary one goes to find a replacement noun.) Read the poem in its new form and see what new sense it makes, if any. You might want to move some of the new nouns around, or even cheat and replace some with others from your noun-horde. When the new version seems to cohere, consider it finished. Then go back and read the original poem again. You will now have a far better sense of it. The sudden clarity with which we see the original text is similar to what Wolfgang Iser calls "a kind of 'awakening- when we put down an engrossing book (The Act of Reading 104). Engaged reading involves an "image-building process...whose significance lies in the fact that image- building eliminates the subject-object division essential for all percep- tion, so that when we 'awaken' to the real world, this division seems all the more accentuated... sothat we can view our own world as a thing `freshly understood'" (140). (I remember, as a child, having the raw real- ness of the world laid bare every time I walked out of a movie theater into the shockingly bright afternoon.) The image-building that is required by the noun substitution process takes us one step away from the "reality" of the original text, to which our return is a kind of awakening. The substitution procedure can be done with the verbs, adjectives, adverbs, conjunctions, and prepositions. If you try substituting for each of these parts of speech, you will notice that each part-of-speech category changes the poem in a different way. The nouns and verbs alter the origi- nal poem far more than the others. If you change only the conjunctions or the prepositions, you might find that the poem could still pass as being by 74 Creative Reading61 the original author, whereas radical changes in the verbs and nouns im- mediately "show," provided the original text is well known. "Lord, Lord, why hast thou disconnected me?" (The Bible) exhibits obvious tampering, whereas the alteration in "Rage, rage behind the dying in the light" (Dylan Thomas) isn't so obvious. As you can see, the procedure is wide open, to be taken as far as you want. And often, the farther you go, the clearer the original text is when you come back to it. 2. Alternate lines. Read every other line of any text. To help the mind not succumb to the temptation of "normal" reading, and to help the eyes find every other line easily, pull a ruler or piece of paper down as you read. Some texts are just as dull read this way as when read in the usual manner, but others lend themselves marvelously to fresh combina- tions of ideas and images, many of them comical. If this approach doesn't seem to "work" at first, be patient. One's mind can be deeply grooved in the usual reading pattern, so that initially any other pattern will seem tir- ing and pointless. If you keep reading alternate lines with no interesting moments or satisfaction at all, try another text, perhaps something lighter, such as magazine prose. How-to articles often become very funny when read this way 3. Line looping. Read every line at least twice. If it's too hard to do silently, do it aloud, which will bring out the rhythm and euphony of the words. In fact, with some texts this can raise the material almost to the level of song. I'm thinking particularly of the blues, in which the first line of each verse is always repeated, then followed by a different line: In the evenin', in the evenin', momma, when the sun go down, In the evenin', in the evenin', Lord, when the sun go down, Yes it's lonesome, so lonesome, when the one you love is not around. You might want to try writing a song in blues form by combining meth- ods 1 (changing single words) and 3 (line looping). Select a text with lines that, when repeated, sound good to you. It's more interesting to work with unlikely material, such as sports writing or a society column, than with, say, greeting cards. (The lines in newspaper columns may prove to be too short for this. If so, cheat and use a few words from the next line.) Pick out the repeated lines, then add the final line, in which you change the last word so that it rhymes with the repeated lines. Or change the final word of the repeated lines so that it rhymes with the last line of each verse. Here are two examples, developed from the New York Times: 7 5 62 Creative Reading Techniques An ancient white magic has proved itself once again An ancient white magic has proved itself once again And water has made us very thin Tastes in dance were equally specific Tastes in dance were equally specific In 1948, the vogue was for the psychologically terrific Whether or not you want to go to such lengthsin effect switch- ing the act of reading into the act of writingyou'll find that by looping lines you'll begin to get a better feel for the material's rhythm. All strings of words have rhythm. They may not have a regular thump-de-thump kind of rhythmmeterbut they will have a rhythmical contour, with pauses, staccato skips, or longer, more limber phrases. Some lines will be quick; others, cumbersome, clompy, or lurching. All these characteristics, good and bad, tend to go unnoticed when we read for content, whether in fic- tion or nonfiction, and yet they form the underpinnings of how we feel about what we read. By isolating a group of words, line looping provides a simple way to perceive those underpinnings. After trying line looping for a while, read a work by Gertrude Stein, particularly one that is based on the rhythms of repetition, such as "As a Wife Has a Cow: A Love Story" (543-45). You'll begin to find that difficult works of literature, such as Stein's, aren't so difficult after all, because once you feel comfortable with an author's cadences, the work tends to reveal itself. 4. Transposing (up or down). The most basic form of thispro- cedure is to bring a word from the previous line down into the one you're reading, or to bring one up from the next line. As discussed in Chapter 5, this can happen spontaneously when two similar words appearone above the other. It can also happen spontaneously when a word catches the eye, particularly a charged word, such as sex. Just a moment ago, did you see the word sex when you were still reading a line above the line it's in? (I intentionally didn't italicize it.) If sex doesn't get your attention, your own name is almost certain to. On the other hand, we almost never transpose the so-called service words (the, a, an, of, in, etc.), which are practically inert. Transposing words up and down at will, however, is rather more difficult, because doing so is contrary to old visual habits. Even if you can transpose at will, it's probably easier for you to go down and get a word than to go up and get one: or, having gone down to the next line, the temptation is simply to go on from there. If transposing up and down proves too hard at first, let your eyes drop from line to line, like a series of little waterfalls in a mountain stream, as in Figures 9 and 10, both of 76 Creative Reading63 Should I get out the automatic? Nonsense. I shook the self- pity out of my head, then lay down and turned off the night light, relaxing my muscles until my breathing became more (regular. i L Knowing how to fall asleep on schedule was an essential part of the mission. Es ecially when two people were sitting down below in a car andatching on an oscilloscope as a luminous white line recorded evemove of)my heart and lungs. If the door was locked from the inside and the windows hermetically sealed, what differenceid it make if he'd gone to sleep in the same bed and at the sam time? here was a worldlof difference between the Hilton and the I tried to picturelmy homecoming; I saw unannounced, or better yet, and walking the rest of the way back rom a stroll. The boys from school already; as soon as they saw the stairs would reverberate with their footsteps. dawned on me that I was supposed to take another For a moment I lay there undecided, sitting up on The bottle was stillin the suitcase. I dragged groped m way over to the table, located y shirts, then filled the cap till the stuff fingers. While emptying the small the sensation of beinan actor in an amateur play. A job's a job, I said by way of self 'ustifica- tion. As I walked back to the bed, my suntanned trunk, arms, and legs merged with the darkness, and my hips stood out like a white girdle. I lay down on the bed, the slug of gin gradually warming my stomach, and slammed my fist into theillow: so_r this is what you've come to, you backup man! Opull up the covers and get some sleep. Then I fell into the sort of drowse where the final flickerings of consciousness can be extinguished only by a state of total relaxation. A vision. I was sailing througspace. (Strangely enough, it was the same dream I'd had just before my trip)to Three Witches Inn. myself pulling up to the house parking the car by the dru store way on foot, as if on in would be home me coming, It suddenly shot.of gin. one elbow. myself out of bed, the flat bottle under started dripping down metal tumbler, I again ha Figure 9.Trickle down example 1. 77 64 Creative Reading Techniques Should I get out the automatic? Nonsense.(I shookhe self- pity out of my head, then lay down and turned off the night light, relaxing my muscles until my breathing became more regular. Knowing how to fall asleep on schedule was an of the mission. Especially when two people were below in a car and watching on an oscilloscope white line recorded every move of m heart door was locked from the inside nd the windows sealed, what difference did it make if he'c)gone to sleep same bed and at the same time? There was a world of difference between the Hilton and the Three Witches Inn. I tried to picture(my homecoming; I saw myself pulling up to the house unannounced, o-r) better yet, parking the car by the drugstore and walking the rest of the way on foot, as if on my wa back from a stroll. The boys would be home from school alread;as soon as they saw me cominthe stairs would reverb-Rate- with their footsteps. It suddenlawned on me that I was supposed to take another shot of gin. For a moment I lay there undecided, sitting up on one e owt.The bottle was still in the suitcase. I dragged myself out of bedo ed my way over to the table, located the flatunder my shirts then filled the cap till the stuff started dripping down my fingers. While emptying the small metal turner,again had the sensation of being an actor in an amateur play. A job's a jot)! said by way of self-justifica- tion. As I walked back to the bed, my suntanned trunk, arms, and legs merged with t e darkness, and my hips stood out like a white girdle. I la down on the bed, the slug of gin gradually warmin my stomach, and slammed my fist into the pillow: so this is what you've come to you backup man! OK, pull up the covers andet some slee of consciousness can be extinguished onlby a state of total (Then I fell into the sort of drowse where the final flickerings enough, it was thehajust before my trip to 1....\relaxation.A vision. T was sailing through space. Strangely same dream essential part sitting down as a luminonD ungs. If the hermetically in the Figure 10.Trickle down example 2. Creative Reading65 which are based on Stanislaw Lem's novel, Chain of Chance "Trickle down" reading is harder than it looks here. I had to search a bit to find a plausible example, and I've made it easier by marking a pattern for you. This pattern is similar to what typesetters and proofreaders call "rivers," those runs of white space between words that sometimes are so aligned atop each other that a "river" of white seems to run down the page. At some point in your reading, you've probably noticed such rivers; they tend to jump out suddenly, the way a knot in a board suddenly resem- bles the profile of, say, Abraham Lincoln, or the way a cloud abruptly be- comes a dog. Look at Figure 11 for an example of a river. Notice that if you tilt the top of the page down toward the floor a bit and sight along it from bottom to top, the vertical river along the left -hand side of the example be- comes even more obvious. Of course, this example is contrived for effect: natural typographic rivers, like aquatic ones, meander here and there. the best way to see the world is on foot, whereby the pace of the traveler is slowed so that the eye is able to take in every little detail, all the tiny, wonderful moments otherwise lost. This is but one reason for slowing one's pace, for there are many others, not the least of which is that pot of gold that glimmers brightly and powerfully at the end of the rainbow of the emotions, the great pot known as inner peace. In order to reach it, one must do more than walk very slowly, of course, and walking slowly does not guarantee that even the most well-intentioned seeker will be able to find out what so many have sought to learn: whether or not heaven or nirvana can be equated with inner pax and whether or not the external, spiritual one, in any sense other than strictly metaphoric. Figure 11. A "river." 5. Edge blur. In edge blur, the edges of a page of type are blurred, but the center portion of each line is kept in focus. Figure 12 gives an idea of the areas involved. The corollary method is center blur, in which only the left- and right-hand parts of each line are read. This corollary method is a good cor- rective for people whose fixations at the beginnings and ends of lines are 79 66 Creative Reading Techniques Teachers & Writers Collaborative (T&W)announces an Outreach Program to buildconnec-tions to and a forum for writers. educators, students.parents. and others concerned with the art ofwriting. T&W is a nonprofit organization formed in 1967in New York City. Our program has threecom-ponents: 1) sending writers into schools and communitysettings to teach writing and work with teachers; 2) publishing a magazine, books, and othermaterials about teaching imaginativewrit-ing, which we distribute to a national audience;and 3) hosting seminars. lectures, workshops, readings, and other events in our Center for ImaginativeWriting. Our goals for the Outreach Programare broad. On the one hand. we are trying to linkup withgroups and people who already share our ideas about teachingwriting. On the other hand. weareseeking opportunities to influence and learn fromthose with different approaches. We seeknewcontributors to our publications and a new audience forour materials. T&W will work with educators or othersto design a program that meets their needs. Depending on available resources. T&W can provide the followingservices and materials: T&W has a cadre of professional writers whohave taught writing to students of allages. Thesewriters are available to give presentations, to teachdemonstration classes. and to work individu-ally or in groups with teachers, students,or others interested in the problems of teaching writing, Our writers arc primarily poets and fictionwritersthough most have also writtenessays andarticleswho represent diverse styles and approachesto writing and teaching. T&W issues a publications catalogue that listsall the materials we publish and the relatedbookswe distribute. We can provide catalogues togroups and individuals interested in this selectivecollection of materials for teaching writing. T&W publishes Teachers & Writers magazinelive time a year, in addition to our more than60professional books for teachers of writing. Wealso distribute other materials, suchas creativebooks for kids and audio-visual tapes. T&Wcan set up displays of these materials and, as part of certain Outreach Programs, provide participantswith T&W publications. T&Wt administrative staff includes peoplewith many years of experience settingup writingprograms. negotiating contracts with the public schools,and editing and publishing children's writing and professional books I'm educators.T&W administrators are available to workwithpeople interested in developing programs andpublications. T&W is also open to inventive collaborationsother than those outlined above. If you have ideas or questions, please call T&W at (212) 691-6590. Figure 12. Edge blur. hasty. Edge and center blurare related to the stencil method (see =-14below). 6.Page skips. This is one of theeasier creative reading methods.All you have to do is reada page, flip at random to anotherpage, read it.Clip to another, and soon. It's easier than some of the othermethods be-cause it leaves large chunks (whole pages) ofsyntax intact. In any kind of BESTrr,r_ys7NT;T.3v V" 80 Creative Reading67 reading, the mind craves meaning; meaning is systematically subverted when you read using any of methods 1-5. The mind tends to try to repair the shattered meaning by guessing at its original form or inventing a new context in which the syntactical fragments make at least some sense. Page skipping doesn't require these frequent mental efforts, because the tex- tual breaks come after longer intervals. Fiction lends itself particularly well to page skipping. You can turn just about any novel into what might be loosely called a Cubist version of itself. By page skipping back and forth at random, you abolish the novel's time line: its events no longer go from point A forward to point Z. Flash- backs and flashforwards take on the same weight as the present, because past, present, and future are abolished, and then united in a sort of eternal present. Likewise, the novel's characters are glimpsed in fragments, then combined by the memory to form mental sketches or portraits. You can buy such novels ready-made. Unwittingly, the authors of the Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew stories have created cubistic narratives in their series of "branching" novels. A branching novel is one in which the story starts normally, then comes to a point at which the reader has the option of several lines of narrative development. For example, in The Secret of the Knight's Sword by Carolyn Keene and Franklin W. Dixon (the first of their "Be a Detective" Mystery Stories), a legend has it that if anything happens to the "Silver Knight," a suit of armor that stands in the Bromley Hall mansion, the family will be cursed. The Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew accompany Nancy's father, Carson Drew, to Bromley Hall, where he has been summoned. In Chapter 1, the characters are on their way to Bromley Hall when they notice a mysterious green car speeding past them, and as they enter the Bromley Hall driveway, they pass a Rolls-Royce whose driver looks ner- vous. Once inside the mansion, they learn that the Silver Knight's sword has been stolen! At the bottom of page 5, the reader is given three options: 1. To have Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys stay at Bromley Hall and investigate. If so, turn to page 6 and continue. 2. Have them follow the trail of the green car. If so, turn to page 10 and continue. 3. Have them investigate the driver of the Rolls-Royce. If so, turn to page 12 and continue. The entire book has 18 of these branching points and 17 different endings (the first on page 42 and the last on page 122, the book's final page). So if you follow instructions, you can get 17 different narratives from this one book. 81 68 Creative Reading Techniques But if you read the book straight through, you'll find even more in- teresting things happening. Early on, young Elizabeth Bromley walks in and asks what's going on. A statue falls from the top of the stairway and narrowly misses her. She is so shaken that she's taken off to her room. Im- mediately she walks in the door again and asks what's going on. The Hardy Boys and Nancy tell her the sword's been stolen, they discuss the green car, investigate, and head toward London. Elizabeth Bromley walks in the door and asks what's going on. The Hardy Boys and Nancy explain that the sword's been stolen and tell her about the driver of the Rolls Royce. The three young detectives follow the car's trail to Kent. But on the next page they are still at Bromley Hall, investigating the garden. And so on. Branching novels might be seen as a twentieth-century descendent of serial novels. Wolfgang Iser says that "readers in the nineteenth century. ..often found a novel read in installments to be better than the very same novel in book form." He explains that the difference arises out of the cutting technique used in the serial story. It generally breaks off just at a point of suspense where one would like to know the outcome of a meeting, a situation, etc. The interruption and consequent prolongation of tension is the basic function of the cut. The result is that we try to imagine how the story will unfold, and in this way we heighten our own participa- tion in the course of events. Dickens was a master of the tech- nique; his readers became his "co-authors." (1978, 191) Branching novels were more directly inspired, I suspect, by the nar- rative options in board games such as Dungeons and Dragons and the flow charts of computer programming. The process came full circle when novelist Thomas M. Disch wrote Amnesia, a branching novel for com- puter; it comes on diskette and is highly reader-interactive. Whatever their origin, branching novels have proved to be surprisingly popular. Bantam claims that its "Choose Your Own Adventure" series alone has sold more than 32,000,000 copies since its inception in 1979. People with intellectual curiosity naturally "branch-read" the dic- tionary. We read the definition of one word, and something in the defini- tion suggests another word, so we look it up, and so on. Or, in looking up one word, we happen to notice another, which may lead to the one next to it, and so on. This leisurely, pleasant, seemingly haphazard ca- reening around in the dictionary has two "engines" that keep it going: meaning and contiguity. The skipping method can be used with larger chunks, such as episodes or chapters. It can also be made to follow a pattern of first, last, 82 Creative Reading69 second, next-to-last, third, third-to-last, and so on, whether applied to whole pages, episodes, or chapters. For instance, you could read a novel's first chapter, its last, its second, its next-to-last, and so on, until you end in the middle of the book. When I was a young boy, my family and I would go to the movies without knowing the show times. We'd arrive in the middle of a movie, see it to the end, stay for the intermission, then watch the movie from the beginning, until that magic moment of recognition when one of us would say, "This is where we came in." It seems odd that we did this with such impunity, but at the time it seemed perfectly normal, even when the two parts of the movie were separated by another entire moviethe other half of a double feature. We were still able to reassemble the two halves of the first film. It was only when I got older and became interested in movies as "art" that I insisted on seeing movies from opening credits to The End, and although at this point I was bringing a lot more conscious attention to my movie viewing, I don't think I was enjoying the movies any more than before, In 1962, Editions du Seuil published an unusual French novel, Composition #1 by Marc Sappora. The novel came in a book-sized box, with the pages inside unbound and unnumbered. The reader was in- structed to shuffle the pages and read them in random order. Then, of course, shuffle them again. Composition #1 might have been inspired by Raymond Queneau's Cent milk milliards de poemes (One Hundred Trillion Poems). Que- neau's collection consists of 10 sonnets, which he calls "generator son- nets." The book is designed so that the reader can turn not a page at a time, but a line at a time. To get an idea of what it looks like, imagine a book of matches opened and turned on its side, with the match heads on the right-hand side. If you want to see a match below, you simply bend back the one above it. The same for the lines in Queneau's poems. So, if you wish to replace the first line of the first poem, simply turn it, the way you would a page (or match), and expose the first line of the second son- net. The possible permutations of the 140 lines of the generator sonnets allow for the creation of 1,000,000,000,000 poems, in only 10 pages! Queneau estimates that it would take approximately 200,000,000 years to read all those poems, assuming, of course, you read 24 hours a day. Inci- dentally, he says his collection was inspired by a children's book called Toles de rechange, in which various heads could be put on various bod- ies. Such books are still available in the U.S. Queneau and Sappora's shuffling of lines and pages recalls the ex- aggerated use of multiple parentheses by Raymond Roussel in his narra- 8 3 70 Creative Reading Techniques tive poem, "New Impressions of Africa. "' Here I'll give (though less through the generosity of my heart ((which has been beating normally lately (((although I have no idea of what "normally" is ;((((well, maybe I do)))) in a case like mine))) and much to my relief)) than through sheer perversity) an example of how difficult, if not impossible, it is to read multiply parenthetical sentences without skipping back and forth.2 But let's skip back to page skipping. The most natural form of page skipping is in collections of poetry. In fact, one of the reasons I like read- ing books of poetry is that they allow you to skip around in them. You can read the poems in any order you want. I often read the first poem, then the last, then the shorter ones, then the rest. Only after I've bounced around this way do I go back and read the entire book from start to finish, and then only if the book is worth reading again. Reading poetry collections from start to finish assumes that some- onethe author, perhapsarranged the poems in a particular sequence for specific reasons, an assumption that is not always true. Often the poems were written at different times, in different moods, and on differ- ent subjects, and are meant to be discrete units. Their proximity be- tween the covers of a book is simply a bow to the convention of traditional book binding. I remember having long, detailed discussions with poet Ted Berrigan in the early 1960s about John Ashbery's book of poems, The Tennis Court Oath. Ted and I saw the same rich and com- plex mind at work in establishing the sequence of the poems as the one involved in writing them in the first place. When we met Ashbery and commented on his careful arrangement, he replied, "Oh, I just sent a bunch of poems to the editor and he did the rest." Ted and I, who took great and sometimes ludicrous pains in arranging our own poems in structured sequences, were surprised by Ashbery's willingness to see his poems arranged in any order, though that in fact is how we ourselves read most poetry booksin effect creating our own notion of the archi- tecture of each book. Ted and I also used another method to rearrange a text: reading it backwards one word at a time. Just as running backwards improves one's physical agility, reading backwards improves one's mental agility. Ted and I used the backwards method for both reading and writing. For writing purposes, one of us would read any text aloud backward to the other, who was poised at the typewriter, mixing the unusual flow of words with our own inner flow. Reading specialist Jeanne Chall used a similar method when she took a page from an ordinary reading primer and read it from bottom to 84 Creative Reading71 top (one sentence at a time). Not surprisingly, she found that the text had "more punch" read backwards than when read forward (Learning to Read, 96). Another language authority, Ann E. Berthoff, says that we can focus more intently on particular sentences if we read backwards (also one sentence at a time). Her remarks deal with correcting one's own prose writing, but the effect is the same: the "sentences sound alien, like those in a workbook, and for the purposes of correction, that is all to the good" (191). In reading backwards, that alien sound is exactly what I'm looking for, because it's this feeling of differentness that activates one's feeling for the magical nature of words. 7. Page repeats.Repeats are akin both to line loops and page skipsline loops because page repeats are simply larger units than line repeats, and page skipping because it's always possible (and even likely, considering how a book's binding will often cause a book to fall open to the same pages) you'll happen to turn to the same page again. To read each page of a book twice before going on to the next page is a massive form of eye regression (discussed in Chapter 5). I've never read an entire book this way, although I frequently go back and read large chunks of material that is intellectually demanding. I think I would have a hard time reading each page twice in a book I didn't particularly like, and in one I did particularly like I'd just want to forge ahead. It's rather pleasant, though, to skip around in a novel and happen upon a page you've already read. If you're skipping at random to create your own Cubist version of the novel, these repeats take on a lyrical qual- ity, something like that of the pantoum form in poetry, wherein the lines come back, as in: Because birds are gliding across your brain, I rise into the shadows And the mist is rolling in Because my breath is rolling out. I rise into the shadows Like a pond that went to sleep: Because my breath is rolling out You hear doorbells in the woods. Like a pond that went to sleep And woke up inside a dream, You hear doorbells in the woods Though the woods are in the dream And woke up inside a dream! Although the air is filled with blue and white clouds, 85 72 Creative Reading Techniques Though the woods are in the dream, A good idea can smell like pine trees. Although the air is filled with blue and white clouds, I am filled with ideas about dreams A good idea can smell like pine trees And a dream can grow like a cloud. I am filled with ideas about dreams, The stars don't know what they mean And a dream can grow like a cloud: You can't explain this bigness. The stars don't know what they mean And the mist is rolling in. You can't explain this bigness Because birds are gliding across your brain. A similar thing happens in the novels of Main Robbe-Grillet (such as The Voyeur and Jealousy) and in his screenplays (such as Last Year at Marienbad), in which certain images and phrases are repeated at various points in the story, like a refrain. Here's a nutshell example from The Voyeur: It was the last house as he left town. Madame Leduc had opened the door almost at once. The preliminaries had gone very fast: the brother working for the steamship line, the wrist watches at prices defying all competition, the hallway splitting the house down the middle, the door to the right, the big kitchen, the oval table in the middle of the room, the oilcloth with the many-col- ored little flowers, the pressure of his fingers on the suitcase clasp, the cover opening back, the black memorandum book, the prospectuses, the rectangular frame on top of the sideboard, the shiny metal support, the photograph, the sloping path, the hol- low on the cliff sheltered from the wind, secret, calm, isolated as if by thick walls ... as if by thick walls ... the oval table in the middle of the room, the oilcloth with the many-colored little flow- ers, the pressure of his fingers on the suitcase clasp, the cover opening back as if on a spring, the black memorandum book, the prospectuses, the shiny metal frame, the photograph showing ... the photograph showing the photograph, the photograph, the photograph, the photograph.... (98) 8. EyeMind Split. One of the least productive things you can doin terms of traditional readingis to let your mind wander. Your eyes keep moving along the words while your mind moves elsewhere. How many times were you exhorted as a child, "Pay attention!"? But pay attention to what? When my mind wanders, it's usually paying attention, 86 Creative Reading73 but to something else. In creative reading, wandering is used as a positive technique that puts the reader in closer touch with where the mind is when it wanders and what it does there. In eye-mind split reading, the mind may be likened to a water- skier, the words to water. The mind flies along the surface, bouncing a bit in the rough going. But what's that up ahead? It's a ramp. The skier heads straight for it, glides up the inclined plane, and shoots out into the air in a smooth arc that rises and then falls to the point of reestablishing contact with the water. In reading, be alert for these ramps in the text. They might be individual words, particular turns of phrase, names of places or people, dates, descriptions, or scenesanything that can send you off into a memory or fantasy. Such ramps transport me when, for example, a cashier announces that the sum total of my purchases is seventeen seventy-six, nineteen twenty-nine, or nineteen forty-two (the year I was born). Sometimes I re- spond with a remark based on what I have intentionally misunderstood to be such a date in history. For 1929, I might say something like "Gee, that was a bad year. I lost all my money and can't pay." These utterances usu- ally provoke blank looks from the sales personnel, who are not accus- tomed, as Walter Pater put it, to having "the ornamental word, the figure, the accessory form or color or reference... stirring along 'brainwave' be- hind it of perhaps quite alien association" User 1978, 126). In the privacy of your own home, however, and with book in hand, you can take these associative leaps without disconcerting a hapless interlocutor. The trick is to keep your eyes moving along the book's words at the same time as your mind has gone off on its "trip," and then to return from the trip and make a fairly smooth landing on the words again. This is a bit harder than simply going off on a fantasy, because it involves your creat- ing a segue (or "bridge").between your fantasy and the words as you reen- ter the text. Sometimes English teachers assign corollary methods. For instance, they have their students read a descriptive passage, and close their eyes to try to "see" what they've just read, to create a vivid and detailed mental picture of the description. Afterward, when students compare their men- tal pictures, they're surprised by both the similarities and the differences. The creation of static mental pictures is something the students have done naturally from an early age but rarely if ever acknowledged publicly, sometimes not even privately. Some teachers also have their students read the beginning of a story, then stop and invent the rest. To do this well, the students have to project 8? 74 Creative Reading Techniques themselves into the storyin order to move it forward in a plausible line of developmentthe way they have to project themselves into a static mental picture. Such exercises in imagination are fine; I've done them many times myself. I've read the first chapter of a novel, stopped, and projected ahead; read the second chapter, stopped, and revised my projection; read the third chapter, stopped, and revised my projection again; and so on. Sometimes I make a final projection after the last chapter; in other words, I keep the story going beyond the end of the book. Eye-mind split is a bit different. It involves drifting off on a tangent, with no pretense of honoring the story's logic. Also, eye-mind split often happens when the reader's eyes are still open and moving along the words on the page. Finally, it requires that at some point the reader realize that he or she is off on a tangent and must now bend that tangent back so that it segues nicely into the material being read at that moment. As you might suspect, it's easier to go off on a tangent than to come back on one. It's perfectly all right to go off, then snap back and abruptly start reading the "real" words again. It just isn't as elegant as reentering the text smoothly. In either case, becoming mindful of eye-mind split helps us to control iteither to let ourselves go or to hew close to the printed text and thus become better and more creative readers. 9. Column confusion. Column confusion, you may recall from Chapter 5, consists of errors in reading a column of type in a newspaper or magazine. Column confusion happens sometimes when we get to the end of one column of a magazine or newspaper article and go on to what we think is the next column, but which actually belongs to a different article. Sometimes this mistake is induced by material that is poorly designed and laid out. We can capitalize on this type of column confusion by simply doing it on purpose. Take, for example, the front page of your daily news- paper. Read it, column by column, beginning in the upper left -hand cor- ner, continuing straight down to the bottom of the page, even (and especially) if it means breaking into other articles. Then go up to the top of the second column and read it all the way down to the bottom of the page. Then up to the third, and so on, until you end up at the bottom right-hand corner of the page. A less usual form of column confusion is one used for literary pur- poses by novelist William S. Burroughs. He calls it "reading cross-column." To read cross-column, all you do is read from left to right, pretending 88 Creative Reading75 One of the things that makes Paris a traveler's nightmare is the intolerance Parisians show to foreigners trying to speak French. All too often the tourist goes away swearing never to return Of great beauty joy, and certainly a bonus to life, he and perhaps you, considering how the narrow and really human quality of will that he and I share just a little bit Figure 13. Two columns example. there's no dividing line between the columns. For example, try reading the two columns in Figure 13 this way (so that the first line reads "One of the things of great beauty"). Of course this is an example whose grammar permits relatively smooth sailing across the columns.3 The syntactical waters are somewhat choppier in columns that are pasted up wherever they happen to fit, with little or no regard to adjacent columnsthe message being, of course, that you aren't supposed to read cross-column. Sometimes I've wondered, though, if there might not be a devilish paste-up artist who, every once in a while, secretly matches up two disparate columns so that they yield a shocking or unusual image, an image no one ever notices. Reading cross-column works particularly well between two or three columns, producing what are called "cut-ups" (but because the cutting is done with the eye, there's no muss, no fuss, you don't need scissors or paste). Reading all the way across six or eight columns usually produces such a syntactical mess among so many different subjects that we soon tire of it. It's chaotic. Best to start with cutting across just two columns. Take the fragment in Figure 14, clipped from the front page of the New York Times (Sunday, July 6, 1986). The first column contains an arti- cle about airport security measures designed to thwart terrorism; the sec- ond column is about the reopening of the refurbished Statue of Liberty; the third, fourth, and fifth columns tell about visitors to the newly opened BEST COPYAVAILABLE "Allihe News Thai's Fit to Print" VOL.CXXXV .... No. 46,817sm,. .151.361dPion Xettra lurk gimes WaChen Hazy stacthine, hot wit bred today; key old warm toulgt. CoatInced 11:23, end humid tomorrow, Tomerattrres today OM. tonight 74 77; yestoday 6990. Deta£3, page 23.- NEW YORK, SUNDAY, JULY 6, 1986 Miss Liberty Reopens Amid Gaiety in the Harbor Contests, Concerts and Street Festival Entertain.Crowds as =mar D.memos*L A refurbiliied Staab at Liberty Inc reapcond td tinplate yesterday /is the LibertyWeettend party, hanffy pausbc Ce3 the mooting after. Idled ahead 'Nth boat and as races, open housett sheaf tented dens end a 'huge tastival In !Over Manbotten. it was a protract quilt day baaJoa and fiddlesnicaterated on.Wall Street, ciperts costarred on liberty' meaning.explered the mys-teries of binnacles and topgallants, classical music drifted bathe parts and sail= in dresowithes were on the Man. But it was again the Statue of UN arty, symbol de Milan and the cantor. piece of a halter togging adth chips and sags, then captured the dap. ending a two9aar cemornial restoration to its thhcentarygraiMato and reoperdog to villitors for the first thus In a yam. 1112s. Reagan Cats Ribbon IkeEST COPY AITAIIABLE, PaeteeerZel=re$1.13 .. FOES OF APARTHEID,. SEEK OUT AND KILL-. 5 BLACK OFFICIALS . . SHOOTINGS IN TOWNSHIPS South' Africa Says 2 Gunmen, Seeking Targets From Car;.- Die in Fight With Police'6. teem en;tem yellt Tuna JOHANNESBURG, July 3Arab Govemmem gunmen armedwith' Soviet designed ARA? assault rifles Cot and killed nee black municipal rib ficials early today, the authorities said. Tow of the assailants. reportedly driving thrtegb segregated Mack town. Clio In teach of targets, were said to have tees IdDed by the wilco after a bighopeed oar dose. The anode Seamed to be =cog the most audacious ipserrille assaults on Mack supporters of Governmentau thosity since the current unrest began Creative Reading77 .milllifiriti; PM 111g!ham ;Poll 148 Hui! 111 111 1014014104111111 8V111 pel°12* I ifi fq; Tilllfirigt. hi 1111 15011111/44411i1 /411ii rff \ friiP m14111111 1iiiihN*11 i-111 Illii#11b1411Al- 41111'111.J. 78 Creative Reading Techniques statue; and the sixth column is about the anti-apartheid struggle in South Africa. Pick any two columns and read them from left to right, ignoring their dividing line. Don't worry if the syntactical jumps between them aren't smooth, or if the lines do not line up perfectly. Any surprises? Giving it a quick scan, I found several. Right away I got "The nation's major airports are a bouquet of white roses" (columns 1 and 2). This sentence is delightful for its fresh mixture of two types of dic- tionthe dry, official "nation's major airports" joined with the more lyri- cal "bouquet of white roses." It is also delightful and surprisingly apt as an image: airports do have a lot of white in them, and, to extend the metaphor, the planes that buzz and fly around them are like birds or in- sects. Also in this sentence is the pleasure of imagining these sprawling, massive complexes as something you can hold in one hand, as well as the pleasure of imagining something lifeless and uninteresting (such as con- crete) becoming sensuous and beautiful, the way life should be. I also noticed an inadvertently funny moment in columns 5 and 6, from which I got "As Mr. Weisman and others waited, Mrs. Reagan took an oversized scissors. Meanwhile, Bishop Desmond M. andwith some diffi- culty because the Tutu, winner of the 1984 Nobel Peace shears, was stiff, cut through a ban and a prominent foe of apartheid." This fragment is syn- tactically jagged, but consider some of its suggestions. It sounds as though the First Lady, using special scissors that had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, is about to cut some material to make a ballet costume (a tutu), but instead she cuts through a ban (such as those imposed on group gatherings) and then keeps snipping away until she accidentally cuts in half "a foe of apartheid"! This mixing of news stories resembles the mixing of people or places in dreams, and, as in dreams, often results in the liberation of feelings and meanings that otherwise remain below the surface, undiscovered and unacknowledged. Glancing at the paper again, I see some interesting intersections between columns 2 and 3: "It was a steamy, sticky day, with about 4,000 tourists and New Yorkers, temperatures in the low 90s and high in a queue that snaked through thin clouds that sometimes hid a pale Battery Park for the noon ferry to Lib Sun." This sounds like a scene in a science fiction novel, in which a spiral of people goes up into the sky to a space- craft that will take them to a distant star called Lib Sun. In these three examples, I've doctored the original source a little by smoothing over the bumpy transitions, leaving out a word or syllable here and there, and avoiding those lines that don't seem to want to go to- gether. As Burroughs says, "You learn to leave out words and to make con- nections," as he does in this demonstration: 92 Creative Reading79 Now, for example, if I wanted to make a cut-up of this (picking up a copy of The Nation), there are many ways I could do it. I could read cross-column; I could say: "Today's men's nerves surround us. Each technological extension gone outside is electrical involves an act of collective environment. The human nervous environment system itself can be reprogrammed with all its private and social values because it is content. He programs logically as readily as any radio net is swallowed by the new environment. The sensory order." You find it often makes quite as much sense as the original. (Interview in Paris Review 25) Sometimes a picture for one article can be paired with a different article. In the upper left -hand corner of the Times example, there is a photograph of tennis player Martina Navratilova celebrating a moment of victory at Wimbledon. The small caption tells us to read about it in Sec- tion 5, which is the sports section. At a distance, though, all I am able to read under the picture is "Airport Security Slows Travelers." If you've ever had to wait in long lines at airports, you will have wanted to throw up your hands and scream, just as Navratilova seems to be doing. She just couldn't take those long lines at the security check-points. Coincidentally, another interpretation suggests itself. A few months before Wimbledon, Navratilova was detained at an airport security check- point when agents found a loaded revolver in her handbag. The gun, which she keeps for her security, had inadvertently been packed in the wrong suitcase by a friend. Again, when Navratilova saw the gun removed from her carry-on luggage, she must had felt like throwing up her hands. Such juxtapositions are coincidental. Or are they? Isn't it possible that the paste-up artist recalled, perhaps unconsciously, the airport inci- dent, and when Navratilova made the news again by winning Wimbledon, "happened" to put her picture next to an article about airport security? Burroughs, among others, believes that such juxtapositions (or "intersec- tions") are hardly coincidental, that they have an oracular power, that when you make cut-ups you do not simply get random juxtaposi- tions of words, that they do mean something, and often these meanings refer to some future event. I've made many cut-ups and then later recognized that the cut-up referred to something that I read later in a newspaper or a book, or something that happened.. .. Perhaps events are pre-written and pre-recorded and when you cut the word lines the future leaks out. (Odier 12-13) If these intersections do have a prophetic power, some newspa- pers keep it in check. In looking through some old newspapers, I had at first thought I'd find some good examples of intersections in the local paper, the Times-Argus of Barre-Montpelier, Vermont. I was surprised to 93 80 Creative Reading Techniques see that the Times-Argus was virtually cross-column-proof; it is designed so that every article is contained in its own, discrete box, with plenty of empty space between articles, whose columnar lines rarely match up with those of other articles. This portioning out of information reflects the pace of life in small-town and rural Vermont, where people do not rush about trying to do two or more things at the same time, where peo- ple are less subject to the constant bombardment of information than are big-city people. You can read every article in the Times-Argus in an hour, whereas you would be overloading your brain to read the entire New York Times, with its reportage from all over the world, its notices for movies, plays, art exhibitions, dance and musical performances, etc. The point here is not that one newspaper is better than the other; the point is that one newspaper gives you one view of the world, the other gives you an- other view, not just by their editorial content, but by their sense of what is important to know, and how much of anything is important to know, and how quickly we should know it. And this sense of importance is con- veyed as much by layout and design as by content. You can learn to adjust your reading method accordingly. In most newspapers, the lead article appears in the upper right-hand corner of the front page. In other words, journalists are making the decisionsas someone must on a newspaperas to what is the single most important story of the day. We grow up reading the newspaper and assuming that "front-page news" is the most significant, but we ought to challenge this ingrained assumption, and teach our children to challenge it, too. Until a certain age, I was never bothered by the way newspapers ordered their information. After all, it's only reasonable to put all the sports news together, to group the gossip, horoscopes, and advice columns, and so on. When Picasso died, though, I was agitated to find that the New York Times lead article of the day was about a squabble be- tween the mayor of New York City and the governor. Picasso got the same amount of space on page 1, but not the lead position. In effect, the Times was telling us that a minor moment in local politics was more significant than the death of one of the geniuses of the twentieth century. The values that led to that judgement seemed way off the mark. The beauty of reading a newspaper is, of course, that we're free to skip around in it, to read it in any order we want, to assign to it our own order of importance. When I was little, I read the comic strips first; now I usually turn directly to the sports page (partly, I think, to reassure myself that the world hasn't altered in some horrible way overnight. Reading the sports page is like participating in a ritual of the Eternal Return.) Poet John Ashbery reads the obituaries first; artist George Schneeman goes 94 Creative Reading81 straight to the mutual fund quotations, my wife makes a beeline to the crossword puzzle. Do you have such a pattern? What do you read first? What last? And why? An interesting exercise in this regard is to make your own front page. Read the daily paper just as you normally would, but as you read, cut out the articles and keep them in that sequence. Then glue them back down (on the front page of an old paper, perhaps), forming your own front page, complete with banner and your lead piece at the top right. This exercise provides a graphic model of your newspaper reading pat- tern, and demonstrates the degree of control we tacitly surrender to and take back fromthe newspaper's staff.It's a particularly good exercise for showing students how to read a newspaper without letting it impose its view of the world on them. Only a few years ago, scientists at MIT's Media Lab were working on a telecommunications system that would allow us to select stories from the wire services and create our own electronic newspaper on a personal computer. As Walter Bender, one of the MIT computer scien- tists, put it, "You become one of the authors ... oreditors yourself....It allows you to dictate what you think is newsworthy." In the meantime, the sudden proliferation of the Internet has allowed us to gain access to wire services, electronic editions of newspapers, and other web sites, and to select from them as we wish, in effect becoming editors of the vast amount of information available on any given day. Unfortunately, when it comes to printing out such a selection in an attractive format, the technol- ogy is still rather crude, so that whatever "electronic newspaper" we cre- ate is still mainly inside our own heads. Burroughs's application of cross-column or cut-up reading is not only a defiant and subversive gesture toward the "establishment" that helped make a world he does not approve of, it is also a way of making lit- erature. "You get very interesting juxtapositions. Some of them are useful from a literary point of view" (Odier 12). There's nothing complicated or arcane about Burroughs's method: It's not unconscious at all, it's a very definite operation. . .the sim- plest way is to take a page, cut it down the middle and across the middle, and then rearrange the four sections. Now that's a very simple form of cut-up if you want to get some idea of one re- arrangement of the words on that page. It's quite conscious, there's nothing of automatic writing or unconscious procedure in- volved here. You don't know what you're going to get. (Odier 12) Burroughs was not the first to use the cut-up technique. He refers to T. S. Eliot's poem "The Waste Land" as "the first great cut-up collage."5 95 82 Creative Reading Techniques Burroughs also refers to Tristan Tzara's cut-ups and John Dos Passos's use of cut-ups in the "Camera Eye" sequences in his novel USA. Writing about Burroughs, Gerard-Georges Lemaire also mentions a similar procedure used by artist Marcel Duchamp: Duchamp, in his Rendez-vous du Dimanche 6 fader a lb 3/4 apres-midi placed four apparently unrelated texts in four divisions of a square. Such are the ancestors of this [cut-up] technique... yet [these ancestors] made no attempt to establish a new form of readability. (Burroughs and Gysin 14) As far back as 1920, Tristan Tzara, the dadaist poet, gave us a recipe for cut-ups: To Make a Dadaist Poem Take a newspaper. Take some scissors. From the newspaper pick an article as long as the poem you want to make. Cut out the article. Then carefully cut out each of the words in the article and put them in a bag. Shake gently. Then take out each piece one at a time. Copy the words in exactly the same order as they came out of the bag. The poem will resemble you. And now you're an infinitely original writer with a charming sensibility, if still not understood by the common people. (64, my translation) Italian writer and educator Gianni Rodari commented on this method: It is possible to compose entire poems using a newspaper and a pair of scissors, even though these poems may not make any sense. And yet there will be a fascinating sense. I do not want to maintain that this is the most useful method for reading a newspaper or that newspapers should be used in schools only to be cut into pieces. Paper is something to be taken seriously. Likewise, the freedom of the press. This game is not in- tended to bring about disrespect for the printed word, although it can serve to temper the worship of the press as a sacred institu- tion. (24) And again: It seems to me that every single mode of exploring coincidence is good. (25) 96 Creative Reacting83 I wonder if Tzara knew Lewis Carroll's poem "Poeta Fit, non Nasci- tur," one of whose stanzas goes: For first you write a sentence, And then you chop it small; Then mix the bits, and sort them out Just as they chance to fall: The order of the phrases makes No difference at all. (Grigson 127) The speaker in Carroll's poem is ironic, but Tzara's irony is so deadpan that we can't be sure it is irony. It is possible that Tzara is saying, in effect, that the world has gone mad, that madness has become normal, and therefore we should now embrace nonsense. T S. Eliot's sober juxtaposi- tions of seemingly unrelated elements suggests that such a procedure could be used meaningfully in "serious" literature. Burroughs takes it a step further in ascribing oracular power to the cut-up. I tend to agree with all four of these viewpoints, any of which I might adopt when I read cross- column. If the procedure seems frivolous, I try to enjoy it, the way I enjoy good nonsense. If the procedure seems to be telling me something impor- tant or unexpected, I listen. Like some of the other creative reading meth- ods in this book, reading cross-column is like taking a Rorschach test: what you see in it depends on who you are. And tells you who you are. 10. Fold-ins. The fold-in method, used by experimental novelists such as Burroughs and Tom Veitch and by poets such as Ted Berrigan, is essentially a variant of reading cross-column (number 9, above). To create a simple fold-in, choose a book you don't mind messing up, perhaps a bat- tered paperback. Open it at random. Fold the left -hand page down the middle. (It doesn't matter whether you fold it forward or backward.) If the book was pasted up and printed consistently, the lines of the folded half page should line up with the lines of the page beneath it, half of which is revealed by the folding. (See Figure 15.) Now read across the two columns of what is in effect a new page. If you don't like the result, flop the folded page and try the new combina- tions thus formed. Or try folding other pages. Some texts make better fold- ins than others; you might have to try several books to find a good one. The combining of half pages is similar to bringing together two un- known chemicals. Sometimes nothing happens. Sometimes they give off heat and gas and form a compound. I'm not sure why some fold-ins "click" and others don't. It has something to do with the vocabulary, the syntax, and the type of writing (descriptive, narrative, abstract, concrete,. 97 84 Creative Reading Techniques A NIGHT IN "POTATO- VILLAGE19 With their few primitive farm)ishly and said, "Well, grow potatoes, which barely k we did we must not was why the place was callee?In case war breaks Liberation saved Potato Vill drive simply because 5other crops and began to cut other sidelines.But traitor Lita laugh. The severity line caused all the people witl flock to the cities.The villagg-ht.We won't argueanybody to keep simple accotwo'llstraighten it out 10Having vented his grievancipair of paddedhis anger gone."We're muc'r hiscoat and handedsaid."Chairman Mao has sent sorsa great event for us fart,."Mc put on ...?"tain gullies." 15"But you must make strictly."You had a pair, said."They came here to beoung Lin's feet.Don't "Of course. When they first clumsy. They didn't know a tlddo but accept the They even had to learn how tod around."Where is 20a slip in the snow can make on its back.Chairman Mao.e- lower-middle peasants* with th youngsters.We must do oura 5 10 He pointed to a15 ppeared, singing and live up to his confidence in uids. They were divided 25hardship.They said one yearling a sled loaded with done them more good than sJ peasant and me, they _ "Old secretary!"The20 *This is a political term denoting:esrevealed the status economic status.These were two stra in the land reform.In class struggle peasants arc the most reliable allies Figure 15.Fold-in example. etc.). A various and colorful vocabulary, a syntax filled with discrete seg- ments, and a concrete narrative should fold-in nicely. As with reading cross-column, it helps to "cheat" a bit by smooth- ing out the jumps between columns, to drop word fragments and other bits that don't fit the flow, and to add small helping words. Or, if you pre- fer your fold-ins undoctored, if you have the mental stamina to absorb the jolts of all those syntactical breaks, do it that way. 98 Creative Reading85 A variation on reading fold-ins is what I call slots. Fold a page, as in Figure 15. Read the first half line at the top left. If it doesn't lead smoothly into the first right-hand half line, try continuing it with the second right- hand half line, and so on, down the page. When you find one that does fit, go back up and read the second left -hand half line, and try to match it up with a half line in the right side. And so on, with line three. Figure 16. Pattern for reading fold-in example in Figure 15. Look at Figure 15 again. It shows a page spread from The Seeds, a col- lection of propaganda stories translated from Chinese, with page 17 folded in half, revealing the right half of page 19. I've numbered the lines on each side, left and right. Read the lines in the order indicated in Figure 16. With a minimum of fudging, you might have come up with something like this: With their few primitive farms, we'll straighten it out, grow pota- toes, which barely appeared, singing, and was why the place was called "Old Secretary"! The Liberation saved the Potato, done them more good than Chairman Mao has said. "They came here to flock to the cities. The village revealed the status on its back." Chairman Mao appeared singing and clumsy. They didn't know a sled loaded with youngsters drives simply because, having vented his griev- ance, he pointed to a hardship. We won't argue. 99 86 Creative Reading Techniques That this technique creates great literature, we won't argue. We will argue that it takes a tedious piece of propaganda fiction and sails it off with a little breath of imagination. 11. Dueling Books. Dueling books involves reading two books at the same time. Not simultaneously, of course, but alternately. Many of us do this, but rarely with a conscious purpose. We start a book, read a cou- ple of chapters, and put it aside for a few days. We start another book, read it for a while, and then go back to the first book. We could be orchestrating our reading a little more consciously. My wife, for instance, read Fernand Braudel's Structures of Everyday Life, a lengthy study of fifteenth- through eighteenth-century world history, over a period of months. During that time, she read eight or ten mystery nov- els, for much the same reason she drinks coffee during the intermissions at the ballet. She loves the ballet, but she seeks contrast during the breaks. The intermissions are both a contrast to the performance and a part of the larger pleasure of "going to the ballet." Students preparing a term paper sometimes read many books at the same time, gathering and correlating information. Some teachers re- quire that term papers show a certain minimum number of sources con- sulted, the idea being to broaden the students' base of knowledge and to widen the topic's point of view. (It is enlightening for students to find two experts contradicting each other.) With some forethought, we can orchestrate our reading, rather than just follow our nose from interest to interest (although there is a lot to be said for following one's nose, too). If we want to explore a certain subject, we could not only read a lot of books on that subject, we could also include different genres. It is quite natural to pause in reading a work of nonfiction (such as literary criticism) to read the original mater- ial discussed in it, and it is rewarding to read a history of philosophy or religion at the same time as reading the philosophers or theologians themselves. Wide reading gives us a diversity of opinion, but different genres lend a roundness to our sense of the subject. For instance, if we're interested in the history of the American Indians, we would do well to add to our reading of history a generous selection of Indian po- etry, songs, folk tales, oral histories (such as Black Elk Speaks), eyewit- ness accounts, and diaries. To this we could add recordings of Indian music, pictures of Indian art and craftwork, and documentary pho- tographsall of which would enrich the orchestration of our reading. It wouldn't hurt to get to know some Indians, and we might even go so far as to camp out in the open,for a while. 100 Creative Reading87 A more radical and mechanical form of dueling books involves reading them in alternating pages or chapters. It would be interesting to crossbreed, say, Elmore Leonard's novel Unknown Man No. 89 with Ice- berg Slim's Pimp: The Story of My Life by reading them alternately page by page. Or Kafka's story "The Hunger Artist" with The Joy of Cooking. Or E Scott Fitzgerald's Tender Is the Night and Calvin Tomkins's Living Well Is the Best Revenge, a biography of Gerald and Sara Murphy, whom Fitzgerald used as the basis for the main characters of his novel. Or how about crossing Thomas Mann's Magic Mountain and a textbook on tuber- culosis? The possibilities are unlimited. These crossbreedings produce the sense of a third book, an imaginary hybrid hovering somewhere be- tween the two. This third book is one that you create for yourself, one that you and only you would ever "read" quite that way. 12. Day toning includes the conscious use of reading as a way to affect the way we see the world. Day toning can be understood more clearly by likening it to visual after-images. You are probably acquainted with the optical experiment in which you stare for an extended period at a red circle on a white card, then focus immediately on a pure white card with no shape on it. But... youdo see a shape, a circle the same size as the one you were just staring at. The "ghost" image is an after-effect. Read- ing has its after-effects, too, and they become part of our world. The more powerful the reading experience, the slower the decay of the after- effects. Some last a lifetimeby actually changing us. Psychologists have done some interesting studies of visual afterimages in reading, but I don't know if anyone has ever claimed to have measured the emotional after- effects of reading (Crowder 59 et passim). Regardless, you don't have to be a psychologist to know that reading changes how you feel. It's obvi- ous. What isn't obvious is why so few of us capitalize on it. My grandmother, who is anything but an intellectual, has survived adversity partly by reading books that, in her words, "put my mind at ease and in tune with the infinite." No one taught her to do this. Every night, sometimes for hours, she immerses her mind in inspirational literature that ranges from "positive thinking" to Christian Science to semi-mystical meditation. Judged as literature, many of these texts are insignificant, but it is undeniable that they have a powerful effect on their readers. At a very advanced age, my grandmother is relatively optimistic, even-tempered, and strong of mind; she is sure that spirit and energy come from the books she reads. In fact, she consciously uses these _books for that very purpose. When she wakes up in the morning, it is -after an evening of peaceful reading followed by restful sleep; in a sense, the previous night's 101 88 Creative Reading Techniques reading is the foundation of the new day. She reads not so much for infor- mation or entertainment as for spiritual nourishment, the way a monk or nun might read sacred texts. She proscribes and maintains the tone of her day by what she chooses to read. It reminds me of when, at the age of 16, I read Marcus Aurelius. Each reading of it imbued me with calm and the ability to concentrate. It was as though the author's stoicismthe attempt "to triumph over the vicissi- tudes and alterations of life by maintaining a constant temper in the face of a changing world" had gently risen from the pages and slipped into my spirit (Leites 51). Floating through the house, I even had a civil word for my parents. The effect soon wore off, in the face of a changing world, not to mention a changing self. At the same age, reading Kerouac's On the Road, I'd jump in the car, tune in Chuck Berry on the radio, and go, go, go. Perhaps the younger we are, the more susceptible we are to what we read (or to what is read to us). Children can be made to cry by sad sto- ries and to scream by scary ones. I remember being terrified by the story of the Three Billy Goats Gruff: I thought they would bite me or eat me. And I positively hated the troll. I didn't want to go to sleep that night. Even now, what I read resonates throughout the day. While writing this book, I found myself alone in the country for a while. I went back and reread Main Robbe-Grillet's novel The Voyeur. It's a strong little book. I admire it. But it left me feeling vaguely fearful and anxious, because fear and anxiety are two of its dominant moods. It made me worry about my dog's health, my son's future, my wife's safety, my book's progress, my mother's happiness, you name it! Fortunately, I was able to recognize the immediate source of my disquiet, and to apply an antidote to it by reading something equally strong but somewhat brighter in mood. I went straight to P G. Wodehouse. William Burroughs describes a slightly different type of day toning: For exercise, when I make a trip, such as from Tangier to Gibraltar, I will record this in three columns in a notebook I always take with me. One column will contain simply an account of the trip, what happened. I arrived at the air terminal, what was said by the clerks, what I overheard on the plane, what hotel I checked into. The next column presents my memories; that is, what I was thinking of at the time, the memories that were activated by my encounters; and the third column, which I call my reading column, gives quota- tions from any book that I take with me. ... For example, I'm read- ing The Wonderful Country and the hero is just crossing the frontier into Mexico. Well, just at this point I come to the Spanish frontier, so I note that down in the margin. Or I'm on a boat or a train, and I'm reading The Quiet American. I look round and see if 102 Creative Reading89 there's a quiet American aboard. Sure enough, there's a quiet sort of young American with a crew-cut, drinking a bottle of beer. It's extraordinary, if you really keep your eyes open. I was reading Ray- mond Chandler, and one of his characters was an albino gunman. My God, if there wasn't an albino in the room. He wasn't a gun- man. (Interview in Paris Review 28) If day toning is affected by the content of what one reads, it is af- fected even more strongly (and subtly) by the quality of the material. Had The Voyeur been a shoddy piece of work, it would have been really de- pressing, perhaps even psychopathic. The fact that it is a work of art well-conceived, original, and well-writtengave it a buoyancy that all good art has, no matter how negative the subject matter. What a horrible world Louis-Ferdinand Celine describes in Death on the Installment Plan, but how terrific it makes us feel to read that book! So the question is not always so much the material's content as it is the artfulness of the presentation. Just being in the general vicinity of great art makes us feel that life really is worthwhile. People read for different reasons, and not everyone cares whether or not a book has literary greatness. The people who read romances prob- ably want to forget themselves and to live vicariously. These readers judge a romance by how complete that vicarious experience is. And, without knowing it, they probably value a particular romance by how powerfully it radiates through them and onto their surroundings, so that for even just a moment the experiences and feelings in the book seem possible in the real world the reader lives in. (This willing suspension of disbelief is just a step away from sexual fantasy, which partly explains why sexual material has entered so easily into the romance genre.) Regardless of how sophisti- cated we are, this radiationfrom text, to reader, to worldtakes place any time we become involved with what we are reading. It is odd that we do not make more conscious use of this power to transform our sense of ourselves and our surroundings. Is it because we're too busy reading what we think we ought to read? Do we waste too much time reading this or that novel because everyone is talking about it? (I almost never enjoy anything. I've read for this reason.) Why don't we take the bull by the horns and read according to what we need? Have you been feeling trivial? Read some philosophy. Have you been stuck in the same town too long? Read about an exotic place. Has your imagination been running riot? Read a good how-to book on plumbing. Does your life seem too cut and dried? Go the the library, close your eyes, reach out and take a book, check it out, go home, and read every word of it. These are all creative uses of reading. 103 90 Creative Reading Techniques 13. Night toning. Another creative use of reading involves ma- nipulating the unconscious. I've already described how my grandmother used reading to induce calm into her sleeping mind. It reminds me of a suggestion made by poet Kenneth Koch. He said that if you want to have intense dreams about language, read Joyce's Finnegans Wake for several hours before bedtime, until you're really sleepy, so that when you put down the book you quickly fall asleep. He was right: I had "language" dreams all night. One of the least creativebut creative nonethelessuses of read- ing is as a soporific. How many millions of people keep a book on their bedside stand, reading only a few pages a night before conking out? It can't be that the book is so boring that they get drowsy, for in fact many bedside books are by favorite authors. No, there is something intrinsically soothing about the very act of reading, quietly, in bed late at night, free of intrusion. The nervous system, stimulated or irritated throughout the day, finally "unwinds." Then begins a silent conversation between author and reader, requiring a minimum of physical activity. The hands hold the book and from time to time turn the pages, the eyes move ever so slightly. It's as if, slowly but surely, the reader's body disappears, as it does in falling asleep. The mind is stimulated by an exciting book, but deep down it knows that at any time it can easily discontinue the excitement: it is in control of the situation. Also, it is being gratified and in some real sense nourished by the interaction between the book and itself, and, like the ap- petite that tells us we needn't eat another bite, the mind senses when it has had enough satisfaction. Like love and meaningful work, this satisfac- tion is fulfilling. It allows us to feel that, for the time being, all is well with the world. We fall asleep, not because we are bored, but because we are content. The whole process is only mildly creative, but, given the circum- stances, perhaps mildness is exactly what is called for. It would be wonderful to be able to read in one's sleep. I've done some reading in my dreams, usually of single poems that I'd "forgotten" I'd written. Every once in a great while, I'll dream that I'm reading some new or forgotten book, which turns out to be amazingly beautiful and revela- tory. Interestingly, those people who are able to control their dreams, to have what are called "lucid" dreams, purport that they are unable to make words appear and then to read them. According to one lucid dreamer, the letters "just won't hold still" (La Berge 102). Perhaps the brain cannot per- form these two functionscreate words and read themsimultaneously.6 Perhaps this is why some of us have trouble with normal reading when we're awake: unknowingly, in our heads we create words that compete with the words on the page, and in some sense the words just won't hold 104 Creative Reading91 still. The exercises in this chapter are designed to make you more aware of that process, to enable you to make the words fly away or hold still. 14. Stencils. In college, I became interested in filmmaking. I read books about directing, cinematography, lighting, and editing, and I started looking at movies differently. I began to notice how the camera framed each shot, how it zoomed in, pulled back, or panned, whether it was stationary or tracking, and whether the shot was a close-up, middle range, or distance one. It was particularly illuminating to focus my atten- tion on anything other than what the filmmaker wanted the audience to focus on. If a close-up of an actress's face emphasized the dreamy look in her eyes, I'd study her earrings. If a violent bar fight were in progress, I'd examine the decor. From time to time, I'd shut my eyes for a few minutes, to make myself more aware of the background music. Or I'd look only at red objects, or at shoes, or at one corner of the screen. I also started watching television analytically. To make it easier, I cut out various shapes of dark paper (such as construction paper) and placed them over the screen. Let's say you have a television set whose screen is 11 inches wide by 8 inches tall. Cut out a dark rectangle 7 inches wide by 4 inches tall and place it on the middle of the screen. (The static electricity in the screen will probably hold the paper in place.) Now watch television for an hour or so. Afterward, ask yourself how the mask affected the way you watched. What did you notice for the first time? What did you see that you probably wouldn't have seen? How much of the program did you "miss" because you couldn't see something essential to understanding it? Do you think that in some ways the show looked better or more interesting? Try other shapescircles, oblongs, triangles, irregular shapes and other sizes. Try combinations of shapes at various locations on the screen. Try taking sheets of paper the size of your screen and cutting shapes out of them, through which you can glimpse the programs. I've al- ways been partial to looking through shapes, rather than around them (the screen as keyhole?). Now apply the same procedure to reading. Take a piece of poster board (or heavy paper), cut out some shapes, place the board against the page, and read only what shows through the holes (Figure 17 a-d). Be- cause book pages are usually smaller than television screens, the holes should be commensurately smaller. You can read the same page at least eight different times with one stencil, by pointing it up, down, left, and right, and then by turning it over and again pointing it up, down, left, and right. Of course, you can point it in any direction you want, and, if you want to develop real 105 92 Creative Reading Techniques of the miss' o. in a car an an essenti ence to picture house unanno rugstore and walkin my wayfrom a st school Its would d on me t a momen e bottle bed, gro e under tpping do mbler, I a teur play. As I walk legs merg hite gird) arming m this is wh vers a a :s .K, pull up the ickerings tal Figure 17a. Grid example. EST COPY AVAILABLE 106 Creative Reading93 . worl I the car by wo yfoot m schoo would r me that I t I lay as stilli ethenfilhlrs. Whil ensation said by w y suntan d my hip he slug of fist into th and OK, woople were an oscillosc essen Figure 17b. BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 107 94 Creative Reading Techniques lar. Know of the mi Blow in a ite line re was lock what di d and at t was a wor hes Inn. g up to t r by the if on m rom sch irs would n me that ent I layundecided was stillin the su' my way over s, then fil gers. igh me mor s an essential pa do girdle. I lay warming m stom this t the phi, K, pull u at Mc Figure 17c. EST COPY AVAILASLE 108 Creative Reading95 was an ess ple were illoscope heart a the wind if he'd g ce betwe picture ouse una gstore an y way ba school al would r on me th la gin.moment I bow. The bottle w t of bed, grop e under m dow e table, ap till ed, t e ed m fist into t K, pu Figure 17d. EST COPY AVAILABLE 109 96 Creative Reading Techniques panache at this technique, you can move the stencil as you read. Other ways of breaking up the usual left -to-right pattern are: reading diagonally, from top left to bottom right, beginning in the upper right-hand corner of each page, and moving down, as shown in Figure 18 ("New Slant"). reading in a whirlpool pattern, beginning anywhere on the edge of the page and spiraling inward to the center, as shown in Fig- ure 18 ("Pere Ubu"). reading each page's topic sentences first, then running your eye down the center of the page, as in Figure 18 ("Skeleton"). reading as if along the frame of a picture, as in Figure 18 ("Bor- der Patrol"). These are just four of many possible patterns. 15. Sound Off. At home I sometimes watch television with the sound off, inventing the music, sound effects, and dialogue, out loud or silently. Sometimes I try to make the music and dialogue match the pic- ture, and sometimes I make them as divergent as possible, while still maintaining some coherence between them. The conscious mind always wants to make sense of things, to find a connection between seemingly disparate elements. As William Burroughs says: You take a television set, shut off the sound-track and put on any arbitrary sound-track and it will seem to fit. You show a bunch of people running for a bus in Picadilly and put in machine-gun sound effects and it will look like Petrograd in 1917; people will assume that they are running because they're being machine-gunned. (Odier 16) Woody Allen used a similar technique in his film What's Up, Tiger Lily? He took an ordinary Japanese crime film and, without knowing Japan- ese, wrote subtitles for it. The original story was about a bunch of Japanese crooks fighting over a briefcase containing narcotics. In Woody Allen's ver- sion, these thugs are fighting over a suitcase containing a recipe. Thus, the comic premise is established, and the humor falls into place around it. I've often wondered why schools with video equipment don't have their stu- dents take an old film and dub in new dialogue. It's a simple technique from which students would learn a lot, and have a good time doing it. You can do much the same with foreign language comic books and picture books, and with what are called in Spanish fotonovellas. (The fotonovella is a story told with photographs showing actors and actresses posed in actual locations.) In comic books and fotonovellas, the dialogue is presented in speech balloons, with narrative continuity ("The next day ...") in little rectangles, often in the upper left -hand corner of the frame. Creative Reading97 New Slant Skeleton. Read topic sentences first, then straight down the middle. Pere Ubu Border Patrol Figure 18. Four reading patterns. (Figure 19 shows an example.) I know a little Spanish, so when I come to a word or expression I don't know, I just make a wild guess and keep reading. Such versions of the stories can be more interesting and enter- taining than the originals. If you get really ambitious and want to extend this form of reading into writing, take some white tempera or White-Out and blank out all the 98 Creative Reading Techniques ME111111 COMO El. TENUE PERFU- ME QUE BROTA DE UNA ROSA, EN MI TRISTE CAMINO ju AMOR APA- r M" NO HAY DUDA, ES LA CANC Ids' QUE ACABA- OS DE ESCUCHAR I' Figure 19. Spanish comic. words. Then go back and write new ones. You might also want to cut out some of the boxes and rearrange them, as I did with artist Joe Brainard in Cherry, a comic strip work based on a fotonovella. (See Figure 20a-e.) Watching films and television without the sound or reading comics without the words forces you to imagine, to create, to take an active part in the experience, the way listening to the radio did years ago. 112 Creative Reading99 1[39 RON PMETT * JOE FAIINARP PAPER, INK, LIGHT, ERASER... ALL SORTS OF THINGS LIKE THAT. Figure 20a. Cherry comic strip by Joe Brainard and Ron Padgett. 113 100 Creative Reading Techniques LISTEN CHERRY_ ABOUT 5Molc04&...LE ME GIVE You MY ADDRESS._ SVDOENLY WHEN I PVT MY MarHAND ON THE gib.,SHADOW OF YOUR HEAP. .,. ,.r..-1 -3r--1, . e_.-z----THANKS. DO YOU SMOKE? AS HIS HELPER STRIDES AWAY.. 1 ...-- ( . GOD THIS TASTES GOopi 1 f :-.. .. Z-.., -/-I RATHER LIKEyov? 0.--.,-,11,.,111 ..p..P-PENcltii...40, .. . ei?. rili 1 i .. 51 1 .? 4 Figure 20b. 114 Creative Reading101 THEM, LADY TURNED AWAY IN DISGUSTTHIS MUST 6E THE WRONG ADDRESS. TAKE IT ANP 60. Figure 20c. 115 102 Creative Reading Techniques Figure 20d. 116 Creative Reading103 UT MI TELL YOU SOMETWINC. ABOUT OUR MoVEMCNT. Figure 20e. Ii? 104 Creative Reading Techniques 16. Foreign languages. It is highly challengingsome would say maddeningto try to make sense of words in an unfamiliar alphabet, such as Russian, and even more taxing to understand words written with an unfamiliar, non-alphabetic system, such as Chinese. With Russian and Chinese, I have some idea of where words begin and end, but not so with, say, Arabic, which to me looks like an uninterrupted flow of elegant curls, flips, and dots. As long as my patience holds out, though, I like letting my eyes pass over the words of foreign languages. Sometimes I begin to notice pat- terns, repetitions of letters, letter combinations, or characters. Hawaiian, for instance, looks liquid and rounded, with lots of vowels and vowel di- graphs. (A digraph is a combination of two or more vowels in which each vowel retains its distinct pronunciation. For example, the oa in "Samoa" is a digraph.) The entire Hawaiian language reminds me of the Hawaiian so- matic type, rounded, smooth, and liquid, like the long waves that roll in from the Pacific. A friend of mine improved his rudimentary Italian by a method that at first sounds simple-minded. He got some books in Italian, opened to the first page, and let his eyes go over the words until he got to the last page. Then he'd "read" another book. And so on. It was as though he were a child imitating adults by "play-reading." After a while he began to feel comfortable with certain patterns, and his vocabulary expanded naturally, because he saw new words over and over in various contexts. When I first went to France, I knew some college French, but I nei- ther spoke nor read French with ease. My reading in French had been lim- ited to lyric poetry and short fiction; I never read long novels. Living on a student budget in (by then) expensive Paris, I found that I had little money for "entertainment." My solution was to buy hefty novels in cheap paperback editions and read for long hours into the evenings. These books contained new vocabulary, unfamiliar turns of phrase, and slang. My understanding was spotty and, in a technical sense, erroneous, be- cause I tended to invent meanings for whatever was unfamiliar (see #15, Sound Off, aboVe). Gradually, though, I began to understand new words and phrases, not by looking them up in the dictionary but by deducing their meanings from their contexts. I noticed that certain writers had "pet" words and phrases. But what I gained was something more funda- mental than a larger vocabulary; I began to get a "feel" for the flow of the language, its syntactical structures, its tone. After some months of such reading, I found that I was no longer translating the French into English in my head (a form of subvocalization that not only slows us down but also distances us from the original text). I was reading "in" French. 118 Creative Reading105 At about that time, I also began to dream in French. In these dreams I spoke with astonishing fluency, and when I woke up, I had the strong impression that the French in the dream was not a phony, made-up French, but the real thing. In other words, when my conscious mind let go, I was able to speak more naturally. This was certainly true after a few glasses of wine: I found myself taking part in spirited conversations in French. Unfortunately I don't recall reading Frenth while tipsy. Perhaps it was like reading on "speed": all night you devour huge tomes with total understanding, but when you wake up late the following afternoon you can't remember all that much, and what remains most vivid is simply the exhilaration of the experience. Apparently, what we read in an "altered state" is stored in the short-term memory, where it quickly decays. Still, having a glass of wine is a good way to relax enough to let your eyes go over the words in, say, a Polish newspa- per. When you go back to reading English, English seems so clear and easy. When I say "English" I mean contemporary American. Contempo- rary English English is, of course, not the same as American English; Eliza- bethan English even less so, and so on, back to Middle English and Old English. Old English (or Anglo-Saxon) is virtually a foreign language. Try deciphering, for instance, the first passage below (from The Song of Caedmon, ca. A.D. 900): Nu [we] sculon herianHeofon-rices Weard, Meotodes meahteand His mod-zepanc, weorc Wuldor-Faeder,swa He wundra zehwaes, oece Dryhten,or onstealde. He aerest [ze] scopielda bearnum Heofon to hrofe,haliz Scieppend; pa middan-zeardmann-cynnes Weard, oece Dryhtenaefter teode firum foldanFrea eall-mihtiz. (Bornstein 6) Notice how much simpler and more "modern" is the next excerpt, from the early fourteenth century (the boldface p stands for Old English "thorn"): The bee has thre kyndis. Ane is, pat scho es never yfill, and scho es noghte with thaym pat will noghte wyrke, bot castys thaym owte and puttes thayme awaye. Anothire is, pat when scho flyes scho takes erthe in hyr fette, pat scho be noghte lyghtly overheghede in the ayere of wynde. The thyrde es, pat scho kepes clene and brychte hire wyngez. (Richard Rolle, in Bornstein 65) When I refer to "foreign languages," the term can here be stretched to in- clude forms of English other than standard: early English, dialects, and pidgin. 119 106 Creative Reading Techniques 17. Typing. In the early 1960s, I learned that one of the best ways to read an author was to type up his or her work at some length. I had typed up brief selections from other people's workindividual poems or paragraphs, bits of dialogue, extracts from an essaybut it wasn't until I typed an entire collection of poems (the 66 poems in the first edition of Ted Berrigan's Sonnets) that I understood how close you can get to an- other's work by this means. This procedure has several requirements. First, you must be able to type, obviously, but well enough so that it isn't just a big chore. Con- versely, you can't be too good a typist, the kind that can breeze along without even reading the original material. Many of us fall somewhere be- tween, perfect for this reading method. Typing Ted's poems made me realize that their basic unit of con- struction was less the clause or phrase than single words placed side by side ("like bricks," as he put it). I also noticed that he favored words that had a weightiness, a physical presence. Words like "shackled," "frolic- some," "unabridged," and "Berrigan." This vocabulary gave the work a cer- tain heft, which he kept from being burdensome by means of the light melody of vowels that played in and out. Using the carriage return, I was also able to focus more clearly on the way he used line breaks, and how these affected the momentum of the entire work. Later, typing John Ashbery's poetry just so I could read it more closely, I noticed how his use of conjunctions lent the work a great for- ward motion. I don't think I would have noticed these (and other) charac- teristics had I not slowed my reading to a rate closer to that of the creation of the original, simulating the position of the author. Choose a piece by a favorite writer. Type it up, at length. What do you notice that you hadn't noticed before? Variant for the tough of mind: do the above with the work of a writer you dislike. 18. Reading the blank page. Many writers have described their anxiety at facing the blank sheet of paper, a feeling readers do not share because, obviously, readers face pages with words (which for some has its own anxiety). Most of these writers also say that once they get started writing, the anxiety vanishes and they get involved in the act of writing, which sometimes is pleasurable and exciting. By learning to read the blank page',readers can obtain a similar pleasure and excitement. The method is simple. Get a bound volume with blank pages there are various sizes available from stationers, art stores, and card shops. (For the purposes of a preliminary experiment, you could even use 120 Creative Reading107 a printed book that has blank pages at the end.) Look at the top center of the first blank page, as if a title were there, and use as the title whatever pops into your head. Immediately move your eyes down and to the left, to where the text would start on a printed page, and move them from left to right, just as you would if you were reading, but all the time allowing that inner voicethe one that said the title to youto keep talking. Allow it to say anything it wants. Continue to move your eyes at your normal read- ing pace, until you get to the bottom of the page. Then go on to the next page: What you're doing is a sophisticated variation on the play-reading of young children. The first time I tried this method, I was surprised by how easy it was. I was sitting in my pickup truck in the parking lot of a supermarket at night, waiting for my wife. I lost interest in watching people get in and out of their cars, so I picked up the book on the seat next to me, a novel by Muriel Spark called A Far Cry from Kensington, and I read the first page, in which the main character, Mrs. Hawkins, says: You can set your mind to anything most of the time. You can sit peacefully in front of a blank television set, just watching nothing; and sooner or later you can make your own programme much bet- ter than the mass product. It's fun, you should try it sometime. (5) This suggestion seemed perfectly reasonable to me, but I stopped reading because the light in the parking lot was dim. I flipped idly through the book until I got to the blank pages at the end. These reminded me of a blank television set. Staring at a blank page, I tried Mrs. Hawkins's sugges- tion, and I heard words inside my head. When I tried to move my eyes in anything other than the normal pattern of reading (left to right and top to bottom), the words stopped or became garbled. But when I resumed the normal pattern, the words flowed inside me again. After the third and last blank page, I realized that this method had worked, but that I was unable to recall clearly the details of the first (blank) page. Now, when I want to recall everything, I tape record myself reading the blank pages aloud. The initial experiments resulted in something akin to stream-of consciousness, but the more I practice the method, the more control I have over the material, provided that I stick with the normal patterns of eye movement. I should add that reading the blank page is not to everyone's taste, and that initial attempts tend to last only five or ten minutes. It helps to loosen up the word flow by preceding the experiment with a few min- utes of what might be called "freetalking," in which you talk aloud to 121 108 Creative Reading Techniques yourself for a period of minutes, saying anything that comes into your head, so long as you do not stop talking. The act of reading the blank page reminds me of a book by the poet Aram Saroyan, published around 1970 by Kulchur Press. The "book" consisted of a ream of mimeograph paper with the author's name and copyright notice modestly rubber-stamped on the wrapping. The "book" baffled readers. (It also caused the publisher's distributor to discontinue their business relationship.) One also wonders about the reception of a book published in France under the title of Nihil: Rien by "Estrennes," which consisted of 100 blank pages.7 Could Saroyan's book be considered a fortuitous trans- lation of it? In quite a different context, Wolfgang Iser has discussed the ener- gizing role of what he calls the "blank" in fiction. For him, the blank can have various functions, but in general, it can be described as any missing element that acts as a "propellant for the reader's imagination, making him supply what has been withheld," because "as blanks mark the suspen- sion of connectabiity between textual segments, they simultaneously form a condition for the connection to be established" (The Act of Read- ing 194, 195). By not telling everything, a work of fiction allows the reader to imagine the missing elements, to participate more actively in the creation of that which arises between text and engaged reader. Works with as few blanks as possible, such as propaganda fiction, attempt to control the reader's mind, not to activate it. Iser presents a brief history of the novel in terms of how it has stim- ulated the reader to what he calls "acts of constitution." The eighteenth century saw the development of the fictitious readerin effect a charac- ter, to whom the book is addressedso that, as in Sterne's Tristram Shandy, the reader is subjected to the shifting perspectives of the narra- tor and the characters, while modulating his or her own responses so that those responses more or less match up with those expected of the ficti- tious reader (The Implied Reader 101-20). Things became more com- plex in the nineteenth century, when the narrator split off from the author, becoming, in effect, another character, whose point of view was no longer reliable. The number of blanks in the text increased in the twentieth century, culminating in Joyce's Ulysses, with its whole panoply of narrative techniques that the novel has evolved during its comparatively short history. But they are organized in an extraordinary way. They continually intersect, and this frag- mentation makes it impossible to find a point at which they might converge or from which they might be guided. Oser, The Act of Reading 207) 122 Creative Reading109 This disorientationthis onslaught of blanksmakes greater demands on the reader's ability to put it all together, to constitute the wholework. What might the next step be in this history? Perhaps one in which the reader takes an even more active role, finally gaining the upper hand over the author. That is partly what I mean by creative reading. 123 7 Other Voices Reading should come in different flavors. Gary Moore By the age of five or six, most children have witnessed oral and silent reading. They have been read to (or seen people reading aloud) and they have seen others absorbed in silent reading. In school, oral and silent reading are confirmed as the two basic modes. I remember my classmates reading aloud, stumbling over hard words and skipping small ones, their voices toneless or constricted, as the rest of us followed the text with our eyes. I remember their reading the words differently than I would have, and how uncomfortable their inepti- tude made me feel. This procedure of one student reading aloud as the others follow silently is now considered pedagogically unsound: it in- duces a herky-jerky, regressive pattern in the eye movements, the very op- posite of what the reading teacher is trying to inculcate. Likewise, choral reading is not so popular as it was; it causes students to read in a lumber- ing, singsong mass that distracts everyone from the text. In many classes, individual students read aloud to their classmates, who simply listen and do not follow the text silently with their eyes. Oral reading relates the students' speaking vocabulary to their read- ing vocabulary; it develops their ability to differentiate between tones and to project those differences; it lends color and bodya physical pres- enceto the text. Oral reading also makes it possible for students to begin to listen to themselves. These are a few of the many good reasons for reading aloud. Silent reading is trickier: it isn't always silent. In the first place, some people "move their lips," even going so far as to whisper the words. When I was a child, lip moving was associated with the way old people read; perhaps they read that way because they had never been told not to. My grandfather used to sit in his easy chair, reading the newspaper, un- aware that a steady stream of subtle hissing was issuing from his lips (in whispering, the s's always carry best). But just as we were forbidden to count on our. fingers, we were forbidden to move our lips during reading, mainly because the physical motion limits our speed. We can't say words as quickly as we can see them, and there's the added possibility that we might stumble over 110 124 Creative Reading111 words simply because we don't know how to pronounce them correctly. Pure sight readers are often able to read and understand manywords they've never said or heard, including words that can't be "sounded out" phonetically. A more subtle and interesting aspect of silent reading occurs when readers keep their lips still, but "hear" in their heads the words on the page. This silent hearing is called "subvocalization."Reading teachers are now taught to discourage both lip moving andsubvocalization. (My teachers never even brought up the idea of subvocalization.) Like lip mov- ing, subvocalization is frowned upon because it reduces reading speed: you can't hear words as quickly as you can see them. But, may I ask, what's the hurry? I like subvocalization. The books I most enjoy reading are those that have a definite "voice," a voiceprovided by the author. What this means is that the style is so distinct that we're able to communicate with a specific, real person: the author. The author does this by writing either in the first person or the third person, as in these examples: I woke up around 7 and lay in bed thinking about getting up. After about an hour I did finally manage to swing my feet over the side of the bed and to place them flat onthe cold marble floor. He woke up around 7 and lay in bed thinking about getting up. After about an hour he did finally manage to swinghis feet over the side of the bed and to place them flat on the cold marble floor. The difference in wordinga few changes of pronounsis very slight, but its effect on the tone is larger. The two examples "feel" different from one another. Some types of books lend themselves readily to either first- or third- person treatment. Autobiographies and nonfiction travelbooks are two of the simplest, most direct uses of the first person. (Gertrude Stein, always exceptional, wrote somebody else's autobiography: The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas.) But, as we saw in the previous chapter, the first person is not always so cut and dried. In fiction, for instance, the "I" may not be the author; it might be a character created by the author to tell the story: the narrator. Although we usually assume a bond of trust between the author and us, we cannot make such an assumption between the narrator and us. Sometimes the narrator tells the story in a self-serving way, or sim- ply lies. And what if the narrator turns out to be a lunatic? We cannot "12 5 112 Other Voices blame the author for the mental or moral condition of the narrator,any more than we can blame any other character for such conditions. The voice in third-person writing is less thorny. Here itmay be as- sumed to be that of the author, with no tricky intermediary. However, the voice can have great range, from the statistical report that is highly objec- tive to the novel whose author is so engaged in the story that heor she cannot resist interrupting it to comment, praise, or blame. Although most books are cast in essentially either one modeor the other, some have internal variations. Nonfiction in the thirdperson often is interspersed with quotations in the first person. Some first-personnov- els might be more aptly called first-people novels: different chaptersare narrated by different characters. Such novels often use those characters' names as the chapter title ("Chapter 1: Bill. Chapter 2: Frederika"). In both these variations, though, the reader knows at all times who is speaking. This does not hold true for certain modern works. In Joyce's Finnegans Wake, we are hard pressed to say who is speaking. Is it theau- thor? A character? Or characters? The same goes for Eliot's "Waste Land," Ashbery's poem "The Skaters," or Ted Berrigan's Sonnets. Ina burst of im- modesty, I'll add my own work to this group, a novel called Antlers in the Treetops, written in collaboration with Tom Veitch. The voice in Antlers shifts every few paragraphs, from author(s), to one character, thenan- other, then to an entirely different author or set of authors, requiring the reader to invent a new voice every few paragraphs. For, if we become involved with a text, we tend to invent a voice to hear it in. We invent what we assume is an appropriate tone of voice, such as the laconic, manly voice of Hemingway in the Nick Adams stories, the exquisite, sometimes peevish voice of Sei Shonagon in her Pillow Book, the sophisticated, subtly modulated voice of Henry James in The Golden Bowl, the robust voice of Whitman in Leaves of Grass, the angular and de- ceptively quiet voice of Emily Dickinson in her poems. Sometimes when I read such authors, I "hear" these voices quite clearly. This subvocalization has a bonding effect on me and the words. That itcauses me to read slower is anything but a drawback, it is exactly what I want! I love the feel- ing that the author is speaking to me, as if he or she were in theroom with me. This is particularly exciting if the author lived far away and long ago. Inventing these voices can be, I admit, shaky business. If you misin- terpret the material, you intensify the error by inventing a voice based on the misinterpretation. Inventing the voices of writers from other cultures can be particularly risky. For some, the temptation, when reading Chinese poetry, might be to "hear" it as if its authors were essentially one big lyri- cal Charlie Chan; that is, our cultural stereotypes can force widely differ- 126 Creative Reading113 ent works into one mold. In doing so, we take the work one step farther away from the original, just as the translation into English did, andthe far- ther away we get from the origin, the less of its character remains. Work that has little character in the first place is immune to such misinterpretation. Dry, official, toneless writing is dry, official, and tone- less in translation, and it has the same "voice" as that which issues from the mouths of so many public and private officials. These people speak unnaturally because their speech imitates, and rather poorly, at that, for- mal, written language. When our education does not succeed in teaching us to think in complex structures, we cannot speak in complex structures either. We cannot utter long, grammatically complex (and correct) sen- tences; we cannot arrange our thoughts into logical groups; and we can- not order such groups into a cohesive whole. To compensate, we use technical and official jargon, fashionable "buzz" words, and important- sounding latinisms. Alas, such a way of speaking precipitates into the cul- ture, like acid rain. Inventing accurate voices for the texts written by such people can hardly be called invention; it is, rather, an exercise in memory. In public, the speaker talks like bad writing, thinks like bad writing, and in private creates more bad writing; the reader immediately recognizes this universal voice, so unmistakable on the page. The whole chain of thinking, writing, and reading not only has no originality, but also has no connection with the natural voice (in both senses of the word). If only some of these people who make speeches and give news conferences would talk to us the way they talk (we assume) at home! If we cannot have clear public speech of intellectual character, let us have at least a lit- tle down-home authenticity. But we have little of that. So what are we to do with such dull mate- rial? Well, we can simply not read it. Or we can try voice substitution. It's an old technique used by co- medians, but never, so far as I know, applied to reading. All you have to do is substitute a "voice" different from that of the text. For example, when reading the text of a dictator, imagine it being delivered by Donald Duck. If the text of a "tobacco industry spokesman" bores you, imagine it in the voice of a professional wrestler. If you are driven up the wall by the plati- tudes of a school commencement address, imagine it being delivered in the voice of Marlene Dietrich or Hattie McDaniel. This is similar to a method used by comic musician Spike Jones. The typical Spike Jones song begins with soothing, romantic material, as in "Cocktails for Two": Oh what delight to Be given the right to 127 114 Other Voices Be carefree and gay once again, No longer slinking Respectably drinking Like civilized ladies and men, No longer need we miss A charming scene like this: In some secluded rendez-vous.... Suddenly a maniacal voice shrieks "Whoopee!," a police whistle sounds, a gun fires, and the music goes completely wild. The vocalist maintains his suavity, but is constantly undercut with burlesque sound effects (his crooning of "And we'll enjoy a cigarette" is followed by an emphysemic cough). This undercutting radically transforms the original material. It's a shame more young people don't know about Spike Jones; he is a delight- ful way to learn about broad parody and burlesque. Jones was the master of his style, but his range was narrow. You might want to try more subtle transformations. In any case, combine whatever voice with whatever material you wish, keeping in mind that the greater the difference between voice and text, the more bizarre (and sometimes comic) the effect. A similar set of techniques can be applied to reading good writing. Let's say you are hooked on the crime novels of Elmore Leonard. Let's also say you have a favorite uncle who used to run numbers. Why not imagine his voice reading Elmore Leonard to you? That's what the companies that produce spoken arts records do: they try to match up the voice with the material. They paired off Irish actress Siobhan McKenna and James Joyce's writing; they hired Jay Silverheels (who played Tonto in the Lone Ranger radio programs and movies) to read Native American poems and tales; they got spooky Vincent Price to read the horror tales of Edgar Allan Poe. You can use anyone's voicea famous person's or a friend'sas the "voice" of the book. When, after many attempts, I finally broke the Proust barrier and got so far into Remembrance of Things Past that I never wanted to get out, I found that the book provided its own voice for me to hear, the voice of Marcel, the narrator. It was a cultured, sensitive voice. One af- ternoon a friend came by for a nice, long chat. That night, when I re- sumed my reading, I heard his voice instead of Marcel's, as I recorded in a poem: Reading Proust I am aware of the volume, the pages, their size and color 128 Creative Reading115 and their texture, with edges and their words set in blocks surrounded with margins, And I am aware too of the meaning of the words and sentences, the majestic flotilla of the paragraphs in the flow of the storyI recognize the characters and remember them from page to page, and I note the art of the writing and the quality of the author's mind, and I see him writing his book, the words of which I hear being read aloud to me by a friend, whom I saw today and who had stayed in my mind, offering, while there, to perform this service. Literal oil flowed across Then I went on reading (Padgett, Tulsa Kid 28) Given my friend's personality, the substitution worked fine. My friend be- came "Marcel" for that night. The next day, I went back to using the origi- nal Marcel voice, refreshed by the respite from it. The experience of hearing a friend's voice in my head was more frequent when I was in my early twenties. In those days I would often spend 10 or 12 hours with Ted Berrigan, the poet, who was a Rabelaisian conversationalist with a highly distinct way of talking. Each time we parted, his voice continued to reverberate in my head. Everything I read I heard in his voice. Everything I said sounded as if he were saying it. Of course, the remembered voice "decayed" over the next few days, and I re- turned to a more various way of hearing. (Every time I see the word vari- ous, though, I hear a little of Frank O'Hara, who used the word variously so beautifully in one of his poems, and of Lionel Trilling, who used it fre- quently in his lectures.) People who are young enough to be impression- able but old enough to do good imitations are prime candidates for learning how to assimilate voices, store them, and use them in their read- ing. It also helps, of course, to live in a culturally diverse society, although I suppose that anyone with a television set has access to a wide variety of voices. We should not overlook the possibility of applying incongruous voices to good writing. When the poetry of Wallace Stevens starts to 429 116 Other Voices sound overintellectualized, I sometimes "hear" it in the voice of a South- ern redneck. T S. Eliot's poetry is particularly delightful when heard in a strong Oklahoma accent ("Aprul eh-is thuh croolist munth"). I like to imagine how William Carlos Williams' poemsso Americanwould sound in an Italian accent. I would like to be able to "hear" an Eskimo cast perform A Midsummer Night's Dream, a Jamaican read Paradise Lost. We can also combine authors in any number of ways; we can, for in- stance, imagine T S. Eliot in the unforgettable voice of Truman Capote, or vice versa. Such unusual pairings result in what amounts to burlesque, but frequently in the burlesque you see clearly an aspect of the writer's work that was previously too familiar to be noticed. The forest and the trees are separated. Our own voices are the most familiar of all. That is to say, when we speak we are so accustomed to hearing ourselves that we cease to notice how we sound, unless there are unusual circumstances, such as a "frog in the throat" or a tape recording. Most people, hearing themselves on tape for the first time, ask, "Is that me? Do I really sound like that?" The reason the voice on the tape sounds different is that we are receiving the sound waves solely from outside our heads, whereas when we speak, we hear the sound from both inside and outside our heads. The new experience of hearing ourselves only from the outside makes most of us feel that we sound horrible, partly because we are distressed to find that we aren't what we had always thought we were, partly because we become self- conscious when attentionlike a camerais directed on us. In learning to read better and more creatively, however, attention to self is exactly what is called for. You might ask yourself: Do I subvocalize? Do I subvocalize sometimes or always? Does the subvocalized voice flicker in and out? Do I subvocalize when it isn't necessary (as in reading the con- tents listing on a food can)? Do I subvocalize in different voices? If so, how do I arrive at those voices? Do I subvocalize in only one voice? What or whose voice is it? Many people use a combination of the above. They don't subvocal- ize single words (like STOP on a street sign) or brief phrases; nor do they subvocalize certain types of material, such as scientific and mathematical data, lists of facts, flat nonfiction, and the like. They do subvocalize some poetry (where the sound can be crucial to the whole experience of the work) and fiction (they might "hear" British novels in an English accent, 130 Creative Reading117 for instance). But, by and large, the single most common voice used in subvocalization seems to be a ghost version of one's own speaking voice. This voice is the old reliable of voices, the one that arises naturally when needed, when no other voices suggest themselves. (It is also the one we hear when we think in words.) So in a sense, when we use our own voice for subvocalization, we are not simply reading to ourselves, we are appro- priating the text, modeling it to our own tone, reshaping its emotional contours. Without changing the words, we are rewriting the text. This discussion of voice in reading would be incomplete without mention of a relatively recent phenomenon: the availability of the au- thor's actual voice. In the past 40 years, there has been a tremendous in- crease in the number of live performances and recordings by authors reading their own work. Before the 1950s, relatively few American authors read their work to large groups in public; only one poet comes readily to mind: Vachel Lindsay. Coffeehouse poetry readings were not uncommon in Greenwich Village and the Lower East Side of New York in the 1920s and 1930s, but their audiences were small and localized. Most of the poetry readings in the 1940s and early 1950s were by "distinguished" older poetsmostly men, although Gertrude Stein was an exceptionwho were invited to read their poetry or perhaps deliver a talk at a university. The big break- through occurred when Dylan Thomas toured America. Thomas's musi- cal and dramatic intonations swept listeners off their feet; you can get some idea of the distinctive power of his voice by listening to any of the recordings still readily available. I remember hearing his recording of "Fern Hill" when I was in high school. I had read the poem before, but I wasn't prepared for the great lyrical blast of his voice. It sent me back to the printed page, and when I got there and silently read the poem again, I could hear his voice "singing" it to me. To this day I subvocalize Dylan Thomas's voice when reading his work. His voice is congruent with his work, as is Wallace Stevens's, Edna St. Vincent Mil lay's, Allen Ginsberg's, and those of many others. Other voices come as surprises. I read John Ashbery's early work for several years before hearing him read, and I subvocalized a voice for it, a voice something like John Wayne's. Ashbery's real voice came as a shock. It seemedpartly as a result of my expectationsrather nasal. Later I ad- justed to his voice, which after all was not so bad, and which blended per- fectly with his new work, "perfectly" because in fact I was unable to read it without hearing his voice. Did I understand his work any better, then? Some might argue that my original fantasy (the John Wayne voice) was, in fact, a more accurate 131 118 Other Voices representation of what has been called Ashbery's status as an "executive" poet. Is there always an advantageor any advantagein being ac- quainted with the author's speaking voice? After listening to hundreds and hundreds of writers read their work, I've come to the conclusion that in some cases it helps, in some cases it doesn't. Some good writers read their own work poorly, making you wish you had stayed home with your own fantasy of the voice. Some writers who seem good read their work in such a way that you realize, hearing them, that their work isn't very good after all; its faults are revealed by the glare of public presentation. Other writers, whose work sometimes seems difficult on the page, come through with perfect clarity when they read it aloud. Here I'm thinking particularly of poets Kenneth Koch and Edwin Denby. Koch's gentle irony is perfectly clear and appropriate, as are Denby's shifting tones of everyday speech. When one goes back to their work on the page, the writing remains forever clarified. When hearing an author read, though, it's important to keep in mind that reading styles change, just as literary styles do. We shouldn't be disconcerted, for exam- ple, by the "old-fashioned" voice of "modernist" Ezra Pound. The great opportunity we as readers havewith multitudes of pub- lic readings, tapes, and records now availableis to be able to invite not only an author's work into our minds, but his or her voice as well. We have the opportunity of measuring the author's voice against whatever voice we had created for that author, and from there, of pondering the rel- ative qualities of both. From this we move toward a greater understanding of what the work is (or isn't). Here are some other ways to experiment with reading aloud: 1. Duets: one person reads silently while another person reads a different text aloud. What effect does this have on the silent reader? How does the selection of material change the effect? Alternative: have both read different texts aloud. 2. Choral readings: a large group of peoplea classroom-full, for instancesimultaneously read different texts, creating a sort of sound en- vironment. This can be orchestrated, to make it resemble the general hum of conversation in a restaurant, theater, or sports arena; to make it harmo- nious (as in a round such as "Row, Row, Row Your Boat"); to make it eu- phonious (perhaps creating an abstraction using a text with similar vowel and/or consonant sounds); to make it chaotic, with everyone reading completely different texts, either whispered or shouted. A variation of choral reading is to have a group read in unison a text that is identical except for, say, its nouns. (Such a text can easily be pre- 132 Creative Reading119 pared by having each person fill-in-the-blanks.) What effect does such a reading have on the feel of the text? This exercise is not unlike the singing of "Happy Birthday to You," when everyone is in unison except when it comes to the name of the birthday person, who, it often turns out, is called by several different names. When the group momentarily divides at that point, the song always gets a little shaky. Another option is to create word environments. Have the group si- multaneously read aloud words that suggest: the ocean (water, waves, whitecaps, splash, glug, crash, shhhh, whoosh, etc.) the desert (sand, palm tree, hot, dry, lizard, thirsty, sun, gasp, etc.) night (cool, dark, quiet, crickets, moon, stars, sleep, etc.) the woods (trees, green, wind, leaves, crunch, quiet, buzz, calm, alone, etc.) A variation of these word scenes is to combine words and sounds, as in: an orchestra, in which the sounds of the instruments are sup- ported by a basso continuo of sentences of words about music a barnyard or zoo, in which animal sounds are mixed with words about animals a factory, with whistles, chugs, booms, and clicks mixed with words about manufacturing. These exercises are fun in themselves, but they also set us to think- ing about how to read aloud material that might be considered unread- able. How, for instance, would you read aloud what the man is saying in Figure 21? Figure 21.Cussing man. 133 120 Other Voices The picture of the cussing man is a clue that makes the typographi- cal symbols (in the speech balloon) into international symbols. Readers in Martinique or the Philippines or Albania would be able to "read" what he is saying. How would you read the semicolon in Ron Loewinsohn's poem (Figure 22)? Obviously, the poet has created this poem more as a treat for the eye than for the ear, which is partly why it's challenging to try to fig- ure out a good way to read it aloud. SEMICOLON; for Philip Whalen Semicolon;like the head & forearm of a man swim- ming, the arm in foreshortened perspective, his head looking away;his mouth's open in exaggerated 0 inhaling on the other side, his wrist's bent just about to re-enter the surf ;water dripping from the fingertips;semicolon Or a whole row of them 9999999 ,,,,, 9.9999111919/79199999/99/9919911 swimming off to Catalina Figure 22. Ron Loewinsohn poem. Take a look at the poem in Figure 23, by Paul de Vree. At first, it looks like a bunch of random letters and parentheses thrown up into the air, but if you look at it for a moment you'll notice that the letters are those of the title of a famous song, with something else thrown in. How would you read this poem aloud? I think I'd have four or five friends read it with me. I'd have everyone read or sing the words, out of synch, and perhaps with fluttery voices, since the parentheses remind me of birds fluttering around in the airy springtime Paris sky. Another exercise is called megaphone. As you read any text aloud, get louder and louder, then softer and softer, then louder again, then softer again, and so on. Read so the change in volume has nothing to do with the text's content. There are several variations on megaphone, based on pitch. As you read aloud, start with your voice pitched low and have it gradually go up 134 Creative Reading121 P atd ( L.o L (,o , ,,, 4; ..,, 0t) r .i, 1 ) ))cz ID ) r r Cati0 e--le 43:;-4),kc°.7a---N'El18 )fe'-'')) 01 M Mm....,0.1. a Figure23. Paul de Vree poem. as high as it can; then back down, and so on. Or have a pitch "twist" on each word, so that the voice rises on each word: I want to go home or falls on each: Thf I want to go home or alternates, one word with a rising twist, the next with a falling: I want to go home or with no change at alla monotone: I want to go home. 135 122 Other Voices It's easier to read in a monotone if you imagine you're a robot or if you simulate a computer-generated voice: Intentionally reading in a mo- notone is particularly helpful for children whose oral reading tends to be toneless; the exaggerated monotone makes them realize that there is such a thing as tone and that reading aloud sounds so much better when it has tone, the way ordinary speech does. Another voice skill valuable for reading is totally silent: listening. Listening is a form of reading, insofar as we "listen" to the words of what we read. Try the following exercise. Close your eyes and open your ears: that is, focus your attention on what you hear. Keep listening until you think you've heard everything there is to hear at the moment, sounds in the far distance, sounds up close (such as that of your own breathing). If there are voices around you, so much the better. Notice how you immedi- ately become more aware of all these sounds. Here's another listening exercise. Ask a friend to talk with you while your eyes are closed. Pay close attention to every word your friend says, not just to the gist of them. Notice the tone, volume, and pace, and check to see if the words come in complete sentences or in little frag- ments. Then have your friend close his or her eyes too and continue the conversation. After a while, do you notice that you feel closer to your friend? Such a feeling of closeness occurs whenever we really listen to the other person, undistracted by other sounds, including those of our own thoughts. We interlock with our friend's words, and, in that sense, we show respect. We show that we feel that our friend's words are worthy of close attention. Reading teachers, especially those in "whole language" classrooms, have become more aware of the importance of listening. Discussing the reading abilities of the deaf and the blind, Jeanne Chall says: Common sense tells us that the deaf would be the better readers because they can see the print. Yet the blind are the better readers. This happens because reading is closer to hearing than to seeing. (Stages 128) Good teachers consider listening an active skill that must be practiced and developed, especially in light of the passive hearing most children grow up with, sitting in front of the television, which, after all, is primar- ily a visual medium, one whose words (and music) are often not worth lis- tening to anyway. But even those who grow up without television need to maintain their listening power, to overcome their natural tendency to- ward aural numbness. And if one wants to read more creatively, the ability to listen carefully and continuously is even more crucial. 136 Creative Reading123 Finally, here are two exercises, for one person. 1. Pick any book and alternate reading silently and orally from it, al- ternating words, phrases, or sentences (the larger the syntactical unit, the easier the exercise). 2. How slowly can you read aloud and still retain the meaning of a sentence? Try reading any text aloud, slower and slower, until you're say- ing it word by word. After you say a word, keep your eyes on it; don't peek ahead to the next one. When you've really slowed down to, say, one word per 10 seconds, notice what your mind does in the silent intervals. After doing any of the exercises in this chapter, you'll find that your normal reading has become smoother, easier, and clearer. 137 8 New Reading The twentieth century has changed the way we read, and the change has been relatively abrupt. The proliferation of advertising, the "ex- plosion" of the media, and the influence of modernism in literature have caused us to perceive words in ways foreign to our ancestors. By this I don't mean to trot out the old "what would Aristotle think if he saw computer graphics" type of truism. I mean to suggest that the change goes deeper, that our fundamental sense of what reading is and how to do it has changed. Imagine that you are driving down a highway and you see, over on the right, the word "GAS" six hundred miles tall. The letters rest lightly on the ground, from where they sweep up through the clouds, their tops disappearing beyond the stratosphere. You would be astonished, like a hillbilly in the 1930s seeing a billboard for the first time. Until then the only words he might have ever seenperhaps in the Biblewere tiny. But you are sophisticated. You have seen faces 50 feet tall, moving and talking, as real as life. You are not like 91-year-old Harold Gough who, at his first movie as a boy in rural Vermont around 1912, saw a train head- ing toward him and got up and ran for his life. You have seen words writ- ten in vapor across the sky, you have seen them flow around the tops of buildings like a revolving halo, you have seen them fly toward you in dif- ferent colors and explode (on TV and in computer games). You've seen them flash on and off, buck like a horse, and spell themselves out in neon script. You've seen them in a hundred different typefaces, big, fat, skinny, curly, leaning, antique, shadowed. You may have seen them deployed in fascinating new ways, combined with sound and images, in CD- ROMs.' Many of us have experienced these new presentations of words, which might be called the popular side of creative reading. Most of these forms are now so ordinary that we take them for granted. Less common are the new ways of reading necessitated by modern literature. In 1897, when Stephane Mallarme's poem "A Throw of the Dice" was published, the literary page was given a new look: the lines, set in various sizes, were scattered around the page, so that the white space around the words suddenly took on an importance of its own. The poem even called into question whether or not we were to read it one page at a time or across the two-page spread. Christian Morgenstern's poem "Night Song" used symbols instead of alphabetical letters: it didn't need to be 124 138 Creative Reading125 translated from the original German. The shaped poetry of the pastin which a poem had the physical shape of its subject matterexperienced a rejuvenation in the hands of Guillaume Apollinaire (see his poem "It's Raining" in Figure 24) and helped spawn what became known as "con- crete poetry." The Italian Futurist poets espoused a kind of writing they called parole in liberta, or "words set loose" (Figure 25); words, some- times truncated or dislocated, appeared in Cubist collages and paintings. In Switzerland, Germany, and France, the Dada poets experimented with chance poetry and sound poetry, as did Kurt Schwitters, the inventor of a one-man art movement, Merz. Apollinaire and Blaise Cendrars brought "found" elements into their poetry, such as the overheard chit-chat in the former's conversation-poem "Monday Rue Christine" and the latter's won- derful plagiarizations in his Nineteen Elastic Poems and Documentaries. Both poets were also attracted to advertising: You read the handbills the catalogs the posters that really sing That's poetry and there are newspapers if you want prose this morning2 Gertrude Stein's experimental repetitions made her prose pieces sound like delirious children's stories. Poets such as e. e. cummings took words apart and put them back together in unusual configurations. James Joyce, in Finnegans Wake, let the words run on in a kind of cosmic babble. Obviously, modern literature has caused us to read in new ways.3 But older literature does too. It all depends on what we mean by "new." Is it new as in "new to humankind" or new as in "new to me"? For example, is reading e. e. cummings for the first time really any more "new" than reading Chaucer (in Middle English) for the first time? The main differ- ence between reading contemporary literature and reading classical liter- ature is that the latter has a large body of criticism surrounding it, from which we can learn how other people have read it. Contemporary litera- ture has fewer such "support systems." In deciding how to read a piece of writing that is radically new, we have to rely on our own nerve, gut reac- tion, and sense of what is beautiful and valuable. The more flexible we are in our reading, the more likely we are to be able to "handle" new work. If our literature is to be various and bold, flexibility in the way we read is crucial, because ultimately it is we who decide whether a work becomes part of our literature or just another forgotten book. Finally, modern experimental literature has not only made us aware that there are many ways to read, but it has also intensified the traditional 139 126 New Reading IT'S RAINING I iaI I nj j 'sdaa tt rat ee aIhnis i sc nosj I i afis nr garj I i e it wna e oi r mnj rf egnaa n gi I a isI Yci i oI nn ouoggi u cmdwI eaaIsi sr i n sI e et Ia orrw i utcIs fs gi nrc tcccIs hni t cg b YoIsai uinn wnstdd ctg c dy eraI 0 ansu d d c0caa afisi 13 d tn0 III cyrwe v ec cI ca ni wPn f0 d ra n I nIs 0d c t aI Isdoiso cr cw o i mpac cI uis mert o5 i rs cm Y uu I a r n Figure 24.Apollinaire's "It's Raining" calligram. 140EST COPY PTA= R.BLE Creative Reading127 CONSORIANTO VOCA LO 111 Dol volume. di prussino pubbhcazione: "It PAIRIOLIIIBEIRII IFUTURISTlio 4ALIDO DALRA, BALLA, DETUDA, BOECIONLAILUZL CMAPIOLI, CANOIULLO, CARRA, CAVALLI, BRUNO COBRA. D. CORRINTI, EA. DEL OUERRA, DELLA PLORESTA, L POLOORE, A. FRANCNI, C. OOVONI. OUIZZIDORO, PiETCA JANNELLI, MARINETTI, ARMANDO MAZZA,PRESENZiNitAATTOLI,EIADIANTE,EIETTIMELLL TODINI, asi4 4 + 44.& ,t4R- 0 k t'?.b \\\11\ sss3STs + + +r BEL I(xLt. +4+ a/ ;1%k Werfalisatlee ,, inualcse et 4-441..1'te:M note 7,44e,,,,..4, -.....<-4.,,, ---4,..-.0;i:. cc.\'-'10ee,ts4 \, PRUSS/EArs, 11 o4.4,..4, x mocaotnnarlizalingmendool "11 dOnl IC X + x Mak* vronkap x x IC x x MOO angott anima angolin vrontuip diroor dkanku 9das0Bala- ibbh Baba ptcplcvlaAAAR trID melokranu bimblm nu tonuEr to ora+ Es otouto4viarvatvar 11ARINETTI,parolibero.IdontagteVellate ¢ Strade x Job) Figure 25.Marinetti's "Parole in liberta." BEST COPYAVAILABLE 141 128 New Reading intimacy of simply reading a book, spending time alone with an author in a quiet corner. As third grader Namah McKay put it:4 Myself ! I love to read, in a chair, in a bed, in a warm blanket, in front of a fire. My head is like a library, with many words and pages. I like the quietness, I like the quietness like a gentle breeze, I am like a lake, with boats of books crossing over me. 142 9 Reading in Unusual Situations Sometimes people read in unusual situations and for different reasons in each of them. Poet C. K. Williams has written memorable poems about such situations, such as one about the guy who, starting to change a tire on a miserably cold January night, starts reading a page of an old newspaper he finds in the trunk (53). Some people are able to read in cars or on trains, without motion sickness. Books such as On the Road might best be read in a car roaring down the highway. I found it extremely pleasant to ride in a small train across Sicily while comparing every bend in the track with its precise de- scription in a guidebook: Again the track crosses Gaggera Stream, suddenly entering a long tunnel under Segesta Hill, and describes two long bends to the north, gaining elevation. After four other short tunnels (at 94 kilo- meters), Segesta Temple Station (elev. 243 m), 1.5 km north of the ruins. (Touring Club Italiano, 222-23, my translation) Sometimes when I couldn't understand a sentence, I'd just look out the window and see what was being described. At these moments it was as if the reader's vision of the text, normally internal, had suddenly gone exter- nal. There was a delightful interplay between outside, text, and inside. I took advantage of a trip to Martinique to reread Aime Cesaire's long poem Notebook of a Return to the Native Land (the land being Mar- tinique). Originally I had found its language too rich and violent, but when I drove through the Martiniquin rain forestthe first I had ever seen, with its monstrous trees, huge flowers, and dense lushnessthat leads up to Mont Pele, the volcano that once sent a wave of lava over the island's largest town, killing its inhabitants in a few minutes, Cesaire's ex- plosive lushness seemed not only appropriate, but normal: I would rediscover the secret of great communications and great combustions. I would say storm. I would say river. I would say tor- nado. I would say leaf. I would say tree. I would be drenched by all rains, moistened by all dews. I would roll like frenetic blood on the slow current of the eye of words turned into mad horses into fresh children into clots into curfew into vestiges of temples into pre- cious stones remote enough to discourage miners. Whoever would not understand me would not understand any better the roaring of a tiger. (43-45) 129 143 130 Reading in Unusual Situations In the context of its natural setting, the poem seemed far less "ex- otic," and I felt, perhaps in a moment of self-delusion, that I was closer to the center of the poem, closer to feeling what it might have been like to have been the young Aime Cesaire writing it in the late 1930s. (It doesn't matter that he wrote it in France.) This type of reading helps us to be more where we are, or rather, to be there more fully. Other times, we read to be elsewhere. The worst "escapist litera- ture" (with sarcastic emphasis on "literature") is churned out for readers who want to identify with glamorous characters leading romantic and ad- venturous lives. I don't see anything wrong with a little escapism. It de- pends on what you're escaping from. If you're running from your personal problems, escapism is perhaps not such a good idea. If, on the other hand, you're fleeing an unpleasant reality over which you have no control, escapism seems pretty healthy to me. For instance, if you ride the subway to work in New York City every day, you eventually might read to block out the surroundings; it is far better to be on the dark parapet of a castle on the windy moor, than in a noisy, crammed, airless subway car. In such cases, reading to be somewhere else is eminently sane. And if you can escape to England with Barbara Pym or to Detroit with Elmore Leonard, so much the better. Besides, "being somewhere else" is at least as much emotional as it is temporal or geographical. Where, mentally, are the people who, in big cities, read as they walk down the street? They walk slowly and they read slowly, glancing up from time to time to confirm their peripheral vision. The rest of us give them wide berth, as if they are blind. They take advantage of wait- ing at stop lights, and if deeply engrossed, they stand on the corner as the light changes from red to green to red to green. They have plenty of time. They are enclosed in the privacy of their own world. It is as though they are at home, taking a nice, long, leisurely bath. Seeing peo- ple reading as they walk has a soothing effect on others, because what is being read is more important at that moment than the outside world. It is a public declaration of faith in the inner life, just as strolling slowly in conversation with a good friend is a public declaration of the value of friendship. Reading while strolling is a distinctly urban pleasure. I find it hard to imagine anyone reading while walking through the woods, along a mountain trail, or across a desert or ice floe: nature is inhospitable to am- bulatory reading.' The same may be said for certain cities, especially the old parts of towns that have twisting streets, narrow sidewalks, and cob- blestone paving. Only cities with streets in grid patterns, generous side- walks, and moderate pedestrian traffic allow for reading while strolling. 144 Creative Reading131 On the other hand, nature can provide extraordinary situations for reading, if one stops and sits down, on a rock, log, a bed of dry leaves or pine needles, or, most comfortable of all, a mossy patch in sunlight. The timelessness of nature makes it easy to fall into the timelessness of the book, which is one of the reasons city dwellers like to read in the park. Natural settings form a precinct free from the pressures of "getting and spending" (as Edwin Denby put it) in which one always has to know what time it is. Reading Walden alone in the woods makes it easy to feel that it is 1846 and that Thoreau is just across the woods a piece. You might not want to pay him a visit, but that is not the point. The point is that in such a setting you can tune him in and out at will with greater clarity because his signals, so to speak, are coming from a nearer loca- tion. Your pupils have dilated as the light gradually thins out and grows dim, so that when you can no longer make out the words, you look up and are surprised that early evening is upon you. It is time to get up and go home to dinner. How long had you been sitting there? An hour? Three hours? Since 1846? Such extended periods of absorption are more difficult in towns and cities, where the hubbub of daily life constantly reminds you that time is passing, passing in fits and starts. You sit in your easy chair, reading a book. A police car goes by, its siren wobbling out extraterrestrial fre- quencies. You notice and wonder, "Going where?" You get back into the book. The phone rings. Who'd be calling you at two in the afternoon? "Are you busy?" No, just reading. Finally you go back to your book for a while. The kids across the hall come home from school. Bang bang on the door. "Mami, apra la puerta!" It must be 3:10 or so. And so on. Each break in concentration is a reminder that time is passing, what we might call "real" time. The flow of time in the book will not have real time in it. The farther we are from real time, the more likely it is that we will be able to become fully absorbed in the flow of time in the book. Reading a book such as Walden in the woods is more complete not only because the setting is sympathetic, but also because it is conducive to timelessness. As Thoreau put it, The oldest Egyptian or Hindu philosopher raised a corner of the veil from the statue of the divinity; and still the trembling robe re- mains raised, and I gaze upon as fresh a glory as he did, since it was I in him that was then so bold, and it is he in me that now reviews the vision. No dust has settled on that robe; no time has elapsed since that divinity was revealed. That time which we really im- prove, or which is improvable, is neither past, present, nor future. My residence was more favorable, not only to thought, but to serious reading, than a university. ... (352) 145 132 Reading in Unusual Situations What is the urban correlative? How do we read an urban novel among urban "vibrations," but with a sense of timelessness? By reading very late at night or very early in the morning, when time "means" less. Going to college in New York City I often stayed up all night reading, going out for coffee or a stroll just before dawn, when the streets were empty, cool, and quiet. It is a time of day that psychologically is outside of time: the old night is not yet over and the new day not yet begun. It was around this "no-time" that I seemed to read with the greatest absorption. Do you read best at a certain time of day? How long has this been true? Within the past few years, have you tried reading at times you wouldn't normally consider? How about getting up earlier than usual and reading before you "start" the day? Or try carrying a book with you every- where you go, and reading it at every slack moment. You might also try matching up your reading material with where you read it (The Old Man and the Sea at the beach, for instance). You might also want to have the book go against the grain of where you read it; for example, read the Bible in a topless bar. Charles Lamb provides a less extreme example: "I should not care to be caught in the serious av- enues of some cathedral alone, and reading Candide" (149). Does the lo- cation change the feel of the book? If so, how? Are you more comfortable reading with the grain or against it? Or neither? Finally, to push matters further, you might want to explore other unusual reading situations: at a concert, when slightly ill, during a violent storm, when you're so depressed you don't feel like doing anything, under hypnosis, while drifting alone in a boat, while riding a Ferris wheel, or while standing on your head. One reader reported that, in fact, the only way he was able to visualize the upside-down ship in The Posei- don Adventure was by lying on his back on the floor while holding the book above him, "so that [he] was like the passengers were" (Nell 291). I wonder what it's like to read while floating in outer space. 146 10 Other Faces ost people read without noticing the "look" of what they're read- ing. They don't notice the typeface or the page design. This is not to say that the look doesn't affect the reader. It does. The reader's response is unconscious, and therefore all the more subject to manipulation. "When we print a word in black ink on a rectangle of white paper, we are creating a composition in black and white," writes Marshall Lee in his Bookmaking (87). Whether brilliant, ordinary, or execrable, any composition has character: strong or weak, dynamic or inert, quiet or noisy, classy or tacky. We react to these qualities; the more knowledge- able we are, the more discriminating our reaction. In characterizing dif- ferent typefaces, a child learning to read would not show the same discrimination as an expert such as Marshall Lee: Type faceslike people's faceshave distinctive features indicat- ing aspects of character. Some features are quite pronounced, some are very subtle and subject to individual interpretation. Here are some text faces with capsule character analyses. BaskervilleClassical and elegant JasonRound and warm GranjonRound, warm, and graceful CaledoniaClean, firm, businesslike Times RomanStiff, cold, formal ElectraLight, cool, efficient FairfieldFussy BodoniDramatic WaverlyRound and cool (78) If you don't know anything about typefaces, such characterizations might sound a little too refined. Lee admits that such interpretations are always subjective. But the more one studies the typefaces listed above, the more accurate Lee's descriptions seem. But whether or not you agree with his interpretation, it can hardly be disputed that typefaces have character, and that the reader senses that character while reading. Take, as an extreme example, the same word set in two quite differ- ent faces: ZertinBerlin To readers of my generation, the first Berlin probably conjures up dark im- ages of Nazi Germany; by comparison the second Berlin looks harmless. 147 133 134 Other Faces Here's another example: A.?/?/1Vienna Which looks better to you; that is, more appropriate? Probably the script version, which calls up pleasant associations of nineteenth-century Aus- tria, Strauss waltzes, elegant, aristocratic balls in sparkling palacesthe very associations we hope to invoke by sending out similarly engraved wedding invitations. When I graduated from college, I received a diploma printed on high-quality paper and using a very distinguished, classical typeface. The words were in Latin. Accompanying it was an English translation, mimeo- graphed on cheap paper that has long since turned sallow. The oil in the mimeograph ink has slowly "bled" into the sheet, blurring the words. These two pieces of paper serve as a paradigm of snobbism. They speak volumes, and we don't even have to know what the words are! If you un- derstand the Latin, you join the elite; if you don't, you may count yourself as, well, common. At one time or another, you have no doubt received from a friend a letter that was printed on a dot-matrix printer. You -know the kind of words I mean: they're made of lots of little dots, they look sort of blurry, and they sometimes have a g or a y that looks funny. Doesn't a letter in this form feel impersonal, even robotic? Aren't you a little put off by it? No matter what the letter says, it won't seem as special as one written by hand, or even typewritten, because these last two, at least, will be the only first copy. The computer letter could be printed out again and again, with every copy looking exactly like every other copy: a clone. The same goes for form letters. Such letters give you the feeling that they aren't really for you; they aren't for anyone in particular. Adver- tisers and others soliciting your business by direct mail know all this, of course, and they try to distract you by adding little "personal" touches. One thing they do is to have the letter's signature printed in a different color, usually blue. They don't really think that we will believe that Joe Blow actually sat down and signed 2.6 million copies of this letter; no, they're just counting on the softening effect of such a signature. Test mail- ings have confirmed the effectiveness of this method. Another thing advertisers do is send you a computer-generated let- ter with your name imbedded at various points in the text: You'll be amazed, Mr. Ronald Padgett, at the effectiveness of this revolutionary new leaf blower. If, after a free 30-day trial in the pri- vacy of your own home, you are not completely satisfied, Mr. Pad- gett, we will cheerfully refund your money. We're so sure, though, 148 Creative Reading135 that you, Mr. Padgett, will be overjoyed by this revolutionary new leaf blower. ... And so on. Now, I would like to meet the rare bird who would believe that such letters are individually typed. But no matter how physically ugly and unconvincing such letters are, they do contain some of the most powerful and effective words we knowour own names. The advertiser is counting on that power to get us to read the pitch, despite the negative effects of the computer-generated type. The more we see dot-matrix type, the less offensive it seems. Not because it is less offensive, but because it becomes customary. This is true of any typeface. It is also true that we find it easier to read typefaces we're accustomed to. Children who are just beginning to read on their own find it difficult to read small type, partly because large letters are eas- ier to recognize, partly because children are accustomed to large type. Marshall Lee has noted (91) that American publishers print readers for children ages 5-7 in type about 18 points high. (The "point" is a unit of measure in typesetting; there are 72 points per inch.) The large type is a signal for the children that this is, in fact, a children's book. To accommo- date the large letters, there will be few words on each page, or the page will be large, or both. If the page is large, the book shouldn't have too many of them, lest the book become unwieldy for little hands. I wish publishers would show the same consideration to adult readers. Many's the time I have at- tempted, while reading in bed, to rest a weighty tome on my belly, only to find myself later in the throes of gastritis. Per cubic inch, books are sur- prisingly heavy. Especially those with glossy pages, such as illustrated textbooks and school yearbooks. One of the agonies of junior high school was hav- ing to lug home what seemed like a mountain of textbooks, switching them from arm to arm to relieve the fatigue. For me, the glossy textbooks added the visual torture of glare: coated paper is better for printing repro- ductions, but it reflects light something awful. Marshall Lee lists nine factors that, content aside, determine a page's readability: 1. typeface 2. size of type 3. length of line 4. leading (pronounced "ledding," the amount of space between lines) 149 136 Other Faces 5. page pattern 6. contrast of type and paper 7. texture of paper 8. typographical relationships (chapter heads, page numbers, etc.) 9. suitability of content. Perhaps the most pernicious of these is excessive line length. In Figure 26 I've quoted Lee (92) on this subject, but I've intentionally made the lines too long. Lee estimates that, at the normal book-reading distance of about 16 inches, the maximum comfortable line length is about 5 inches. The further beyond that you go, the less readable the material is. Finally, the well-designed page has a characteristic that only an ar- ticulate artist or typographical expert such as Lee would notice: In a well-designed page, the white areas are effective elements in- teracting with the blackthe page is alive. In poor typography, the type seems printed on top of a white backgroundthe page is dead. (88) This brings up the question of whether what we read is black on white or white around black. Obviously we can't have one without the other; but which of the two we focus on determines to some degree how we read. Some speed-readers suggest that reading the white is more fluid. By going into some detail here about typefaces and book design, I am not suggesting that we all need to become experts on the subject. I do believe, though, that we will become better readers if we're more aware of the circumstancessometimes the constraintsunder which we read. Otherwise, in having trouble reading a poorly designed book, we may blame ourselves or the author for shortcomings that instead are the publisher's. Children also blame themselves when they have trouble reading. A little voice in them says, "I can't do this, it's too hard for me." They are not in a position to know that the fault may lie elsewhere; that the content has no sparkle, no wit, no life; that stylistically it is stale, characterless, en- ervated; or that its typeface and design are uninviting. Nor can they know that other forces are causing their eyes to skitter off the page. Many childrenespecially those who come to school from emo- tionally unstable homes in socially and economically ravaged neighbor- hoods, who come to school metabolically askew with poor nutrition, who come to school vibrating from the relentless hammering of urban lifehave trouble just keeping their eyes on any one thing for an ex- tended period of time. I'm not talking about the short attention span that is common to infants. I'm talking about children who cannot keep their 150 Tests have shown many disadvantages in long lines: (a) the eye must blink at intervals during reading. After each blink, an optical adjustment and refocus takes place. The longer the line, the more frequently blinks occur within, rather than at the end of lines; (b) there is the timeand visual effort lost in traveling back to the beginning of the next line; (c) when the measure is too wide, there is momentary difficulty in determining which is the next line (sometimes the wrong one is selected). Each interruptionthe blink, the trip back, and the search for the right linecauses loss of reading efficiency, or poor readability. (Lee, p. 92) Figure 26. Long lines example. 151 138 Other Faces eyes on anything that doesn't constantly move around and entertain them, that doesn't feed them "eye-candy" children who have grown up with television as part of their nervous systems. Put the emphasis on systems and you'll see what I mean: the sys- tems are nervous. They are nervous because they have been subjected to a constant bombardment of excitations and irritations from the cathode ray tube that projects images that jump and switch and cut away every few seconds. Try this experiment. Go turn on your television set. Turn the sound off. Look at the second hand on your watch. Watch the screen for one minute. Count the number of times the view is switched. If the show is an "adult" show, such as Meet the Press, it won't jump around so much. If it's a comedy series, it'll jump around a lot. If it's a cartoon, it'll jump around a lot. If it's a commercial, it'll jump around like crazy. What would you guess is the average amount of time that a particular camera shot is left on the screen? I'm writing this with a word processor hooked up to my television, so I can switch back and forth between these words and the various stations. I just switched over to Channel 4 (NBC). Commercials. The visual phrasing was staccato, with each shot lasting only two or three seconds. What, I wondered, would it be like if I began to see everything this way? I looked over at the plants on the windowsill, jumped to John Kenneth Galbraith's Money on the shelf, jumped to the glass of paint- brushes behind it, jumped to the wall, jumped to the painting on the wall, jumped to the record cabinet, jumped to the chair, ugh! It was awful, and the idea of doing it nonstop for a couple of hours was unbearable. Try it for a few minutes. You'll find that you glaze over quickly, unable to concen- trate on any of the things your eyes land on. On most television shows, of course, the concentrating is done for you. The result is that all too often one becomes a passive lump with a hazed brain and an agitated nervous system. So what's surprising about the fact that many schoolchildren can- not chin themselves, remember what they're told, or concentrate? I'm sure there are statistics on the relative amount of jumping around on various types of television shows, and there may even be statis- tics comparing today's jumpiness to that of, say, 25 years ago. My gut sense of it is that today's programming is much jumpier. I remember going to see "avant-garde," "underground" American films in 1960 that had very quick cutting, so quick that they seemed almost abstract. In comparison, commercial cinema seemed to lumber along. What was con- sidered avant-garde cutting in 1960 is now the order of the day. This high- speed zigzag imagery is pouring into children's nervous systems for hours every day. According to the Department of Education's What Works: Re- search About Teaching and Learning, "At home, half of all fifth graders 152 Creative Reading139 spend... an averageof 130 minutes a day watching television" (11). The same fifth graders spend "only four minutes a day reading." I don't know how such statistics are arrived at, I don't think television is inherently evil, and I'm not against quick cutting as an artistic technique. I'm just saying it's dishonest to allow our children to be accelerated into a visual and visceral blur, and then to blame the schools for their reading prob- lems. Nor should we allow our children to blame themselves. For decades, teachers and reading specialists have been warning us about the dangers of television, and all too often, I suspect, their cavils have been dismissed as those of the old biddy and the wet blanket. Hey, a little TV can't hurt anybody, can it? No, a little can't. But television is like peanuts: you can't eat just one. Before you know it, you're down to the bottom of the jar and you don't feel so good. Finally, you turn off the set and stagger off to bed. You've watched a lot, but you've seen little, and you'll remember less. You are as far away from reading as possible. How far away from reading are you when you do read? Or rather, how far away is what you read? Consider the following situation: When a driver approaches an intersection, an automobile from the right appears to be moving at a much faster pace than actually is the case. This is an optical illusion produced by the action of the two cars approaching the intersection at about the same time. Often, when the auto from the right travels toward the center of the street, it seems to speed up, but actually it may be slowing down. (Hovious 176) This situation is diagrammed in Figure 27. Imagine yourself as the driver of car D. The car marked R appears to be speeding up, in the spot marked by the dotted line. t - Figure 27.Cars at intersection. Is there a similar phenomenon in the act of reading? That is, is the reader like the driver in car D, and the approaching words like car R? 153 140 Other Faces The reader's peripheral vision includes the words approaching from the right (or at least seem to be approaching. Of course the words aren't moving; the eyes are. But the effect is the same as if the eyes were stationary and the words moving from right to left.) As the eyes move from left to right across a line of type, the words to the far right seem to pick up speed as they approach the point of fixation, where, for an in- stant, they stand still, before zooming away to the left. This visual illusion of the words speeding up as they approach and slowing down as they re- cede is comparable to the Doppler Effect. The Doppler Effect is one of those phenomena that are so familiar that we rarely realize they happen. Imagine you are standing alongside a flat stretch of highway in the middle of the desert. It is dead quiet. Then, far down the road, you see a speck, a dot of color approaching: it's a car. As the car approaches, the dull growl of its engine rises to a shrill whine untilwhr000m!the car blows past you, and the pitch of its engine falls and fades to silence. It's as if the the sound had disappeared, the way lines of perspective disappear into the vanishing point.* So, in the dis- tance, the car seems small and slow, with an engine sound that is low in volume and pitch. Up close, the car is big and fast, with a loud, high- pitched engine. One difference between looking at a car approach and reading a line of words is that we can keep our eyes focused on the car throughout the entire process, whereas we have to leap from word-group to word-group, refocusing and pausing each time. That's why the words don't seem to move when we're fixated on them. It's as if they've en- teredfor that instanta timeless zone, the zone our eyes are fixated on, the zone our minds are (presumably) in. I want to suggest that, in reading, there is a psychological equivalent to the laws of perspective and the Doppler Effect. As the words approach the eye (and the mind behind them), they take on a momentousness that allows them to radiate their power into us. If we're reading with our full faculties, the words unleash their meanings, their connotations, their sen- suality, their whole being, up to the limits of our capabilities. The more we know about words, what they mean and how their meanings shift when they're set side by side; the more we have a sense of the "feel" of the words, their textures and "music"; the older and more experienced we are, more able to understand the words in a fuller and richer context then, the more powerful will be that timeless, immobile moment of fixa- tion, when the purest transportation occurs: *If Renaissance Italians discovered perspective in art, who discovered "perspective" in sound? 154 Appendix: Skywriting It was a bright warm spring afternoon around 1952, and there must have been advance word, because quite a few people on our tree-lined street were outdoors, scanning the skies. Around two o'clock, the first puff appeared in the sky, the beginning of a graceful, looping rope of "smoke" that veered this way and that, writing an immense white message across the pure blue sky. It might have said something as mundane as EAT AT JOE'S, but that didn't matter, for, as the pianist Glenn Gould said about the first radio broadcast, what mattered was not what was said, but rather that a miracle was happening. In this case, the miracle was that large words appeared in the heavens. Then the sky rained down hundreds and hundreds of balloons that fell like big drifting raindrops and came to rest all across town. Inside the balloon I caught was a certificate for a free car- ton of soda pop. It was Tulsa's version of manna from heaven. I never fail to see words written in the sky without being moved, perhaps because of this early experience, perhaps because of something deeper, and invariably I pause to watch the entire message until it is erased by the wind. Its delicacy, rarity, and brief existence make it all the more precious, no matter what it says. In fact, I confess that although I read the messages, I forget them even before they fade from the sky. If you ask older New Yorkers if they remember any skywriting from the late 1930sabout 60 years agomany will promptly mention Pepsi Cola and the I. J. Fox Fur Company. I have similar memories instilled in me by another delightful advertising technique, memories of Burma Shave, a product I would use, out of sheer gratitude, were it still on the market. Those clever Burma Shave jingles, with each line on a separate sign placed at intervals alongside the roadintervals just right for leisurely reading at 50 miles per hourmay have been what predisposed me to "experimental" writing.' But no terrestrial writing gives me the timeless, hypnotic feeling that skywriting does. During World War I, airplanes laid down smoke screens along the trenches to disguise infantry assaults, and from this practice came the idea of skywriting. The smoke was created by pouring oil into the engine mani- fold. The hot engine burned the oil and created a dark smoke. The first skywriter was Major John S. Savage of the Royal Air Force, who used sky- 155141 142 Skywriting writing to send war messages over great distances when other means were not possible.2 The first commercial use of skywriting was by Captain Cyril Turner, also an RAF pilot, who skywrote over Epsom Downs during the English Derby in May of 1922.3 Captain Allen J. Cameron, an American pilot, saw the demonstration that day and brought the technique to Amer- ica. His first message, written over New York City in October of 1922, was HELLO USA. The popularity of skywriting as an advertising medium in- creased until World War II, when pilots, planes, and other resources were diverted into the war effort. Skywriting resumed after the war, but was dealt an even heavier blow in the late 1940s by the advent of television ad- vertising. It was as though the big blue sky had been replaced by the little blue tube. Throughout the 1950s, skywriting retreated to large metropoli- tan areas, where a lot of people tended to be outdoors in nice weather; to sporting events, such as the Rose Bowl, where a large, captive audience could be reached; and to the company that had a history of skywriting ad- vertising, Pepsi-Cola. Not counting a lone individual here and there, by the 1980s there were only four skywriting agencies in the U.S.: Skytypers West (in California), Skytypers East (in New York), Rosie O'Grady's Flying Circus (in Florida), and the Pepsi-Cola Company, and even Pepsi had a long sky- writing hiatus (1953-1975). When Pepsi resumed its skywriting, it used only one plane, a 1929 Travel Air D4D open-cockpit biplane. Since 1981, it has been piloted by the only female skywriter, Suzanne Asbury-Oliver. She is also the only Pepsi skywriter, and, discounting the occasional outside job, PEPSI is all she writes. Pepsi got the Travel Air in 1973 from Anthony "Andy" Stinis, who thought the company wanted it as a piece of corporate memorabilia. Sti- nis, one of the original Pepsi skywriters, had used that very plane writing more than 7,000 Pepsi messages from 1938 until 1953, when Pepsi began its hiatus. He had done his first skywriting in the early 1930s. Apparently he was something of a daredevil. His son Greg speculates that skywriting was the natural result of his father's love of flyinghe was there when Charles Lindbergh took off on his historic transatlantic flightand racing motorcycles. Andy had some interesting skywriting experiences, such as writing a whiskey ad in the night sky (presumably with a bright moon illu- minating the letters from behind): true moonshine. After his stint with Pepsi, Andy continued with his own skywriting company, Stinis Air Ser- vices, which changed its name to Skytypers in 1979. He holds the patent to the skywriting method he invented in 1949, called skytyping. Skywriting is still done pretty much the way it was in World War I. Today, however, the skywriting fluid is an "environmentally approved" (as 156 Creative Reading143 every skywriter will hasten to inform you) oil-base solution, a petroleum byproduct that doesn't dissipate as quickly as straight water vapor. The fluid is released into the plane's manifold exhaust collector ring, where the engine heat vaporizes it into a white "smoke" that is then emitted from a pipe and expands into big white lines. Skywriting is usually done in block letters by a single plane. Appar- ently it's not that easy to learn. A few years ago, Greg Stinis, the operator of Skytypers West, trained seasoned pilots for a big skywriting job across the western U.S.: 65 cities in 10 days. Each pilot had 10-15 years' experi- ence with the planesSNJ-2sand were given carefully planned in- struction. It took them two to three weeks to learn to skywrite, and even then their "handwriting" was childlike. Continuous script is much more difficult. According to Greg Stinis, skywriting is somewhat instinctive. You have to develop a feel for it, in your body, as you're forming the let- ters.4"Everything you're doing is behind you. You have to develop a kind of sixth sense on how to do it," he says. However, there are some tricks of the trade. For instance, before you start the message, you pick some highly visible landmarks, which serve as a baseline for the message, like lines on ruled paper. Before the flight, most skywriters diagram the mes- sage on a piece of paper or cardboard, with arrows and symbols indicat- ing the direction of the turns and pauses, and keep the diagram in the cockpit. The diagram reads upside down and backwards, because that's the way the message looks from the point of view of the pilot. Most pi- lots count silently as they form the various parts of the letters, the way ballet dancers count measures to keep track of where they are in a piece of choreography. If the pilot gets worried about the alignment of the let- ters, he can roll out a little and take a peek. Also, if the conditions are just right, he can use the sun to see shadows on the ground, the shadows of the words he's writing. The shadows are likely to be quite visible, because the letters are from three-quarters to one mile tall, probably the largest letters on earth (so to speak). Placed at an altitude of 10,000 feet, they can be read from 20-50 miles away. Wind, haze, and overcast skies are the skywriter's betes noires. Be- cause much of the skywriter's cost is simply getting up in the air and get- ting down, he or she frequently checks the weather bureau for conditions at 10,000 feet, especially wind velocity. Wind is particularly bad for sky- writing. As Mort Arken, head of Skytypers East, explained, "In skywriting, it takes a single plane at least ten minutes to form the letters in SOLAR- CAINE. By the time the pilot has written the E, the S, 0, and L have faded and the rest of the letters are disappearing."5 157 144 Skywriting This is why Andy Stinis's invention of skytyping was a great ad- vance in efficiency: it is faster, and therefore can handle longer messages. SOLARCAINE can be skytyped in 45 secondsabout 4 seconds per letter. Therefore, skytyping can be done on windier days. Skytyping is the exclu- sive service of Skytypers East, which Stinis handed on to Mort Arken, and of Skytypers West. In skytyping, five planes (SNJ-2s, military planes built in the early 1940s) fly side by side, around 250 feet apart. The lead plane, in the center, contains a computer that sends radio signals to smoke-pro- ducing devices on all five planes, telling them when to emit puffs of smoke. Thus, in forming the letter 0, each of the five planes will first emit a puff simultaneously. It will look like this: Then only the two end planes will emit some puffs, forming the top and bottom of the letter: Finally, all five will again emit puffs, to form the final side: The result is boxy, but practical. The principle is the same as that of the dot-matrix printing of computers and electronic typewriters. It isn't ele- gant, but it's ingenious and fast. Given to nostalgia, I prefer the slow elegance of skywriting, prefer- ably in script. I get little pleasure from watching people type, but for some reason I enjoy watching people write: the flow of words onto paper has always fascinated me (the words of others, that is). And with drawing, the experience is even more intense: when I watch my artist friends draw, I get a tingly, dreamy, happy feeling. So what about skydrawing? And couldn't short poems be written across the sky by jets?6 158 Notes Chapter 2 1. As Don Holdaway points out, though, the focus has been on how to teach reading, with little attention paid to how reading is learned (see The Foun- dations of Literacy 15). 2. See, for example, How to Teach Your Baby to Read by Glen J. Doman. 3. Don Holdaway's Foundations of Literacy has some wonderful pas- sages on the lack of empowerment of students, such as: "The child who is humil- iated by his failure to carry out an analytic process which even his own teacher is incapable of performing unerringly, such as syllabification, ought to have the right to massive legal compensation" (p. 103). 4. See Ellen Lupton's delightful and imaginative essay, "An Abbreviated History of Punctuation," in Educating the Imagination, edited by Christopher Edgar and Ron Padgett. 5. See The Complete Guide to Punctuation by Margaret Enright Wye, p. 34. 6. Ann Lauterbach's poem "Betty Observed" (in her Before Recollection) makes a similar point: When I was young, I used to Check pages for talk; dialogue was the key To readability. That was before I had a taste For abstraction. "I love you Betty" was a good sign Chapter 5 1. Our system of reading horizontally came from the ancient Greeks. Their method was a bit different, though. Greek was originally written in a pat- tern called boustrophedon ("as the ox turns"), with the eye following the same path as an ox plowing a field: In other words, Greek was read from left to right to left to right and so on. For more information, see Dyslexia and Your Child by Rudolph F Wagner. Later the Greek pattern changed to the left -to-right pattern we use. 2. Don Holdaway has an interesting discussion of this idea in his Founda- tions of Literacy, pp. 96-98. 145 =159 146 Notes 3. Frank Kermode discusses this interview in his Genesis of Secrecy, p. 13. 4. See Frank Smith's Reading without Nonsense for an interesting discus- sion of the role of anticipation in reading. Chapter 6 1. See Kenneth Koch's translation of part of it, in Roussel's How I Wrote Certain of My Books (Boston: Exact Change, 1995), an expanded version of the same title published by SUN in New York in 1977. 2. See But I Digress, an interesting study of the use of parentheses in En- glish verse, by John Lennard. 3. An even smootherand a devilishly cleverexample is one (ca. 1600) that was written expressly to be read both vertically and cross-column: I holde as faytheWhat Englands Church allowes What Romes church saithMy conscience disallowes Where the King is headThe church can have no shame The flock's misleadThat hath the Pope Supreame Where the Altar's drestTher's service scarce divine The People's BlestWith Table, Bread and Wine He's but as AsseWho that Com[m]union flyes Who shun's the massIs Catholique and wise Wherefore I prayThe England flourish best That Rome may swayShall ne'er be my request (Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, D.C. [MS V.a. 198, fol. 14r], quoted in Lennard 266-67) Lennard also mentions a poem in Latin that "reads forwards and back- wards, each direction providing a different meaning" (267). 4. In an interview on "The Printed Word and Beyond," part of WNET's "Innovation" series broadcast January 7, 1988. 5. Interview in Paris Review No. 35, 1965, p. 24. It is interesting to note that collage or cut-up writing often seems to have more than one voice in it, and that Eliot's poem is, in fact, the product not only of collaged material but also of strong editorial excisions by another poet, Ezra Pound. 6. The night after I wrote these words, I dreamed I was reading a letter, but when, in the dream, I said to myself, "Hey, I'm reading in a dream," the words grew blurry and disappeared. 7. My source for this information, Ripley's Believe It or Not 50th An- niversary Edition (New York: Pocket Books, 1968, unpaginated, no author cred- ited) does not give the date of Nihil. Rien or its author's first name. Chapter 8 1. At a recent lecture-demonstration by the head of a CD-ROM company, a member of the audience asked a disarming question: "Does anybody actually' 160 Creative Reading147 read CD-ROMs?" The implication was that CD-ROMs sometimes have wonderful combinations of graphics, sound, and text, but that their text comes in a far dis- tant third. Who would really want to read, for example, Moby-Dick from a com- puter monitor? It's not just that prolonged staring at a cathode ray tube can make you feel that masonry nails have been driven into your eyes; it's also that the monitor is a glass wall between reader and text, a text that remains distant and cool. Reading a book is more intimate partly because it's more sensuous. You can hold and caress a book, and when it's new, you can even sniff its heady combina- tion of printer's ink, binding glue, and fresh paper, and when the book grows old, its ineffable essence of library._Books_are_like food. Will-we-ever "devoura-- CD-ROM? As for reading in bed.... 2. From Guillaume Apollinaire's poem "Zone" in Koch and Farrell, p. 123 (my translation). 3. An awareness of sign language and modern dance can expand our defi- nition of reading. Peter Wisher, a coach and professor of physical education at Gallaudet University (the school for the deaf), created a new form of dance for his students. When viewed by a hearing audience, Wisher's choreography simply seems to include large gestures, but to deaf audiences who know American Sign Language, the dance is also operatic, because the dancers are actually signing the lyrics with their entire bodies. Years before I learned of Wisher's work, I wrote, in a poem: "I am saying / that grammar is the direct result of how humans feel in the world; / or rather, / that grammar follows from what we experience viscerally and punctuation keeps it that way; / that, for instance, people walking down the street are forming various sentences with their bodies. ..." ("Yak and Yak," New & Selected Poems 15). See also my article "Phrases in Grammar and Dance," in which I discuss the relationship between the phrase in dance and the phrase in language. Many choreographers of modern dance are aware of such relationships between dance and language, and that in some way, perhaps unconsciously, their dances can be "read." Such relationships have been the subject of study for many years by bee experts such as Karl von Frisch, author of The Dancing Bees. 4. Unpublished poem, written in a poetry class conducted by Judith Steinbergh. Chapter 9 1. Some people, such as Charles Lamb, find any outdoor reading impossi- ble: "I am not much a friend to out-of-door reading. I cannot settle my spirits to it." From "Detached Thoughts on Books and Reading" (149). Appendix 1. For more information on Burma Shave signs, see The Verse by the Side of the Road by Frank Rowsome. 2. I mean skywriting in the modern sense of the word. Otherwise, it could be argued that Native American smoke signals constituted the first skywriting. i61 148 Notes 3. Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary gives 1922 as the year of the first known use of the word skywriting, but one wonders what it was called before then. 4. To get some idea of what is meant here, try these experiments. At the beach, find a large area where the sand is smooth. First, use a stick to write a very large (perhaps 30 feet high) message in the sand, with your eyes closed. Second, write a large message with your eyes open, but trailing the stick behind you, and forming the letters upside-down and backwards. 5. Quoted in The New Yorker's "Talk of the Town" column, July 17, 1978, issue. The May 28, 1987, Wall Street Journal also has an interesting article about skywriting, entitled "Last Few Skywriters Strut the Stuff Doing Ads on the Fly." 6.I like the idea of ending a book in a footnote. It turns out that someone has written poems across the sky. A few years ago, David Antin created such poems, a three-line one over Santa Monica and a four-line one over La Jolla, Cali- fornia. Limited to around 20 letters per line because of wind dispersal, Antin played on the idea of erasure by using several short phrases in each line, phrases whose meanings toyed with the reader's expectations. In radio contact on the ground, Antin told the pilots of Skytypers West to wait until each line disap- peared before writing the next. For a fuller' description and a photograph, see his article "Fine Furs" in Critical Inquiry. 162 Bibliography This bibliography includes works cited and works that were in a more general way useful in the writing of this book. Agnes, Yves, and Jean-Michel Croissandeau. Lire le journal. St-Julien-du-Sault, France: E P Lobies, 1979. Antin, David. "Fine Furs." Critical Inquiry 19.1 (Autumn 1992): 155-63. Aristotle. "On the Art of Poetry." Classical Literary Criticism. Ed. and trans. T S. Dorsch. New York: Penguin, 1984. Barthes, Roland. The Pleasure of the Text. Trans. Richard Miller. New York: Far- rar, Straus & Giroux, 1975. Berger, Allen. Speed Reading: An Annotated Bibliography. Newark: Interna- tional Reading Association, 1970. Berrigan, Ted. Clear the Range. New York: Adventures in Poetry/Coach House, 1977. . TheSonnets. 3rd ed. New York: United Artists, 1982. Berthoff, Ann E. Forming Thinking Writing: The Composing Imagination. Mont- clair: Boynton/Cook, 1982. Bettelheim, Bruno, and Karen Zelan. On Learning to Read: The Child's Fascina- tion with Meaning. New York: Knopf, 1982. Billington, Lillian E. Using Words. New York: Silver Burdett, 1945. Blanchot, Maurice. The Gaze of Orpheus. Trans. Lydia Davis. Barrytown: Station Hill, 1981. Bloomfield, Leonard. Language. New York: Henry Holt, 1933. Bornstein, Diane. A History of the English Language. Booklet accompanying a boxed set of three 1p phonograph records of the same name. New York: Caedmon Records, 1973. Bruner, Jerome. The Process of Education. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1965. Burroughs, William. Interview. Paris Review no. 35, 1965. Burroughs, William, and Brion Gysin. The Third Mind. New York: Viking, 1978. Caws, Mary Ann. The Art of Interference. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989. . The Eye in theText: Essays on Perception, Mannerist to Modern. Prince- ton: Princeton University Press, 1981. Cesaire, Aime. The Collected Poetry. Trans. Clayton Eshleman and Annette Smith. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1983. 163 149 150 Bibliography Chall, Jeanne S. Learning to Read: The Great Debate. 2nd ed. New York: Mc- Graw-Hill, 1983. . Stages of Reading Development. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983. Chase, Stuart. The Tyranny of Words. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1959. Chomsky, Noam. Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton, 1957. Cole, K. C. Vision: In the Eye of the Beholder. San Francisco: Exploratorium, 1978. Commission on Reading. Becoming a Nation of Readers. Washington: National Institute of Education, 1985. Covino, William A. The Art of Wondering. Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook, 1988. Crowder, Robert G. The Psychology of Reading. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982. Davis, Bonnie M. A Guide to Information Sources for Reading. Newark: Interna- tional Reading Association, 1972. De Bono, Edward. Lateral Thinking. London: Ward Lock Educational, 1970. . The Use of Lateral Thinking. London: Jonathan Cape, 1967. Denby, Edwin. Complete Poems. New York: Random House, 1986. Disch, Thomas M. Amnesia. Computer disk. San Mateo: Electronic Arts, 1986. Doman, Glenn J. How to Teach Your Baby to Read. Garden City: Doubleday, 1975. Dorsch, T. S., ed. and trans. Classical Literary Criticism. New York: Penguin, 1986. Durkin, Dolores. Children Who Read Early. New York: Teachers College Press, 1966. . Teaching Them to Read. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1970. Edgar, Christopher, and Ron Padgett. Educating the Imagination. 2 vols. New York: Teachers & Writers Collaborative, 1994. [Ellen Lupton's essay on the history of punctuation is in volume 1.] Engel, Susan. The Stories Children Tell. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1995. Freud, Sigmund. The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud. Ed. and trans. A. A. Brill. New York: Modern Library, 1938. Frisch, Karl von. The Dancing Bees. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1953. Goodman, Ken. On Reading. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1996. . What's Whole in Whole Language? Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1986. Goodman, Yetta, and Carolyn Burke. Reading Miscue Inventory: Procedure for Diagnosis and Evaluation. New York: Macmillan, 1972. Gray, William S., and Marion Monroe. Think-and-Do Book. Chicago: Scott, Fores- man, 1946. 164 Creative Reading151 Green, Henry. Interview. Writers at Work: The Paris Review Interviews, Fifth Se- ries. Ed. George Plimpton. New York: Viking, 1981. Grigson, Geoffrey. The Faber Book of Nonsense. London: Faber & Faber, 1979. Hansen, Jane, Thomas Newkirk, and Donald Graves, eds. Breaking Ground: Teachers Relate Reading and Writing in the Elementary School. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1985. Hazlitt, William. "On the Pleasure of Hating" and "On Reading Old Books." Se- lected Essays. New York: Random House, 1930. -Hogben, Lancelot, The-Mother Tongue:New-York:Norton, 1965. Holdaway, Don. The Foundations of Literacy. Sydney: Ashton Scholastic, 1979. Hoover, Paul. Idea. Great Barrington: The Figures, 1987. Hovious, Carol. Following Printed Trails. New York: Heath, 1936. Huizinga, Jan. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture. Boston: Beacon Press, 1955. Iser, Wolfgang. The Act of Reading: A Theory of Aesthetic Response. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978. . The Implied Reader.Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974. Jones, Richard M. Fantasy and Feeling in Education. New York: New York Uni- versity Press, 1968. Kaye, Peggy. Games for Reading. New York: Pantheon, 1984. Keene, Carolyn, and Franklin W Dixon. The Secret of the Knight's Sword. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984. Kermode, Frank. The Genesis of Secrecy: On the Interpretation of Narrative. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979. Koch, Kenneth, and Kate Farrell. Sleeping on the Wing. New York: Random House, 1981. LaBerge, Stephen. Lucid Dreaming. Los Angeles: Tarcher, 1985. Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1980. Lamb, Charles. The Complete Works and Letters of Charles Lamb. New York: Modern Library, 1963. Lauterbach, Ann. Before Recollection. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987. Lee, Dorris, and R. V. Allen. Learning to Read through Experience. Englewood: Prentice-Hall, 1943, 1963. Lee, Marshall. Bookmaking. 2nd ed. New York: Bowker, 1979. Leites, Edmund. The Puritan Conscience and Modern Sexuality. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986. Lem, Stanislaw. Chain of Chance. Trans. Louis Iribane. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978. 165 152 Bibliography Lennard, Jim. But I Digress: The Exploitation of Parentheses in English Printed Verse. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991. Loewinsohn, Ron. MeatAir. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970. Lupton, Ellen, ed. Period Styles: A History of Punctuation. Exhibition catalog. New York: Cooper Union, 1988. [Lupton's title essay reprinted in Educat- ing the Imagination, vol. 1, ed. Christopher Edgar and Ron Padgett. New York: Teachers & Writers Collaborative, 1994.] Mallarme, Stephane. Un coup de des n'abolira le hasard. Trans. Daisy Aldan. New York: Tiber Press, 1956. Meyer, Bonnie J. E, Carole J. Young, and Brendan J. Bartlett. Memory Improved: Reading and Memory Enhancement across the Life Span through Strategic Text Strutures. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1989. Montaigne, Michel de. Essays. Trans. J. M. Cohen. New York: Penguin, 1981. National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Education Statistics. Washing- ton: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1994. National Commission on Excellence in Education. A Nation at Risk. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1983. Nell, Victor. Lost in a Book: The Psychology of Reading for Pleasure. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988. Odier, Daniel. The Job: Interviews with William Burroughs. London: Cape, 1970. OulipoAtlas de litterature potentielle. Paris: Gallimard, 1981. [An edited and ex- panded version of Oulipo: La litterature potentielle. Paris: Gallimard, 1973.] Padgett, Ron. Great Balls of Fire. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1969. . New & Selected Poems. Boston: David R. Godine, 1995. ."Phrases in Grammar and Dance." Teachers & Writers 18.2 Sept.-Oct. 1986. . "Problems with Words." Blood Work. Flint: Bamberger Books, 1993. . Tulsa Kid. Calais: Z Press, 1979. , ed. The Teachers & Writers Handbook of Poetic Forms. New York: Teach- ers & Writers Collaborative, 1987. Pessoa, Fernando. The Book of Disquiet. Trans. kin Watson. London: Quartet, 1991. Picard, Michel. La lecture comme jeu. Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1986. Plimpton, George, ed. Writers at Work: The Paris Review Interviews, Fifth Series. Interview with Henry Green by Terry Southern. New York: Viking, 1981. .Writers at Work: The Paris Review Interviews, Third Series. Interview with William Burroughs. New York: Penguin, 1977. Queneau, Raymond. Cent mille milliards de poemes. Paris: Gallimard, 1961. Richards, I. A. How to Read a Page. New York: Norton, 1942. 166 Creative Reading153 . Practical Criticism. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, n.d. (First published in 1929). Rimbaud, Jean-Arthur. A Season in Hell. Trans. Delmore Schwartz. Norfolk: New Directions, 1939. Ripley's Believe It or Not! 50th Anniversary Edition. New York: Pocket Books, 1968. Robbe-Grillet, Main., The Voyeur. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Grove, 1958. Rodari,-Giannir-The-Grammar-of Fantasy. Trans. Jack Zipes. New York: Teachers & Writers Collaborative, 1996. Rosenblatt, Louise. The Reader, the Text, the Poem. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1978. Roussel, Raymond. How I Wrote Certain of My Books. Trans. Trevor Winkfield. New York: SUN, 1977. An expanded version was issued by Exact Change in 1995.] Rowsome, Frank. The Verse by the Side of the Road. Brattleboro: Stephen Greene Press, 1965. Saporta, Marc. Composition No. 1. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1963. Saroyan, Aram. [untitled]. New York: Kulchur, n.d. Sartre, Jean-Paul. The Words. Trans. Bernard Frechtman. New York: George Braziller, 1964. The Seeds and Other Stories. "A Night in 'Potato' Village" by Tai Mujen. Beijing: Foreign Language Press, 1972. Shaughnessy, Mina P. Errors and Expectations. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. Smith, Frank. Reading without Nonsense. 2nd ed. New York: Teachers College Press, 1985. Understanding Reading. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1986.. , ed. Psycholinguistics and Reading. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1973. Smith, Nila Banton. American Reading Instruction. Newark: International Read- ing Association, 1986. Smith, Thomas M. et al. The Condition of Education. Washington: U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office, 1994. Spark, Muriel. A Far Cry from Kensington. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1988. Spencer, Herbert, ed. The Liberated Page. San Francisco: Bedford Press, 1987. Stein, Gertrude. Selected Writings. New York: Modern Library, 1962. Taylor, Stanford Earl, Helen Frackenpohl, and James L. Pettee. Grade Level Norms for the Components of the Fundamental Reading Skill. Bulletin no. 3. Huntington: Educational Development Laboratories, 1960. 154 Bibliography Thoreau, Henry David. The Portable Thoreau. Ed. by Carl Bode. New York: Pen- guin, 1981. Touring Club Italiano. Sicilia. Milan: Touring Club Italiano, 1968. Trelease, Jim. The Read-Aloud Handbook. New York: Penguin, 1982. Tucker, Man. Reading Games. Wymondham, England: Brewhouse, 1973. Tzara, Tristan. Lampisteries, precedes des Sept Manifestes Dada. Paris: Jean- Jacques Pauvert, 1963. Trans. Barbara Wright as Seven Dada Manifestos and Lampisteries. London: Calder Publications, 1992. United States National Commission on Excellence in Education. A Nation at Risk. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1983. Vincent, Stephen, and Jayne Cortez, eds. The Poetry Reading. San Francisco: Momo's Press, 1981. Wagner, Rudolph E Dyslexia and Your Child. Rev. ed. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. Waldman, John. Rapid Reading Made Simple. 2nd ed. Garden City: Doubleday, 1981. Weaver, Constance. Reading Process and Practice. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1988. What Works: Research about Teaching and Learning. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Education, 1986. Williams, C. K. Flesh and Blood. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1987. Williams, Emmett, ed. An Anthology of Concrete Poetry. New York: Something Else Press, 1967. Wye, Margaret Enright. The Complete Guide to Punctuation. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1985. 168 Index Act of Reading, 60, 108 Aeschuylus, 59 Allen, Woody, and intentional mistranslation, 96 Amnesia, 68 Burroughs, William S., 74-75, 78-79, 81-82, 83, 88, 96 But I Digress, 146 anticipation, in reading, 49-52 Antin, David, and skytyping, 148 Antlers in the Treetops, 112 Apollinaire, Guillaume, as modernist, 125, 126, 147 Ariosto, 30 Aristotle, 39, 59, 124 Arkin, Mort, 143, 144 "As a Wife Has a Cow," 62 Asbury-Oliver, Suzanne, 142 Ashbery, John, 39, 70, 80, 106, 112, 117-118 Aurelius, Marcus, soothing effect of, 88 Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas, 111 Ballad of Reading Gaol, 1 basal readers, 2, 38 Beethoven, as poor speller, 17 Before Recollection, 145 Berrigan, Ted, 59, 70, 83, 106, 112, 115 Berry, Chuck, 88 Berthoff, Ann E., 70-71 Bettelheim, Bruno, 38-41 "Betty Observed," 145 Bible, 61, 124 Black Elk Speaks, 86 Blake, William, 58 Blanchot, Maurice, 30 blank in fiction, 108-109 Bleulor, Eugen, 49 blues songs, one way to write them, 61-62 Bob, Son of Battle, 24 book design, its effect on readers, 133-137 Book of Disquiet, 4 Bookmaking, 133 books as authoritative, 4-5 Bornstein, Diane, 105 Brainard, Joe, 4n, 98, 99-103 branching novels, 67-68 Braudel, Fernand, 86 Burma Shave signs, 147 Cameron, Captain Allen J., 142 Campbell, Wilhelmina, 59 Candide, 132 Capote, Truman, voice of, 116 Carroll, Lewis, and cut-ups, 83 CD-ROMs, 146-147 Celine, Louis-Ferdinand, 89 Cendrars, Blaise, 7, 125 Cent mille milliards de poemes, 69 Cesaire, Aime, 129-130 Chain of Chance, 65 Chall, Jeanne, xiv, 10, 70, 122 Chan, Charlie, stereotype of, 112 Chandler, Raymond, 89 Charlotte's Web, 22 Chaucer, Geoffrey, 125 Cherry, 98, 99-103 children's literature, 22 Clear the Range, 59 "closed" system of teaching reading and writing, xiv Clough, Harold, 124 "Cocktails for Two," and incongruity, 113-114 column confusion, 54-55, 74-80 Complete Guide to Punctuation, 145 Composition #1, and random permutations, 69 Critical Inquiry, 148 Crowder, Robert G., 87 cummings, e. e., and typography, 125 cut-ups, 81-82, 146 Dada poets, and chance and sound poetry, 125 Dancing Bees, 147 day toning (reading technique), 87-89 de Vree, Paul, 120-121 Death on the Installment Plan, 89 Denby, Edwin, 42, 118, 131 Department of Education, U.S., 138 155 169 156 Index "Detached Thoughts on Books and Reading," 147 "Dick and Jane," 8-10 Dickens, Charles, 68 Dickinson, Emily, voice of, 112 Dietrich, Marlene, 113 Disch, Thomas M., 68 Dixon, Franklin W, 67 Documentaries, 125 Doman, Glen J., 145 Doppler Effect, corollary of in reading, 140 Dos Passos, John, 82 Drew, Carson, 17 Drew, Nancy, 67-68 Duchamp, Marcel, 82 Duck, Donald, 113 dueling books (reading technique), 86-87 duets (reading technique), 118 Dungeons and Dragons, and branching novels, 68 Dyslexia and Your Child, 145 Edgar, Christopher, 145 edge blur, in reading, 52, 65-66 Educating the Imagination, 145 Eliot, T. S., 81, 112, 116 Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 56 English, the irregularity of, 1-2 "Estrennes," 108 Euripides, 59 eye-mind split, in reading, 53-54, 72-74 Far Cry from Kensington, as origin of blank page reading technique, 107 Farrell, Kate, 147 Fear and Trembling, as difficult, 29 "Fern Hill," 117 "Fine Furs," 148 Finnegans Wake, 90, 112, 125 Fitzgerald, E Scott, 87 fixation (in reading), 43 fold-ins (reading technique), 83-85 foreign languages, 104-105 form letters, 134-135 fotonovellas, 96-98 Foundations of Literacy, 145 Freud, Sigmund, 48, 49 Frisch, Karl von, 147 Futurists, Italian, and innovative typography, 125 Galbraith, John Kenneth, 138 Gallup, Dickie, 26 Genesis of Secrecy, 146 Ginsberg, Allen, 26, 117 Glaucon, 39 Golden Bowl, 112 Goodman, Ken, and reading miscues, 40 Gould, Glenn, and innovation, 141 Gray and Monroe, 11 Gray, William S., 10 Great Balls of Fire, 45 Green, Henry, and intentional mishearing, 47-48 Grigson, Geoffrey, 83 Hardy Boys, 67-68 Hemingway, Ernest, voice of, 112 Higgins, Dick, 3 Holdaway, Don, 145 Hoover, Paul, 46 Hopper, Hedda, 28 House Beautiful, 28 Hovious, Carol, 139 How I Wrote Certain of My Books, 146 How to Teach Your Baby to Read, 145 "Hunger Artist," 87 Implied Reader, 108 intention of author, 39-40 Iser, Wolfgang, 60, 68, 73, 108 "It's Raining," 126 James, Henry, and voice, 112 Jealousy, 72 Jones, Spike, his use of the incongruous, 113-114 Joy of Cooking, 87 Joyce, James, 90, 108, 112, 114, 125 jumping a line (reading technique), 48, 61 Kafka, Franz, 40, 87 Kierkegaard, Soren, 29 Keene, Carolyn, 67 Kermode, Frank, 47, 146 Kerouac, Jack, 26, 88 Koch, Kenneth, 90, 118, 146, 147 170 Creative Reading157 La Berge, Stephen, and lucid dreaming, 90 Lamb, Charles, 132,147 Lassie, 24 Last Year at Marienbad, 72 Lauterbach, Anne, 145 Learning to Read, 10 Leaves of Grass, 112 Lee and Allen, xiv Lee, Marshall, on book design, 133, 135-136,137 Leites,_Edmund, 88 Lem, Stanislaw, 65 Lemaire, Gerard-Georges, 82 Lennard, John, 146 Leonard, Elmore, 87,114,130 Library That Would Not Die, in Lincoln, Abraham, 65 Lindbergh, Charles, 142 Lindsay, Vachel, and poetry readings, 117 linguistics approach to teaching reading, 2 listening, 122 Living Well Is the Best Revenge, 87 Loewinsohn, Ron, 120 Lone Ranger, 114 Lone Ranger and the Lost City of Gold, 24 "look-say" (word recognition) approach to teaching reading, 2,10 looping a line (reading technique), 49 lucid dreaming, 90 Lupton, Ellen, on the history of the alphabet, 145 McDaniel, Hattie, voice of, 113 McKay, Namah, 128 McKenna, Siobhan, voice of, 114 Magic Mountain, 87 Mallarme, Stephane, and use of typography, 124 Mann, Thomas, 87 Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, and use of typography, 127 Marx, Groucho, ix mastery, the idea of, in instruction, 2 "Meet the Press," 138 megaphone (reading technique), 120-121 Merz, and use of typography, 125 Mickey Mantle Story, 24-25 Midsummer Night's Dream, 116 Millay, Edna St. Vincent, voice of, 117 mindfulness, 54,55 mishearing, 47-48 misreading, intentional, 41 mistakes in reading, visual, 42-55 MIT Media Lab, and electronic newspapers, 81 Moby-Dick, 147 "Monday Rue Christine," 125 Money, 138 Monopoly, 1 Montaigne, 29-30 Moore, Clayton (The Lone Ranger), 24 Moore, Gary, 110 Morgenstern, Christian, 124 Motor Maids across the Continent, 59 Murphy, Gerald and Sara, 87 My Weekly Reader, 22-23 "Myself!", 128 Nation, 79 Nation at Risk, xv Navratilova, Martina, 79 Nell, Victor, 132 New & Selected Poems, 147 "New Impressions of Africa," 69 New York Times, 48,61,75-80 New York Times Book Review, 35 New Yorker, 148 newspapers, 79-81; electronic, 81 National Center for Education Statistics, xiv National Commission on Excellence in Education, xiv "Night Song," 124 night toning (reading technique), 90 Nihil: Rien, 108,146 Nineteen Elastic Poems, 125 Notebook of a Return to the Native Land, 129 Odier, Daniel, 79,81,96 O'Hara, Frank, 115 Old Man and the Sea, 132 011ivant, Alfred, 24 "On Cannibalism," 30 On Learning to Read, 38-41 On the Road, 88,129 One Hundred Trillion Poems, 69 "open" system of teaching reading and writing, xiv Orlando Furioso, 30 Oulipo, and use of chance operations, 60 Oz books, 22 171 158 Index Padgett, Ron, 45,115,145 page repeats (reading technique), 52-53, 71-72 page skips (reading technique), 41,52, 66-69,70 pantoum, 71 Paradise Lost, 116 parentheses (multiple), 69-70 Paris Review Henry Green interview, 47 William Burroughs interview, 79,89, 146 "Parole in liberta," 125,127 Pater, Walter, 73 penmanship, 11-12; of founding fathers, 12 Pepsi Cola, 142 permutations, random, 69 Pessoa, Fernando, 4 phonics, 2,10 Picasso, Pablo, 80 Pig Farming, 28 Pillow Book, 112 Pimp, 87 Poe, Edgar Allan, 114 "Poeta Fit, non Nascitur," 83 Poseidon Adventure, 132 Pound, Ezra voice of, 118 and "The Waste Land," 146 Price, Vincent, voice of, 114 "Printed Word and Beyond," 146 Proust, Marcel, voice of, 114 "Psychopathology of Everyday Life," 48 punctuation, history of, 12,145 Pym, Barbara, 130 Queneau, Raymond, and permutations, 69 Quiet American, 88 readability of a page, 135-136 reading after formal instruction, 35-37 aloud, 110-111,123 alternate lines, 61 anticipation in, 50-52 as passive activity, 3 at school, 33-35 backwards, 70-71,146 before formal instruction, 7-8,31-33 blank pages, 106-108 effect of metabolism on, 136,138 escapist, 130 in cars and trains, 129 in cities, 131-132 in nature, 131,147 modern literature, 124-127 slowly, 123 vertically, 43-44 while asleep, 90-91 while walking, 130 "reading" a painting, 44 Reading As ItWas, In reading instruction, 2 "Reading Proust," 114-115 reading research, 2-3 reading test scores, xiv "reading wheel," 25 Reading without Nonsense, 51 reading-writing connection, xiii-xiv, 11 readings, choral, 118-120 readings, public, by authors, 117-118 Reagan, Nancy, 78 Remembrance of Things Past, 114 Rimbaud, Arthur, 28 Robbe-Grillet, Main, and repetition, 72,88 Rodari, Gianni, and cut-ups, 82 Rolle, Richard, 105 Rorschach test, 83 Rosenblatt, Louise, 3 Roussel, Raymond, and use of multiple parentheses, 69,146 "Row, Row, Row Your Boat," 118 Ruth, Babe, 48 regression, in reading, 43 repetition, 45,61-62 Ripley's Believe It or Not 50th Anniversary Edition, 146 "rivers" (typographical), 65 Rosie O'Grady's Flying Circus, 142 Rowsome, Frank, 147 S + 7,60 saccade, 43 Sanders, George, 28 Santa Claus, 52 Sappora, Marc, and use of random arrangements of text, 69 Saroyan, Aram, and blank pages, 108 Satie, Erik, 28 Savage, Major John S., 141 scanning a new book, 57 Schneeman, George, 80 school library, problems with, 25 172 Creative Reading159 Schwitters, Kurt, 125 Season in Hell, 28 Secret of the Knight's Sword, 67-68 Seeds, 85 Sesame Street, 31 Shakespeare, spelling of, 12 Shaw, George Bernard, as poor speller, 17 Shonagon, Sei, 112 sign language and dance, 147 Silverheels, Jay (Tonto), 24, 114 single word errors, 46-48, 58-61 "Skaters," 112 Skytypers East, 142, 143 Skytypers West, 142, 143, 148 skytyping, 144 skywriting, 141-144, 147, 148 Slim, Iceberg, 87 "slots" (reading technique), 85-86 Smith, Frank, 51 Song of Caedmon, 105 Song of Solomon, 1 Sonnets, 106, 112 sound off, watching TV with, 96 Spark, Muriel, 107 spelling changes in, 12-13 instruction, 17-22 Stages of Reading Development, 122 Stein, Gertrude, 45, 62, 111, 117, 125 Steinbergh, Judith, 147 stencils, 91-96 Sterne, Laurence, 108 Stevens, Wallace, 115, 117 Stinis, Anthony ("Andy"), 142, 144 Stinis, Greg, 142, 143 Stokes, Katherine, 59 Striker, Fran, 24 Structures of Everyday Life, 86 subvocalization, 111, 116-117 sweep, visual, in reading, 43 Taylor, Stanford Earl, 43 Teachers & Writers Collaborative, 66 television, staccato cutting of images on, 138-139 Tender Is the Night, 87 Tennis Court Oath, 70 Tetes de rechange, 69 Think-and-Do Book, 8-10 Thomas, Dylan, voice of, 117 Thoreau, Henry David, 131 "Throw of the Dice," 124 Times-Argus (Barre-Montpelier, Vt.), 79-80 "To Make a Dadaist Poem," 82 Tompkins, Calvin, 87 Tonto, 114 Touring Club Italiano, 129 transposing up (reading technique), 49, 62 trickle down (reading technique), 62-65 Trilling, Lionel, 115 Tristram Shandy, 108 Tulsa Kid, 115 Turner, Captain Cyril, 142 Tutu, Desmond M., 78 typefaces, 133-134 typing, as a way of reading, 106 Tzara, Tristan, 82, 83 Ulysses, 108 unconscious, role of, in reading, 38-41 Unknown Man No.89, 87 Using Words, 17 Vanity Fair, 29 Veitch, Tom, 83, 112 Verse by the Side of the Road, 147 voice substitution, 113-116 "voice," the author's, 111-113, 146 Voyeur, 72, 88, 89 Wagner, Rudolph E, 145 Walden, 131 Waldman, John, 38, 41 Wall Street Journal, 148 "Waste Land," 81, 112 Wayne, John, voice of, 117 Weaver, Constance, 2, 40 Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, 148 What Works, 138 What's Up, Tiger Lily?, 96 Whitman, Walt, 50, 112 whole language approach, 2, 11 Wilde, Oscar, 1 Williams, C. K., 129 Williams, William Carlos, 116 Wisher, Peter, 147 Wodehouse, P G., 88 Wonderful Country, 88 word recognition approach ("look-say"), 2, 10 writers-in-the-schools, 11 173 160 Index writing, as active, 3 "writing process," 11 Wye, Margaret Enright, 145 "Yak and Yak," 147 Yeats, William Butler, as poor speller, 17 Zelan, Karen, 38-41 "Zone," 147 174 Author RON PADGEIT's books include The Big Some- thing, Great Balls of Fire, Ted:A Personal Memoir of Ted Berri gan, and Bloodwork: Selected Prose, as well as a translation of The Complete Poems of Blaise Cendrars and Guillaume Apollinaire's Poet Assassinated and Other Stories. He has received fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation, the National Endowment for the Arts, the New York State Council on the Arts, and the Fulbright Com- mission. From 1969 to 1978 he taught imaginative writing to students of all ages. For two years, Pad- gett directed the Saint Mark's Poetry Project in New York, before becoming publications director of Teachers & Writers Collaborative, for whom he has edited many books on the teaching of writing. For the past several years, he has also taught Imagi- native Writing at Columbia University. His New & Selected Poems appeared in 1996. 175 161 This book was typeset in Garamond and Futura by Precision Graphics. Typefaces used on the cover were Bodoni and Gill Sans. The book was printed on Finch Opaque, 60 lb. paper, by Braun-Brumfield, Inc. 176 NCTE Membership The Professional Choice for Teachers of English Language Arts NCTE membership provides you with powerful teaching toolspractical information you can use nowplus up-to-the-minute information on the latest scholarship and trends shaping our profession. Whether MU are an elementary. secondary, or postsecondary English language arts teacher, your membership in NCTE is customized to help you keep your teaching energized and your creative juicesflow- ing. Through membership in the Council. you can . u'rif Stay Connected. lour subscription to NCTE's journals will help you stay connected by bringing the world of ideas into your teaching. NCTE offers multiple journals specifi- cally geared to elementary, middle, secondary, and postsec- ondary levels. Selecting the journal specific to your classroom level allows you to customize your membership to give you ex- actly what you need. air' Support Your Profession. NCTE is made up of teachers and scholars like you who have great ideas to share and who are eager to swap thoughts and strategies as we all search for the right combination to connect with every student. Through membership you are joining more than -0,000 of your colleagues working together to advance the quality of English teaching and learning. u:3- Lighten Your Load. lOti already work hardNCTE helps you work smart by giving you effective. easy, and hands- on ways to streamline your grading. communicate effectively with parents. conduct productive student conferences, and lead your students to become more independent learners. ci Keep Up-to-Date. Through your subscription to NCTE's newspaper. The Council Chronicle. and your journal subscriptions, you can stay up-to-date on the current trends in English and be intormed of important education news. The Cbronide is also your key to keeping abreast of professional development activities through announcements of conferences. seminars, and great opportunities. Professional Benefits of NCTE Membership for Teachers of English Language Arts Include: or A year's subscription to the journal of your choice, written for teach- ers at your level. lart-A year's subscription to the NCTE newspaper, The. Council Chronicle. lir Discounts of up to 30% on conference and convention registration fees. t Opportunities to net- work 'With teachers in yourcommunity through chances to join your local NCTE affiliate. NiFree copies of NCTE position and policy state- ments to give you in- sights into the issues that confront you daily or-Opportunities to ex- pand your interests and build a personalized net- work of your colleagues through NCTE special in- terest groups dealing with topics such as ado- lescent literature, the role of computers in the classroom, and writing across the curriculum. For membership information, contact NCTE at 800-369-6283, or at1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096. Or visit our Web site at http://www.ncte.org. 177BEST COPY AVAILABLE 4V 11 ,$) $, 4 40 .01 t- Creative Reading is a lucid, friendly, and highly imaginative presentation of new ways to approach the printed page. Writing with a poet's -eye view, Ron Padgett discusses the mystery of learning to read, the physiology and psychology of reading, and the ongoing contests between various methods of instruction. The heart of the book, though, offers a series of inventive methods and exercises for creative reading, using both classic and modern literature in ways that blend reading and writing. Along the way, Padgett talks about the influence of typography, movies, and television on reading, the joys of misun- derstanding, the music of Spike Jones, skywriting, Dada poetry, an actual book that contains 100,000,000,000,000 poems and another that has no words at all, reading in dreams, and much more. In enlarging the possibilities of reading, this book will delight and inspire adventurous teachers at all levels, as well as anyone interested in what may well be the future of reading. National Council of Teachers of English 1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 0- or.4, '41tr suR' IPlb et 4q6 g'"', -0-Aa'a , ,.1,--4 * r0- AO t 41.0-s.-4 &_...,-- 9g ., 0,.t1 =',;t're SBN 0-8141-0906-3 4e ::,,sci;',II1E11111 IIfargt,,4:6(3, 443.4,1;14.r: ").ert.sittt..* 41BEST COPY AVAILABLE f, 4T78081109069 :4* t1r4cA, 178' ui913 (9/92) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OEM) Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) NOTICE REPRODUCTION BASIS WRICI This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a "Specific Document" Release form. This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either "Specific Document" or "Blanket"). The Poetry of Charles Reznikoff Holocaust, 1975, The Complete Poems, Vols. I and II, 1976, 1977, Testimony, Vol. I, 1978 (Vol. II projected for 1979), Black Sparrow Press I Over the last three years, Black Sparrow Press has been engaged in the admirable cask of re-publishing the bulk of Charles Reznikoff's writings. When the second volume of Testimony, the poet's long "recitative" on American life, appears chis spring, all of Reznikoff's verse will be in print. The entire series (except Holocaust) has been edited with apparent thoroughness and devotion by Seamus Cooney. In an important essay, ''The Sorrows of American­ Jewish Poetry" which appeared a few years ago in Commentary, Harold Bloom acknowledged the writer's gifts but confessed his disappointment when confronting Reznikoff's work as a whole. Bloom's strong doubts seem from his penetrating criticism of what he calls the "equivocal" achievements of those poets in the Pound-Williams school. He simply doesn't find Reznikoff' s imaginative pre-disposition compatible with the Poundian "objectivist" doctrines which the writer embraced. Bloom is chilled by one of Reznikoff's own verses which bears witness to the poet's eschewal of the higher and more difficult call­ ing (to Bloom) of the great American prophetic strain of Whitman, Stevens and Crane. Reznikoff should have clung to the Hebraic tone of the transcendental Emerson rather than to the mechanical pragmatism of the rwo "strangers," Pound and Williams: The he brew of your poets, Zion is like oil upon a burn, cool as oil; after work, the smell in the street at night of the hedge in flower. Like Solomon, I have married and married the speech of strangers; none are like you, Shulamite. But Bloom's insight should perhaps be taken as a polemic against what he feels is the too readily accept­ ed dogmatic creed that to speak of poetry in this cen­ tury is to speak of "The Pound Era." In the heat of 2 his argument, Bloom never gets around to talking significantly about what the poet's gifts actually are. Reznikoff's work, although it is not major poetry, has real value and deserves a lasting, if somewhat diminished place beside his fellow "objectivists" and friends, Louis Zukovsky and George Oppen. One has to face the face chat his poetry is modest, perhaps dis­ armingly so; it treats everyday objects in an everyday world, drawn without metaphors, without what Reznikoff himself considered ornamental or artificial language and form. At least this is Reznikoff in theory, as the poet saw himself. There is a quite self. conscious (possibly self-deceiving) attempt to avoid the visionary heritage of Romanticism, to cast off the robes of the self-appointed poec/prie r: Nor because of victories I sing, having none, but for the common sunshine, the breeze, the largess of the spring. Not for victory, but for the day's work done as well as I was able; not for a seat upon the dais bur at the common table . Although the glory of the noble conquerer is dis­ dained, the poetic voice is still forceful and enduring, akin to the common working man who steadily plow on while kingdoms rise and fall. In a memorial tribute to Reznikoff, who died in 1976, George Oppen wrote, . this is / heroic chis is / the poem / to write / in the great / world small.'' Setting aside the obvious and admitted influence of Pound and Eliot, Reznikoff's temperament as a writer was significantly molded by two major factors of his early life: his childhood in the impoverished Jewish ghettos of New York City at the turn of the century, and his training as a lawyer. The former, which he evoked so movingly in a series of short poems, "Jews," written in the '20's, displayed Reznikoff's pessimistic insight into the material forces (money, food, clothing, social status) and the baser emotions Qealousy, greed, lust, prejudice) which are an eternal portion of the human lot. His training in law enabled him to put into poetic practice a language which strived for clarity and absolute precision, as opposed to what Reznikoff felt was the vague toying with connotation of the majority of poets. The ideal of the law, with its concern for facts and objectivity, and its avoidance of moralizing and forming pre-conclusion is one Reznikoff held on to from quite early in his writing career. And he never forgot the ''meanness'' of his beginnings, the petty day-to-day affair in which he felt there still lurked a humanity. One find then, a bit of the priest in Reznikoff after all. In the persona of Samuel, the poet speaks what are perhaps his most celebrated lines, lines which are ironically uncharacteristic in that Reznikoff has adopted conventional meter and rhyme: Whatever unfriendly stars and comets do, whatever stormy heavens are unfurled, my spirit be like fire in this too that all the straws and rubbish of the world only feed its flame. The seasons change. That is change enough. Chance planted me beside a scream of water; content, I serve the land, whoever lives here and whoever passes As in "Samuel," my favorite Reznikoff poems are those in which he re-works either Biblical themes or historical treatises pn the ancient Jews. In depicting an age long lost, his language achieves a richness and sensuousness, both in terms of vocabulary and rhythm, which it often lacks. . "King David" is a re-telling of the noted legend, a slight modification of existing records because Rezni­ koff has imaginatively enlarged the role of Michal, Saul's daughter and one of David's wives. Through her eyes we get a picture of the King which is quite different from the official version the ruler's own scribes recorded (Michal, incidentally, doesn't miss the irony of "in-house" chronicling). She lays more emphasis on the tragedy of Saul and portrays David as a ruthless opportunist whose sense of God's benedic­ tion upon him becomes a license for cold calculation under the flag of righteousness. As he frequently does, Reznikoff deflates the myth of a '' golden age.'' There is no reason, of course, why we should even take Michal at her word, though her rhetoric convinces. The poem ends on a great irony underscored by repetition as Michal speaks: Your scribes will write you down a great king, and of me-if they say anything at all- but I belong to that doomed house of Saul not even Jonathan could save. I shall not weep before you again; these tears are the last: now I have wept them all away. And I can speak of all my dead without a tear. Your scribes will write me down a cold, proud woman, wandering about the garden of the king, and you a glorious king, a glorious king. Based on the historical writings of Josephus, ''The Fifth Book of the Maccabees,'' is a poignant and quite subtle study of the last days of the great Jewish state. Since it refers to the Apochrypha, the title is mildly ironic; the poet is adding a chapter to the works of doubtful authenticity, another imaginative delving into the ''facts.'' In a characteristically indirect and elliptical manner, Reznikoff describes the bloody rivalry between Alexander Jannai and the Pharisees and the eventual conquest of Palestine by Pompey. One can't read this poet lazily, for like many writers who employ similar means of indirection, if casually perused, they come off as flat. The narrative events are so organized in "Maccabees," the reader must skill­ fully dig for Reznikoff's true subject: the reasons for the spiritual decay and collapse of the old Jewish culture. Two internal causes, political and intellectual, are intimated: one, the decadence of the ruling family which, ignoring ancient religious strictures, glorified power and riches in an attempt to emulate and ultimately compete with Rome; and the other, the apparent vulnerability of the oral law tradition which appeared impractical and clumsy in the light of the eloquent and rational "moderns," Aristotle and Plato. The final blow which shatters the world of the Jews is delivered in the midst of the pagans' drive eastward as the Roman army sacks Jerusalem and violates the sacred shrines. In the closing section, Reznikoff creates pathos through true objectivist means, merely giving the reader a two-page descriptive catalogue of the various appurtenances of the typical Roman mercenary on the march, a fragment of which reads: Their leather coats, heavy with bands of iron and brass over sleeveless woolen shirts; a greave of bronze on the right leg­ the forward leg in battle- and feet in heavy sandals; a heavy square shield of wood plated with iron hung at each man's left. The badge of his cohort, a bright wreath or a thunderbolt , perhaps, painted about the boss, but now, on the march, under a leather cover. In this sustained single im•age, the objects speak for themselves; the overwhelming technological and material forces in their naked immediacy assert their control over the course of events. Reznikoff then shifts modes abruptly with a short epilogue taken from the "Song of Deborah." It is a wonderful juxtaposition: ''The river Kishon swept them away, the ancient river, the river Kishon. 0 my soul, you have trodden down strength!'' HERALDOS NEGROS CÉSAR V ALLEJO Los Laberintos CÉSAR V ALLEJO 36 Los heraldos negros  LOS HERALDOS NEGROS Edición de divulgación basada en la de Ricardo González Vigil (99) Lima, 2007 [Lima, 1918] Laberintos César Vallejo CÉSAR V ALLEJO 2 2008 DERECHOS RESERVADOS DE ESTA EDICIÓN EN FORMATO ELECTRÓNICO Centro Peruano de Estudios Culturales Ediciones Laberintos es una marca comercial del Centro Peruano de Estudios Culturales Edición distribuida por Páginas del Perú S. A. C. www.paginasdelperu.com DIGITACIÓN Alumnos de la promoción 2003 del Colegio Trilce Surco, dirigidos por Karem Robertson y Óscar Limache PRIMERA REVISIÓN Rosario Rivas T arazona REVISIÓN FINAL Paul Forsyth DISEÑO Y DIAGRAMACIÓN Ana María T essey SUPERVISIÓN Y EDICIÓN GENERAL Ó scar Limache y Alexander Forsyth PINTURA DE PORTADA Ricardo Wiesse Los heraldos negros 3 ÍNDICE DE LOS PRIMEROS VERSOS Hay golpes en la vida, tan fuertes... Y o no sé! 9 PLAFONES ÁGILES Luna! Corona de una testa inmensa, 3 Linda Regia! T us venas son fermentos 4 Dulce hebrea, desclava mi tráns ito de arcilla; 5 V engo a verte pasar todos los días, 6 Al callar la orquesta, pasean veladas 7 Luciré para Tilia, en la tragedia, 8 He soñado una fuga. Y he soñado 9 Lirismo de invierno, rumor de crespones, 20 Ausente! La mañana en que me vaya 2 Melancolía, saca tu dulce pico ya; 22 Cual hieráticos bardos prisioneros, 23 BUZOS Es una araña enorme que ya no anda; 27 Dulce hogar sin estilo, fabricado 28 Pasamos juntos. El sueño 29 Más acá, más acá. Y o estoy muy bien. 30 DE LA TIERRA —Si te amara... qué sería? 33 Amada, en esta noche tú te has crucificado 34 CÉSAR V ALLEJO 4 V erano, ya me voy. Y me dan pena 35 Aquella noche de Setiembre, fuiste 36 Esta tarde llueve, como nunca; y no 37 Señor! Estabas tras los cristales 38 La noche es una copa de mal. Un silbo agudo 39 Pureza amada, que mis ojos nunca 40 Llegué a confundirme con ella, 4 Silencio. Aquí se ha hecho ya de noche, 42 NOSTALGIAS IMPERIALES En los paisajes de Mansiche labra 45 La anciana pensativa, cual relieve 45 Como viejos curacas van los bueyes 46 La Grama mustia, recogida, escueta 47 Fulge mi cigarillo; 48 El puño labrador se aterciopela, 50 Echa una caña al aire el indio triste. 50 Madrugada. La chicha al fin revienta 5 Ni sé para quioén es esta amargura! 52 Y o soy el corequenque ciego 53 Vierte el humo doméstico en la aurora 54 Lejana la vibración de esquilas mustias 56 Qué está haciendo esta hora mi andina y dulce Rita 58 TRUENOS Y el alma se asustó 6 Hoy no ha venido nadie a preguntar; 62 Así pasa la vida, como raro espejismo. 63 Me siento bien. Ahora 64 Los heraldos negros 5 El suertero que grita “La de a mil” , 65 Se bebe el desayuno... Húmeda tierra 66 Color de ropa antigua. Un Julio a sombra, 68 Como horribles batracios a la atmósfera, 69 Anoche, unos abriles granas capitularon 70 Cada cinta de fuego 7 Subes centelleante de labios y ojeras! 72 Hasta cuándo estaremos esperando lo que 73 Amada: no has querido plasmarte jamás 74 Solo al dejar de ser, Amor es fuerte! 75 Esta mañana bajé 76 Y o digo para mí: por fin escapo al ruido; 77 Ir muriendo y cantando. Y bautizar la sombra 78 Dios mío, estoy llorando el ser que vivo; 79 Hay ganas de volver, de amar, de no ausentarse, 80 Viejo Osiris! Llegué hasta la pared 8 En Lima... En Lima está lloviendo 82 Amor, ya no vuelves a mis ojos muertos; 83 Siento a Dios que camina 84 En esta noche mi reloj jadea 85 Arriero, vas fabulosamente vidriado de sudor. 86 CANCIONES DE HOGAR Por los cuadros de santos en el muro colgados 89 Mi padre duerme. Su semblante augusto 90 Hermano, hoy estoy en el poyo de la casa, 9 Mi padre, apenas, 92 Y o nací un día 94 CÉSAR V ALLEJO 6 Los heraldos negros 7 Qui potest capere capiat E L EVANGELIO CÉSAR V ALLEJO 8 Los heraldos negros 9 LOS HERALDOS NEGROS Hay golpes en la vida, tan fuertes... Y o no sé! Golpes como del odio de Dios; como si ante ellos, la resaca de todo lo sufrido se empozara en el alma... Y o no sé! Son pocos; pero son... Abren zanjas oscuras en el rostro más fiero y en el lomo más fuerte. Serán talvez los potros de bárbaros atilas; o los heraldos negros que nos manda la Muerte. Son las caídas hondas de los Cristos del alma, de alguna fe adorable que el Destino blasfema. Esos golpes sangrientos son las crepitaciones de algún pan que en la puerta del horno se nos quema. Y el hombre... Pobre... pobre! Vuelve los ojos, como cuando por sobre el hombro nos llama una palmada; vuelve los ojos locos, y todo lo vivido se empoza, como charco de culpa, en la mirada. Hay golpes en la vida, tan fuertes... Y o no sé! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 0 Los heraldos negros  Plafones ágiles CÉSAR V ALLEJO 2 Los heraldos negros 3 DESHOJACION SAGRADA Luna! Corona de una testa inmensa, que te vas deshojando en sombras gualdas! Roja corona de un Jesús que piensa trágicamente dulce de esmeraldas! Luna! Alocado corazón celeste ¿por qué bogas así, dentro la copa llena de vino azul, hacia el oeste, cual derrotada y dolorida popa? Luna! Y a fuerza de volar en vano, te holocaustas en ópalos dispersos: tú eres talvez mi corazón gitano que vaga en el azul llorando versos!... CÉSAR V ALLEJO 4 COMUNION Linda Regia! T us venas son fermentos de mi noser antiguo y del champaña negro de mi vivir! T u cabello es la ignota raicilla del árbol de mi vid. T u cabello es la hilacha de una mitra de ensueño que perdí! T u cuerpo es la espumante escaramuza de un rosado Jordán; y ondea, como un látigo beatífico que humillara a la víbora del mal! T us brazos dan la sed de lo infinito, con sus castas hespérides de luz, cual dos blancos caminos redentores, dos arranques murientes de una cruz. Y están plasmados en la sangre invicta de mi imposible azul! T us pies son dos heráldicas alondras que eternamente llegan de mi ayer! Linda Regia! T us pies son las dos lágrimas que al bajar del Espíritu ahogué, un Domingo de Ramos que entré al Mundo, ya lejos para siempre de Belén! Los heraldos negros 5 NERVAZON DE ANGUSTIA Dulce hebrea, desclava mi tránsito de arcilla; desclava mi tensión nerviosa y mi dolor... Desclava, amada eterna, mi largo afán y los dos clavos de mis alas y el clavo de mi amor! Regreso del desierto donde he caído mucho; retira la cicuta y obséquiame tus vinos: espanta con un llanto de amor a mis sicarios, cuyos gestos son férreas cegueras de Longinos! Desclávame mis clavos ¡oh nueva madre mía! ¡Sinfonía de olivos, escancia tu llorar! Y has de esperar, sentada junto a mi carne muerta, cuál cede la amenaza, y alondra se va! Pasas... vuelves... T us lutos trenzan mi gran cilicio con gotas de curare, filos de humanidad, la dignidad roquera que hay en tu castidad, y el judithesco azogue de tu miel interior. Son la ocho de una mañana en crema brujo... Hay frío... Un perro pasa royendo el hueso de otro perro que fue... Y empieza a llorar en mis nervios un fósforo que en cápsulas de silencio apagué! Y en mi alma hereje canta su dulce fiesta asiática un dionisíaco hastío de café...! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 6 BORDAS DE HIELO V engo a verte pasar todos los días, vaporcito encantado siempre lejos... T us ojos son dos rubios capitanes; tu labio es un brevísimo pañuelo rojo que ondea en un adiós de sangre! V engo a verte pasar; hasta que un día, embriagada de tiempo y de crueldad, vaporcito encantado siempre lejos, la estrella de la tarde partirá! Las jarcias; vientos que traicionan; vientos de mujer que pasó! T us fríos capitanes darán orden; y quien habrá partido seré yo... Los heraldos negros 7 NOCHEBUENA Al callar la orquesta, pasean veladas sombras femeninas bajo los ramajes, por cuya hojarasca se filtran heladas quimeras de luna, pálidos celajes. Hay labios que lloran arias olvidadas, grandes lirios fingen los ebúrneos trajes. Charlas y sonrisas en locas bandadas perfuman de seda los rudos boscajes. Espero que ría la luz de tu vuelta; y en la epifanía de tu forma esbelta, cantará la fiesta en oro mayor. Balarán mis versos en tu predio entonces, canturreando en todos sus místicos bronces que ha nacido el niño-jesús de tu amor. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 8 ASCUAS Para Domingo Parra del Riego Luciré para Tilia, en la tragedia, mis estrofas en óptimos racimos; sangrará cada fruta melodiosa, como un sol funeral, lúgubres vinos. Tilia tendrá la cruz que en la hora final será de luz! Prenderé para Tilia, en la tragedia, la gota de fragor que hay en mis labios; y el labio, al encresparse para el beso, se partirá en cien pétalos sagrados. Tilia tendrá el puñal, el puñal floricida y auroral! Y a en la sombra, heroína, intacta y mártir, tendrás bajo tus plantas a la Vida; mientras veles, rezando mis estrofas, mi testa, como una hostia en sangre tinta! Y en un lirio, voraz, mi sangre, como un virus, beberás! Los heraldos negros 9 MEDIALUZ He soñado una fuga. Y he soñado tus encajes dispersos en la alcoba. A lo largo de un muelle, alguna madre; y sus quince años dando el seno a una hora. He soñado una fuga. Un “para siempre” suspirado en la escala de una proa; he soñado una madre; unas frescas matitas de verdura, y el ajuar constelado de una aurora. A lo largo de un muelle... Y a lo largo de un cuello que se ahoga! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 20 SAUCE Lirismo de invierno, rumor de crespones, cuando ya se acerca la pronta partida; agoreras voces de tristes canciones que en la tarde rezan una despedida. Visión del entierro de mis ilusiones en la propia tumba de mortal herida. Caridad verónica de ignotas regiones, donde a precio de éter se pierda la vida. Cerca de la aurora partiré llorando; y mientras mis años se vayan curvando, curvará guadañas mi ruta veloz. Y ante fríos óleos de luna muriente, con timbres de aceros en tierra indolente, cavarán los perros, aullando, un adiós! Los heraldos negros 2 AUSENTE Ausente! La mañana en que me vaya más lejos de lo lejos, al Misterio, como siguiendo inevitable raya, tus pies resbalarán al cementerio. Ausente! La mañana en que a la playa del mar de sombra y del callado imperio, como un pájaro lúgubre me vaya, será el blanco panteón tu cautiverio. Se habrá hecho de noche en tus miradas; y sufrirás, y tomarás entonces penitentes blancuras laceradas. Ausente! Y en tus propios sufrimientos ha de cruzar entre un llorar de bronces una jauría de remordimientos! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 22 AVESTRUZ Melancolía, saca tu dulce pico ya; no cebes tus ayunos en mis trigos de luz. Melancolía, basta! Cuál beben tus puñales la sangre que extrajera mi sanguijuela azul! No acabes el maná de mujer que ha bajado; yo quiero que de él nazca mañana alguna cruz, mañana que no tenga yo a quien volver los ojos, cuando abra su gran O de burla el ataúd. Mi corazón es tiesto regado de amargura; hay otros viejos pájaros que pastan dentro de él... Melancolía, deja de secarme la vida, y desnuda tu labio de mujer...! Los heraldos negros 23 BAJO LOS ALAMOS Para José Eulogio Garrido Cual hieráticos bardos prisioneros, los álamos de sangre se han dormido. Rumian arias de yerba al sol caído, las greyes de Belén en los oteros. El anciano pastor, a los postreros martirios de la luz estremecido, en sus pascuales ojos ha cogido una casta manada de luceros. Labrado en orfandad baja el instante con rumores de entierro, al campo orante; y se otoñan de sombra las esquilas. Supervive el azul urdido en hierro, y en él, amortajadas las pupilas, traza su aullido pastoral un perro. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 24 Los heraldos negros 25 Buzos CÉSAR V ALLEJO 26 Los heraldos negros 27 LA ARAÑA Es una araña enorme que ya no anda; una araña incolora, cuyo cuerpo, una cabeza y un abdomen, sangra. Hoy la he visto de cerca. Y con qué esfuerzo hacia todos los flancos sus pies innumerables alargaba. Y he pensado en sus ojos invisibles, los pilotos fatales de la araña. Es una araña que temblaba fija en un filo de piedra; el abdomen a un lado, y al otro la cabeza. Con tantos pies la pobre, y aún no puede resolverse. Y, al verla atónita en tal trance, hoy me ha dado qué pena esa viajera. Es una araña enorme, a quien impide el abdomen seguir a la cabeza. Y he pensado en sus ojos y en sus pies numerosos... ¡Y me ha dado qué pena esa viajera! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 28 BABEL Dulce hogar sin estilo, fabricado de un solo golpe y de una sola pieza de cera tornasol. Y en el hogar ella daña y arregla; a veces dice: “El hospicio es bonito; aquí no más!” ¡Y otras veces se pone a llorar! Los heraldos negros 29 ROMERIA Pasamos juntos. El sueño lame nuestros pies qué dulce; y todo se desplaza en pálidas renunciaciones sin dulce. Pasamos juntos. Las muertas almas, las que, cual nosotros, cruzaron por el amor, con enfermos pasos ópalos, salen en sus lutos rígidos y se ondulan en nosotros. Amada, vamos al borde frágil de un montón de tierra. V a en aceite fungida el ala, y en pureza. Pero un golpe, al caer yo no sé dónde, afila de cada lágrima un diente hostil. Y un soldado, un gran soldado, heridas por charreteras, se anima en la tarde heroica, y a sus pies muestra entre risas, como una gualdrapa horrenda, el cerebro de la Vida. Pasamos juntos, muy juntos, invicta Luz, paso enfermo; pasamos juntos las lilas mostazas de un cementerio. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 30 EL PALCO ESTRECHO Más acá, más acá. Y o estoy muy bien. Llueve; y hace una cruel limitación. Avanza, avanza el pie. Hasta qué hora no suben las cortinas esas manos que fingen un zarzal? V es? Los otros, qué cómodos, qué efigies. Más acá, más acá! Llueve. Y hoy tarde pasará otra nave cargada de crespón; será un pezón negro y deforme arrancado a la esfíngica Ilusión. Más acá, más acá. T ú estás al borde y la nave arrastrarte puede al mar. Ah, cortinas inmóviles, simbólicas... Mi aplauso es un festín de rosas negras: cederte mi lugar! Y en el fragor de mi renuncia, un hilo de infinito sangrará. Y o no debo estar tan bien; avanza, avanza el pie! Los heraldos negros 3 De la tierra CÉSAR V ALLEJO 32 Los heraldos negros 33 ¿ ........... —Si te amara... qué sería? —Una orgía! —Y si él te amara? Sería todo rituario, pero menos dulce. Y si tú me quisieras? La sombra sufriría justos fracasos en tus niñas monjas. Culebrean latigazos, cuando el can ama a su dueño? —No; pero la luz es nuestra. Estás enfermo... V ete... T engo sueño! (Bajo la alameda vesperal se quiebra un fragor de rosa). —Idos, pupilas, pronto... Y a retoña la selva en mi cristal! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 34 EL POETA A SU AMADA Amada, en esta noche tú te has crucificado sobre los dos maderos curvados de mi beso; y tu pena me ha dicho que Jesús ha llorado, y que hay un viernesanto más dulce que ese beso. En esta noche rara que tanto me has mirado, la Muerte ha estado alegre y ha cantado en su hueso. En esta noche de Setiembre se ha oficiado mi segunda caída y el más humano beso. Amada, moriremos los dos juntos, muy juntos; se irá secando a pausas nuestra excelsa amargura; y habrán tocado a sombra nuestros labios difuntos. Y ya no habrá reproches en tus ojos benditos; ni volveré a ofenderte. Y en una sepultura los dos nos dormiremos, como dos hermanitos. Los heraldos negros 35 VERANO V erano, ya me voy. Y me dan pena las manitas sumisas de tus tardes. Llegas devotamente; llegas viejo; y ya no encontrarás en mi alma a nadie. V erano! Y pasarás por mis balcones con gran rosario de amatistas y oros, como un obispo triste que llegara de lejos a buscar y bendecir los rotos aros de unos muertos novios. V erano, ya me voy. Allá, en Setiembre tengo una rosa que te encargo mucho; la regarás de agua bendita todos los días de pecado y de sepulcro. Si a fuerza de llorar el mausoleo, con luz de fe su mármol aletea, levanta en alto su responso, y pide a Dios que siga para siempre muerta. T odo ha de ser ya tarde; y tú no encontrarás en mi alma a nadie. Y a no llores, V erano! En aquel surco muere una rosa que renace mucho... CÉSAR V ALLEJO 36 SETIEMBRE Aquella noche de Setiembre, fuiste tan buena para mí... hasta dolerme! Y o no sé lo demás; y para eso, no debiste ser buena, no debiste. Aquella noche sollozaste al verme hermético y tirano, enfermo y triste. Y o no sé lo demás... y para eso, yo no sé por qué fui triste... tan triste...! Sólo esa noche de Setiembre dulce, tuve a tus ojos de Magdala, toda la distancia de Dios... y te fui dulce! Y también fue una tarde de Setiembre cuando sembré en tus brasas, desde un auto, los charcos de esta noche de diciembre. Los heraldos negros 37 HECES Esta tarde llueve como nunca; y no tengo ganas de vivir, corazón. Esta tarde es dulce. Por qué no ha de ser? Viste gracia y pena; viste de mujer. Esta tarde en Lima llueve. Y yo recuerdo las cavernas crueles de mi ingratitud; mi bloque de hielo sobre su amapola, más fuerte que su “No seas así!” Mis violentas flores negras; y la bárbara y enorme pedrada; y el trecho glacial. Y pondrá el silencio de su dignidad con óleos quemantes el punto final. Por eso esta tarde, como nunca, voy con este búho, con este corazón. Y otras pasan; y viéndome tan triste, toman un poquito de ti en la abrupta arruga de mi hondo dolor. Esta tarde llueve, llueve mucho. ¡Y no tengo ganas de vivir, corazón! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 38 IMPÍA Señor! Estabas tras los cristales humano y triste de atardecer; y cuál lloraba tus funerales esa mujer! Sus ojos eran el jueves santo, dos negros granos de amarga luz! Con duras gotas de sangre y llanto clavó tu cruz! Impía! Desde que tú partiste, Señor, no ha ido nunca al Jordán, en rojas aguas su piel desviste, y al vil judío le vende pan! Los heraldos negros 39 LA COPA NEGRA La noche es una copa de mal. Un silbo agudo del guardia la atraviesa, cual vibrante alfiler. Oye, tú, mujerzuela, ¿cómo, si ya te fuiste, la onda aún es negra y me hace aún arder? La Tierra tiene bordes de féretro en la sombra. Oye, tú, mujerzuela, no vayas a volver. Mi carne nada, nada en la copa de sombra que me hace aún doler; mi carne nada en ella, como en un pantanoso corazón de mujer. Ascua astral... He sentido secos roces de arcilla sobre mi loto diáfano caer. Ah, mujer! Por ti existe la carne hecha de instinto. Ah, mujer! Por eso ¡oh, negro cáliz! aun cuando ya te fuiste, me ahogo con el polvo, y piafan en mis carnes más ganas de beber! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 40 DESHORA Pureza amada, que mis ojos nunca llegaron a gozar. Pureza absurda! Y o sé que estabas en la carne un día, cuando yo hilaba aún mi embrión de vida. Pureza en falda neutra de colegio; y leche azul dentro del trigo tierno a la tarde de lluvia, cuando el alma ha roto su puñal en retirada, cuando ha cuajado en no sé qué probeta sin contenido una insolente piedra, cuando hay gente contenta; y cuando lloran párpados ciegos en purpúreas bordas. Oh, pureza que nunca ni un recado me dejaste, al partir del triste barro ni una migaja de tu voz; ni un nervio de tu convite heroico de luceros. Alejaos de mí, buenas maldades, dulces bocas picantes... Y o la recuerdo al veros ¡oh, mujeres! Pues de la vida en la perenne tarde, nació muy poco ¡pero mucho muere! Los heraldos negros 4 FRESCO Llegué a confundirme con ella, tanto...! Por sus recodos espirituales, yo me iba jugando entre tiernos fresales, entre sus griegas manos matinales. Ella me acomodaba después los lazos negros y bohemios de la corbata. Y yo volvía a ver la piedra absorta, desairados los bancos, y el reloj que nos iba envolviendo en su carrete, al dar su inacabable molinete. Buenas noches aquellas, que hoy la dan por reír de mi extraño morir, de mi modo de andar meditabundo. Alfeñiques de oro, joyas de azúcar que al fin se quiebran en el mortero de losa de este mundo. Pero para las lágrimas de amor, los luceros son lindos pañuelitos lilas, naranjas, verdes, que empapa el corazón. Y si hay ya mucha hiel en esas sedas, hay un cariño que no nace nunca, que nunca muere, vuela otro gran pañuelo apocalíptico, la mano azul, inédita de Dios! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 42 YESO Silencio. Aquí se ha hecho ya de noche, ya tras del cementerio se fue el sol; aquí se está llorando a mil pupilas: no vuelvas; ya murió mi corazón. Silencio. Aquí ya todo está vestido de dolor riguroso; y arde apenas, como un mal kerosene, está pasión. Primavera vendrá. Cantarás “Eva” desde un minuto horizontal, desde un hornillo en que arderán los nardos de Eros. ¡Forja allí tu perdón para el poeta, que ha de dolerme aún, como clavo que cierra un ataúd! Mas... una noche de lirismo, tu buen seno, tu mar rojo se azotará con olas de quince años, al ver lejos, aviado con recuerdos mi corsario bajel, mi ingratitud. Después, tu manzanar, tu labio dándose, y que se aja por mí por la vez última, y que muere sangriento de amar mucho, como un croquis pagano de Jesús. Amada! Y cantarás; y ha de vibrar el femenino en mi alma, como en una enlutada catedral. Los heraldos negros 43 Nostalgias imperiales CÉSAR V ALLEJO 44 Los heraldos negros 45 NOSTALGIAS IMPERIALES I En los paisajes de Mansiche labra imperiales nostalgias el crepúsculo; y lábrase la raza en mi palabra, como estrella de sangre a flor de músculo. El campanario dobla... No hay quien abra la capilla... Diríase un opúsculo bíblico que muriera en la palabra de asiática emoción de este crepúsculo. Un poyo con tres potos, es retablo en que acaban de alzar labios en coro la eucaristía de una chicha de oro. Más allá, de los ranchos surge al viento el humo oliendo a sueño y a establo, como si se exhumara un firmamento. II La anciana pensativa, cual relieve de un bloque pre-incaico, hila que hila; en sus dedos de Mama el huso leve la lana gris de su vejez trasquila. Sus ojos de esclerótica de nieve un ciego sol sin luz guarda y mutila...! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 46 Su boca está en desdén, y en calma aleve su cansancio imperial talvez vigila. Hay ficus que meditan, melenudos trovadores incaicos en derrota, la rancia pena de esta cruz idiota, en la hora en rubor que ya se escapa, y que es lago que suelda espejos rudos donde náufrago llora Manco-Cápac. III Como viejos curacas van los bueyes camino de Trujillo, meditando... Y al hierro de la tarde, fingen reyes que por muertos dominios van llorando. En el muro de pie, pienso en las leyes que la dicha y la angustia van trocando: ya en las viudas pupilas de los bueyes se pudren sueños que no tienen cuándo. La aldea, ante su paso, se reviste de un rudo gris, en que un mugir de vaca se aceita en sueño y emoción de huaca. Y en el festín del cielo azul yodado gime en el cáliz de la esquila triste un viejo corequenque desterrado. Los heraldos negros 47 IV La Grama mustia, recogida, escueta ahoga no sé qué protesta ignota: parece el alma exhausta de un poeta, arredrada en un gesto de derrota. La Ramada ha tallado su silueta, cadavérica jaula, sola y rota, donde mi enfermo corazón se aquieta en un tedio estatual de terracota. Llega el canto sin sal del mar labrado en su máscara bufa de canalla que babea y da tumbos, ahorcado! La niebla hila una venda al cerro lila que en ensueños miliarios se enmuralla, como un huaco gigante que vigila. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 48 HOJAS DE EBANO Fulge mi cigarrillo; su luz se limpia en pólvoras de alerta. Y a su guiño amarillo entona un pastorcillo el tamarindo de su sombra muerta. Ahoga en una enérgica negrura el caserón entero la mustia distinción de su blancura. Pena un frágil aroma de aguacero. Están todas las puertas muy ancianas, y se hastía en su habano carcomido una insomne piedad de mil ojeras. Y o las dejé lozanas; y hoy ya las telarañas han zurcido hasta en el corazón de sus maderas, coágulos de sombra oliendo a olvido. La del camino, el día que me miró llegar, trémula y triste, mientras que sus dos brazos entreabría, chilló como en un llanto de alegría. Que en toda fibra existe, para el ojo que ama, una dormida novia perla, una lágrima escondida. Con no sé qué memoria secretea mi corazón ansioso. — Señora?... —Sí, señor; murió en la aldea; aún la veo envueltita en su rebozo... Los heraldos negros 49 Y la abuela amargura de un cantar neurasténico de paria ¡oh, derrotada musa legendaria! afila sus melódicos raudales bajo la noche oscura; como si abajo, abajo, en la turbia pupila de cascajo de abierta sepultura, celebrando perpetuos funerales, se quebrasen fantásticos puñales. Llueve... llueve... Sustancia el aguacero, reduciéndolo a fúnebres olores, el humor de los viejos alcanfores que velan tahuashando en el sendero con sus ponchos de hielo y sin sombrero. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 50 TERCETO AUTÓCTONO I El puño labrador se aterciopela, y en cruz en cada labio se aperfila. Es fiesta! El ritmo del arado vuela; y es un chantre de bronce cada esquila. Afílase lo rudo. Habla escarcela... En las venas indígenas rutila un yaraví de sangre que se cuela en nostalgias de sol por la pupila. Las pallas, aquenando hondos suspiros, como en raras estampas seculares, enrosarian un símbolo en sus giros. Luce el Apóstol en su trono, luego; y es, entre inciensos, cirios y cantares, el moderno dios-sol para el labriego. II Echa una cana al aire el indio triste. Hacia el altar fulgente va el gentío. El ojo del crepúsculo desiste de ver quemado vivo el caserío. La pastora de lana y llanque viste, con pliegues de candor en su atavío; Los heraldos negros 5 y en su humildad de lana heroica y triste, copo es su blanco corazón bravío. Entre músicas, fuegos de bengala, Solfea un acordeón! Algún tendero da su reclame al viento: “Nadie iguala!” Las chispas al flotar lindas, graciosas, son trigos de oro audaz que el chacarero siembra en los cielos y en las nebulosas. III Madrugada. La chica al fin revienta en sollozos, lujurias, pugilatos; entre olores de úrea y de pimienta traza un ebrio al andar mil garabatos. “Mañana que me vaya....” se lamenta un Romeo rural cantando a ratos. Caldo madrugador hay ya de venta; y brinca un ruido aperital de platos. V an tres mujeres... silba un golfo... Lejos el río anda borracho y canta y llora prehistorias de agua, tiempos viejos. Y al sonar una caja de T ayanga, como iniciando un huaino azul, remanga sus pantorrillas de azafrán la Aurora. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 52 ORACION DEL CAMINO Ni sé para quien es esta amargura! Oh, Sol, llévala tú que estás muriendo, y cuelga, como un Cristo ensangrentado, mi bohemio dolor sobre su pecho. El valle es de oro amargo; y el viaje es triste, es largo. Oyes? Regaña una guitarra. Calla! Es tu raza, la pobre viejecita que al saber que eres huésped y que te odian, se hinca la faz con una roncha lila. El valle es de oro amargo, y el trago es largo... largo... Azulea el camino; ladra el río... Baja esa frente sudorosa y fría, fiera y deforme. Cae el pomo roto de una espada humanicida! Y en el mómico valle de oro santo, la brasa del sudor se apaga en llanto! Queda un olor de tiempo abonado de versos, para brotes de mármoles consagrados que hereden la aurífera canción de la alondra que se pudre en mi corazón! Los heraldos negros 53 HUACO Y o soy el corequenque ciego que mira por la lente de una llaga, y que atado está al Globo, como a un huaco estupendo que girara. Y o soy el llama, a quien tan sólo alcanza la necedad hostil a trasquilar volutas de clarín, volutas de clarín brillantes de asco y bronceadas de un viejo yaraví. Soy el pinchón de cóndor desplumado por latino arcabuz; y la flor de humildad flotó en los Andes como un perenne Lázaro de luz. Y o soy la gracia incaica que se roe en áureos coricanchas bautizados de fosfatos de error y de cicuta. A veces en mis piedras se encabritan los nervios rotos de un extinto puma Un fermento de Sol; ¡levadura de sombra y corazón! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 54 MAYO Vierte el humo doméstico en la aurora su sabor a rastrojo; y canta, haciendo leña, la pastora un salvaje aleluya! Sepia y rojo. Humo de la cocina, aperitivo de gesta en este bravo amanecer. El último lucero fugitivo lo bebe, y, ebrio ya de su dulzor, ¡oh celeste zagal trasnochador! se duerme entre un jirón de rosicler. Hay ciertas ganas lindas de almorzar, y beber del arroyo, y chivatear! Aletear con el humo allá, en la altura; o entregarse a los vientos otoñales en pos de alguna Ruth sagrada, pura, que nos brinde una espiga de ternura bajo la hebraica unción de los trigales! Hoz al hombro calmoso, acre el gesto brioso, va un joven labrador a Irichugo. Y en cada brazo que parece yugo se encrespa el férreo jugo palpitante que en creador esfuerzo cuotidiano chispea, como trágico diamante, a través de los poros de la mano que no ha bizantinado aún el guante. Los heraldos negros 55 Bajo un arco que forma verde aliso, ¡oh cruzada fecunda del andrajo! pasa el perfil macizo de este Aquiles incaico del trabajo. La zagala que llora su yaraví a la aurora, recoge ¡oh V enus pobre! frescos leños fragantes en sus desnudos brazos arrogantes esculpidos en cobre. En tanto que un becerro, perseguido del perro, por la cuesta bravía corre, ofrendando al floreciente día un himno de Virgilio en su cencerro! Delante de la choza el indio abuelo fuma; y el serrano crepúsculo de rosa, el ara primitiva se sahúma en el gas del tabaco. T al surge de la entraña fabulosa de epopéyico huaco, mítico aroma de broncíneos lotos, el hilo azul de los alientos rotos! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 56 ALDEANA Lejana vibración de esquilas mustias en el aire derrama la fragancia rural de sus angustias. En el patio silente sangra su despedida el sol poniente. El ámbar otoñal del panorama toma un frío matiz de gris doliente! Al portón de la casa que el tiempo con sus garras torna ojosa, asoma silenciosa y al establo cercano luego pasa, la silueta calmosa de un buey color de oro, que añora con sus bíblicas pupilas, oyendo la oración de las esquilas, su edad viril de toro! Al muro de la huerta, aleteando la pena de su canto, salta un gallo gentil, y, en triste alerta, cual dos gotas de llanto, tiemblan sus ojos en la tarde muerta! Lánguido se desgarra en la vetusta aldea el dulce yaraví de una guitarra, en cuya eternidad de hondo quebranto la triste voz de un indio dondonea, como un viejo esquilón de camposanto. Los heraldos negros 57 De codos yo en el muro, cuando triunfa en el alma el tinte oscuro y el viento reza en los ramajes yertos llantos de quenas, tímidos, inciertos, suspiro una congoja, al ver que en la penumbra gualda y roja llora un trágico azul de idilios muertos! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 58 IDILIO MUERTO Qué estará haciendo esta hora mi andina y dulce Rita de junco y capulí; ahora que me asfixia Bizancio, y que dormita la sangre, como flojo coñac, dentro de mí. Dónde estarán sus manos que en actitud contrita planchaban en las tardes blancuras por venir; ahora, en esta lluvia que me quita las ganas de vivir. Qué será de su falda de franela; de sus afanes; de su andar; de su sabor a cañas de Mayo de lugar. Ha de estarse a la puerta mirando algún celaje, y al fin dirá temblando: “Qué frío hay... Jesús!” . Y llorará en las tejas un pájaro salvaje. Los heraldos negros 59 Truenos CÉSAR V ALLEJO 60 Los heraldos negros 6 EN LAS TIENDAS GRIEGAS Y el Alma se asustó a las cinco de la aquella tarde azul desteñida. El labio entre los linos la imploró con pucheros de novio para su prometida. El Pensamiento, el gran General se ciñó de una lanza deicida. El Corazón danzaba; mas, luego sollozó: ¿la bayadera esclava estaba herida? Nada! Fueron los tigres que la dan por correr a apostarse en aquel rincón, y tristes ver los ocasos que llegan desde Atenas. No habrá remedio para este hospital de nervios, para el gran campamento irritado de este atardecer! Y el General escruta volar siniestras penas allá..................................................................... en el desfiladero de mis nervios! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 62 AGAPE Hoy no ha venido nadie a preguntar; ni me han pedido en esta tarde nada. No he visto ni una flor de cementerio en tan alegre procesión de luces. Perdóname, Señor: qué poco he muerto! En esta tarde todos, todos, todos pasan sin preguntarme ni pedirme nada. Y no sé qué se olvidan y se queda mal en mis manos, como cosa ajena. He salido a la puerta, y me dan ganas de gritar a todos: Si echan de menos algo, aquí se queda! Porque en todas las tardes de esta vida, yo no sé con qué puertas dan a un rostro, y algo ajeno se toma el alma mía. Hoy no ha venido nadie; y hoy he muerto qué poco en esta tarde! Los heraldos negros 63 LA VOZ DEL ESPEJO Así pasa la vida, como raro espejismo. ¡La rosa azul que alumbra y da el ser al cardo! Junto al dogma del fardo matador, el sofisma del Bien y la Razón! Se ha cogido, al acaso, lo que rozó la mano; los perfumes volaron, y entre ellos se ha sentido el moho que a mitad de la ruta ha crecido en el manzano seco de la muerta Ilusión. Así pasa la vida, con cánticos aleves de agostada bacante. Y o voy todo azorado, adelante... adelante, rezongando mi marcha funeral. V an al pie de brahacmánicos elefantes reales, y al sórdido abejeo de un hervor mercurial, parejas que alzan brindis esculpidos en roca, y olvidados crepúsculos una cruz en la boca. Así pasa la vida, vasta orquesta de Esfinges que arrojan al V acío su marcha funeral. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 64 ROSA BLANCA Me siento bien. Ahora brilla un estoico hielo en mí. Me da risa esta soga rubí que rechina en mi cuerpo. Soga sin fin, como una voluta descendente de mal... soga sanguínea y zurda formada de mil dagas en puntal. Que vaya así, trenzando sus rollos de crespón; y que ate el gato trémulo del Miedo al nido helado, al último fogón. Y o ahora estoy sereno, con luz. Y maya en mi Pacífico un náufrago ataúd. Los heraldos negros 65 LA DE A MIL El suertero que grita “La de a mil” , contiene no sé qué fondo de Dios. Pasan todos los labios. El hastío despunta en una arruga su yanó. Pasa el suertero que atesora, acaso nominal, como Dios, entre panes tantálicos, humana impotencia de amor. Y o le miro al andrajo. Y él pudiera darnos el corazón; pero la suerte aquella que en sus manos aporta, pregonando en alta voz, como un pájaro cruel, irá a parar adonde no lo sabe ni lo quiere este bohemio dios. Y digo en este viernes tibio que anda a cuestas bajo el sol: ¡por qué se habrá vestido de suertero la voluntad de Dios! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 66 EL PAN NUESTRO Para Alejandro Gamboa Se bebe el desayuno... Húmeda tierra de cementerio huele a sangre amada. Ciudad de invierno... La mordaz cruzada de una carreta que arrastrar parece una emoción de ayuno encadenada! Se quisiera tocar todas las puertas, y preguntar por no sé quién; y luego ver a los pobres, y, llorando quedos, dar pedacitos de pan fresco a todos. Y saquear a los ricos sus viñedos con las dos manos santas que a un golpe de luz volaron desclavadas de la Cruz! Pestaña matinal, no os levantéis! ¡El pan nuestro de cada día dánoslo, Señor...! T odos mis huesos ajenos; yo talvez los robé! Y o vine a darme lo que acaso estuvo asignado para otro; y pienso que, si no hubiera nacido, otro pobre tomara esta café! Y o soy un mal ladrón... A dónde iré! Los heraldos negros 67 Y en esta hora fría, en que la tierra trasciende a polvo humano y es tan triste, quisiera yo tocar todas las puertas, y suplicar a no sé quién, perdón, y hacerle pedacitos de pan fresco aquí, en el horno de mi corazón...! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 68 ABSOLUTA Color de ropa antigua. Un Julio a sombra, y un Agosto recién segado. Y una mano de agua que injertó en el pino resinoso de un tedio malas frutas. Ahora que has anclado, oscura ropa, tornas rociada de un suntuoso olor a tiempo, a abreviación... Y he cantado el proclive festín que se volcó. Mas ¿no puedes, Señor, contra la muerte, contra el límite, contra lo que acaba? Ay! la llaga en color de ropa antigua, cómo se entreabre y huele a miel quemada! Oh unidad excelsa! Oh lo que es uno por todos! Amor contra el espacio y contra el tiempo! Un latido único de corazón; un solo ritmo: Dios! Y al encogerse de hombros los linderos en un bronco desdén irreductible, hay un riego de sierpes en la doncella plenitud del 1. ¡Una arruga, una sombra! Los heraldos negros 69 DESNUDO EN BARRO Como horribles batracios a la atmósfera, suben visajes lúgubres al labio. Por el Sahara azul de la Substancia camina un verso gris, un dromedario. Fosforece un mohín de sueños crueles. Y el ciego que murió lleno de voces de nieve. Y madrugar, poeta, nómada, al crudísimo día de ser hombre. Las Horas van febriles, y en los ángulos abortan rubios siglos de ventura. ¡Quién tira tanto el hilo; quién descuelga sin piedad nuestros nervios, cordeles ya gastados, a la tumba! Amor! Y tú también. Pedradas negras se engendran en tu máscara y la rompen. ¡La tumba es todavía un sexo de mujer que atrae al hombre! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 70 CAPITULACION Anoche, unos abriles granas capitularon ante mis mayos desarmados de juventud; los marfiles histéricos de su beso me hallaron muerto; y en un suspiro de amor los enjaulé. Espiga extraña, dócil. Sus ojos me asediaron una tarde amaranto que dije un canto a sus cantos; y anoche, en medio de los brindis, me hablaron las dos lenguas de sus senos abrasadas de sed. Pobre trigueña aquella; pobres sus armas; pobres sus velas cremas que iban al tope en las salobres espumas de un marmuerto. V encedora y vencida, se quedó pensativa y ojerosa y granate. Y o me partí de aurora. Y desde aquel combate, de noche entran dos sierpes esclavas a mi vida. Los heraldos negros 7 LINEAS Cada cinta de fuego que, en busca del Amor, arrojo y vibra en rosas lamentables, me da a luz el sepelio de una víspera. Y o no sé si el redoble en que lo busco, será jadear de roca, o perenne nacer de corazón. Hay tendida hacia el fondo de los seres, un eje ultranervioso, honda plomada. ¡La hebra del destino! Amor desviará tal ley de vida, hacia la voz del Hombre; y nos dará la libertad suprema en transubstanciación azul, virtuosa, contra lo ciego y lo fatal. ¡Que en cada fila lata, recluso en albas frágiles, el Jesús aún mejor de otra gran Y ema! Y después... La otra línea... Un Bautista que aguaita, aguaita, aguaita... Y, cabalgando en intangible curva, Un pie bañado en púrpura. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 72 AMOR PROHIBIDO Subes centelleante de labios y ojeras! Por tus venas subo, como un can herido que busca el refugio de blandas aceras. Amor, en el mundo tú eres un pecado! Mi beso es la punta chispeante del cuerno del diablo; mi beso que es credo sagrado! Espíritu es el horópter que pasa ¡puro en su blasfemia! ¡el corazón que engendra al cerebro! que pasa hacia el tuyo, por mi barro triste. ¡Platónico estambre que existe en el cáliz donde tu alma existe! ¿Algún penitente silencio siniestro? T ú acaso lo escuchas? Inocente flor! ... Y saber que donde no hay un Padrenuestro, el Amor es un Cristo pecador! Los heraldos negros 73 LA CENA MISERABLE Hasta cuándo estaremos esperando lo que no se nos debe... Y en qué recodo estiraremos nuestra pobre rodilla para siempre! Hasta cuándo la cruz que nos alienta no detendrá sus remos. Hasta cuándo la Duda nos brindará blasones por haber padecido... Y a nos hemos sentado mucho a la mesa, con la amargura de un niño que a media noche, llora de hambre, desvelado... Y cuándo nos veremos con los demás, al borde de una mañana eterna, desayunados todos. Hasta cuándo este valle de lágrimas, a donde yo nunca dije que me trajeran. De codos, todo bañado en llanto, repito cabizbajo y vencido: hasta cuándo la cena durará. Hay alguien que ha bebido mucho, y se burla, y acerca y aleja de nosotros, como negra cuchara de amarga esencia humana, la tumba... Y menos sabe ese oscuro hasta cuándo la cena durará! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 74 PARA EL ALMA IMPOSIBLE DE MI AMADA Amada: no has querido plasmarte jamás como lo ha pensado mi divino amor. Quédate en la hostia, ciega e impalpable, como existe Dios. Si he cantado mucho, he llorado más por ti ¡oh mi parábola excelsa de amor! Quédate en el seso, y en el mito inmenso de mi corazón! Es la fe, la fragua donde yo quemé el terroso hierro de tanta mujer; y de un yunque impío te quise pulir. Quédate en la eterna nebulosa, ahí, en la multicencia de un dulce noser. Y si no has querido plasmarte jamás en mi metafísica emoción de amor. deja que me azote, como un pecador. Los heraldos negros 75 EL TALAMO ETERNO Sólo al dejar de ser, Amor es fuerte! Y la tumba será una gran pupila, en cuyo fondo supervive y llora la angustia del amor, como en un cáliz de dulce eternidad y negra aurora. Y los labios se encrespan para el beso, como algo lleno que desborda y muere; y, en conjunción crispante, cada boca renuncia para la otra una vida de vida agonizante. Y cuando pienso así, dulce es la tumba donde todos al fin se compenetran en un mismo fragor; dulce es la sombra, donde todos se unen en una cita universal de amor. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 76 LAS PIEDRAS Esta mañana bajé a las piedras ¡oh las piedras! Y motivé y troquelé un pugilato de piedras. Madre nuestra, si mis pasos en el mundo hacen doler, es que son los fogonazos de un absurdo amanecer. Las piedras no ofenden; nada codician. T an sólo piden amor a todos, y piden amor aun a la Nada. Y si algunas de ellas se van cabizbajas, o van avergonzadas, es que algo de humano harán... Mas, no falta quien a alguna por puro gusto golpee. T al, blanca piedra es la luna que voló de un puntapié... Madre nuestra, esta mañana me he corrido con las hiedras, al ver la azul caravana de las piedras, de las piedras, de las piedras... Los heraldos negros 77 RETABLO Y o digo para mí: por fin escapo al ruido; nadie me ve que voy a la nave sagrada. Altas sombras acuden, y Darío que pasa con su lira enlutada. Con paso innumerable sale la dulce Musa, y a ella van mis ojos, cual polluelos al grano. La acosan tules de éter y azabaches dormidos, en tanto sueña el mirlo de la vida en su mano. Dios mío, eres piadoso, porque diste esta nave, donde hacen estos brujos azules sus oficios. Darío de las Américas celestes! T al ellos se parecen a ti! Y de tus trenzas fabrican sus cilicios. Como ánimas que buscan entierros de oro absurdo, aquellos arciprestes vagos del corazón, se internan, y aparecen... y, hablándonos de lejos, nos lloran el suicidio monótono de Dios! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 78 PAGANA Ir muriendo y cantando. Y bautizar la sombra con sangre babilónica de noble gladiador. Y rubricar los cuneiformes de la áurea alfombra con la pluma del ruiseñor y la tinta azul del dolor. La Vida? Hembra proteica. Contemplarla asustada escaparse en sus velos, infiel, falsa Judith; verla desde la herida, y asirla en la mirada, incrustando un capricho de cera en un rubí. Mosto de Babilonia, Holofernes sin tropas, en el árbol cristiano yo colgué mi nidal; la viña redentora negó amor a mis copas; Judith, la vida aleve, sesgó su cuerpo hostial. T al un festín pagano. Y amarla hasta en la muerte, mientras las venas siembran rojas perlas del mal; y así volverse al polvo, conquistador sin suerte, dejando miles de ojos de sangre en el puñal. Los heraldos negros 79 LOS DADOS ETERNOS PARA MANUEL GONZÁLEZ PRADA, esta emoción bravía y selecta, una de las que, con más entusiasmo, me ha aplaudido el gran maestro. Dios mío, estoy llorando el ser que vivo; me pesa haber tomádote tu pan; pero este pobre barro pensativo no es costra fermentada en tu costado: tú no tienes Marías que se van! Dios mío, si tú hubieras sido hombre, hoy supieras ser Dios; pero tú, que estuviste siempre bien, no sientes nada de tu creación. Y el hombre sí te sufre: el Dios es él! Hoy que en mis ojos brujos hay candelas, como en un condenado, Dios mío, prenderás todas tus velas, y jugaremos con el viejo dado... T alvez ¡oh jugador! al dar la suerte del universo todo, surgirán las ojeras de la Muerte, como dos ases fúnebres de lodo. Dios mío, y esta noche sorda, oscura, ya no podrás jugar, porque la Tierra es un dado roído y ya redondo a fuerza de rodar a la aventura, que no puede parar sino en un hueco, en el hueco de inmensa sepultura. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 80 LOS ANILLOS FATIGADOS Hay ganas de volver, de amar, de no ausentarse, y hay ganas de morir, combatido por dos aguas encontradas que jamás han de istmarse. Hay ganas de un gran beso que amortaje a la Vida, que acaba en el áfrica de una agonía ardiente, suicida! Hay ganas de... no tener ganas, Señor; a ti yo te señalo con el dedo deicida: hay ganas de no haber tenido corazón. La primavera vuelve, vuelve y se irá. Y Dios, curvado en tiempo, se repite, y pasa, pasa a cuestas con la espina dorsal del Universo. Cuando las sienes tocan su lúgubre tambor, cuando me duele el sueño grabado en un puñal, ¡hay ganas de quedarse plantado en este verso! Los heraldos negros 8 SANTORAL (Parágrafos) Viejo Osiris! Llegué hasta la pared de enfrente de la vida. Y me parece que he tenido siempre a la mano esta pared. Soy la sombra, el reverso: todo va bajo mis pasos de columna eterna. Nada he traído por las trenzas; todo fácil se vino a mí, como una herencia. Sardanápalo. T al, botón eléctrico de máquinas de sueño fue mi boca. Así he llegado a la pared de enfrente; y siempre esta pared tuve a la mano. Viejo Osiris! Perdónote! Que nada alcanzó a requerirme, nada, nada... CÉSAR V ALLEJO 82 LLUVIA En Lima... En Lima está lloviendo el agua sucia de un dolor qué mortífero. Está lloviendo de la gotera de tu amor. No te hagas la que está durmiendo, recuerda de tu trovador; que yo ya comprendo... comprendo la humana ecuación de tu amor. Truena en la mística dulzaina la gema tempestuosa y zaina, la brujería de tu “sí” . Mas, cae, cae el aguacero al ataúd de mi sendero, donde me ahueso para ti... Los heraldos negros 83 AMOR Amor, ya no vuelves a mis ojos muertos; y cuál mi idealista corazón te llora. Mis cálices todos aguardan abiertos tus hostias de otoño y vinos de aurora. Amor, cruz divina, riega mis desiertos con tu sangre de astros que sueña y que llora. ¡Amor, ya no vuelves a mis ojos muertos que temen y ansían tu llanto de aurora! Amor, no te quiero cuando estás distante rifado en afeites de alegre bacante, o en frágil y chata facción de mujer. Amor, ven sin carne, de un icor que asombre; y que yo, a manera de Dios, sea el hombre que ama y engendra sin sensual placer! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 84 DIOS Siento a Dios que camina tan en mí, con la tarde y con el mar. Con él nos vamos juntos. Anochece. Con el anochecemos. Orfandad... Pero yo siento a Dios. Y hasta parece que él me dicta no sé qué buen color. Como un hospitalario, es bueno y triste; mustia un dulce desdén de enamorado: debe dolerle mucho el corazón. Oh, Dios mío, recién a ti me llego, hoy que amo tanto en esta tarde; hoy que en la falsa balanza de unos senos, mido y lloro una frágil Creación. Y tú, cuál llorarás... tú, enamorado de tanto enorme seno girador... Y o te consagro Dios, porque amas tanto; porque jamás sonríes; porque siempre debe dolerte mucho el corazón. Los heraldos negros 85 UNIDAD En esta noche mi reloj jadea junto a la sien oscurecida, como manzana de revólver que voltea bajo el gatillo sin hallar el plomo. La luna blanca, inmóvil, lagrimea, y es un ojo que apunta...Y siento cómo se acuña el gran Misterio en una idea hostil y ovóidea, en un bermejo plomo. ¡Ah, mano que limita, que amenaza tras de todas las puertas, y que alienta en todos los relojes, cede y pasa! Sobre la araña gris de tu armazón, otra gran Mano hecha de luz sustenta un plomo en forma azul de corazón. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 86 LOS ARRIEROS Arriero, vas fabulosamente vidriado de sudor. La hacienda Menocucho cobra mil sinsabores diarios por la vida. Las doce. V amos a la cintura del día. El sol que duele mucho. Arriero, con tu poncho colorado te alejas, saboreando el romance peruano de tu coca. Y yo desde una hamaca, desde un siglo de duda, cavilo tu horizonte, y atisbo lamentado por zancudos y por el estribillo gentil y enfermo de una “paca-paca” . Al fin tú llegarás donde debes llegar, arriero, que, detrás de tu burro santurrón, te vas............ te vas....................... Feliz de ti, en este calor en que se encabritan todas las ansias y todos los motivos; cuando el espíritu que anima al cuerpo apenas, va sin coca, y no atina a cabestrar su bruto hacia los Andes oxidentales de la Eternidad. Los heraldos negros 87 Canciones de hogar CÉSAR V ALLEJO 88 Los heraldos negros 89 ENCAJE DE FIEBRE Por los cuadros de santos en el muro colgados mis pupilas arrastran un ay! de anochecer; y en un temblor de fiebre, con los brazos cruzados, mi ser recibe vaga visita del Noser. Una mosca llorona en los muebles cansados yo no sé qué leyenda fatal quiere verter: una ilusión de Orientes que fugan asaltados; un nido azul de alondras que mueren al nacer. En un sillón antiguo sentado está mi padre. Como una Dolorosa, entra y sale mi madre. Y al verlos siento un algo que no quiere partir. Porque antes de la oblea que es hostia hecha de Ciencia, está la hostia, oblea hecha de Providencia. Y la visita nace, me ayuda a bien vivir.............. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 90 LOS PASOS LEJANOS Mi padre duerme. Su semblante augusto figura un apacible corazón; está ahora tan dulce... si hay algo en él de amargo, seré yo. Hay soledad en el hogar; se reza; y no hay noticias de los hijos hoy. Mi padre se despierta, ausculta la huida a Egipto, el restañante adiós. Está ahora tan cerca; si hay algo en él de lejos, seré yo. Y mi madre pasea allá en los huertos, saboreando un sabor ya sin sabor. Está ahora tan suave, tan ala, tan salida, tan amor. Hay soledad en el hogar sin bulla, sin noticias, sin verde, sin niñez. Y si hay algo quebrado en esta tarde, y que baja y que cruje, son dos viejos caminos blancos, curvos. Por ellos va mi corazón a pie. Los heraldos negros 9 A MI HERMANO MIGUEL In memoriam Hermano, hoy estoy en el poyo de la casa, donde nos haces una falta sin fondo! Me acuerdo que jugábamos esta hora, y que mamá nos acariciaba: “Pero, hijos...” Ahora yo me escondo, como antes, todas estas oraciones vespertinas, y espero que tú no des conmigo. Por la sala, el zaguán, los corredores. Después, te ocultas tú , y yo no doy contigo. Me acuerdo que nos hací amos llorar, hermano, en aquel juego. Miguel, tú te escondiste una noche de Agosto, al alborear; pero, en vez de ocultarte riendo, estabas triste. Y tu gemelo corazón de esas tardes extintas se ha aburrido de no encontrarte. Y ya cae sombra en el alma. Oye, hermano, no tardes en salir. Bueno? Puede inquietarse mamá . CÉSAR V ALLEJO 92 ENEREIDA Mi padre, apenas, en la mañana pajarita, pone sus setentiocho años, sus setentiocho ramos de invierno a solear. El cementerio de Santiago, untado en alegre año nuevo, está a la vista. Cuántas veces sus pasos cortaron hacia él, y tornaron de algún entierro humilde. Hoy hace mucho tiempo que mi padre no sale! Una broma de niños se desbanda. Otras veces le hablaba a mi madre de impresiones urbanas, de política; y hoy, apoyado en su bastón ilustre que sonara mejor en los años de la Gobernación, mi padre está desconocido, frágil, mi padre es una víspera. Lleva, trae, abstraído, reliquias, cosas, recuerdos, sugerencias. La mañana apacible le acompaña con sus alas blancas de hermana de caridad. Día eterno es éste, día ingenuo, infante, coral, oracional; se corona el tiempo de palomas, y el futuro se puebla de caravanas de inmortales rosas. Padre, aún sigue todo despertando; es Enero que canta, es tu amor Los heraldos negros 93 que resonando va en la Eternidad. Aún reirás de tus pequeñuelos, y habrá bulla triunfal en los V acíos. Aún será año nuevo. Habrá empanadas; y yo tendré hambre, cuando toque a misa en el beato campanario el buen ciego mélico con quien departieron mis sílabas escolares y frescas, mi inocencia rotunda. Y cuando la mañana llena de gracia, desde sus senos de tiempo que son dos renuncias, dos avances de amor que se tienden y ruegan infinito, eterna vida, cante, y eche a volar V erbos plurales, jirones de tu ser, a la borda de sus alas blancas de hermana de caridad ¡oh, padre mío! CÉSAR V ALLEJO 94 ESPERGESIA Y o nací un día que Dios estuvo enfermo. T odos saben que vivo, que soy malo; y no saben del Diciembre de ese Enero. Pues yo nací un día que Dios estuvo enfermo. Hay un vacío en mi aire metafísico que nadie ha de palpar: el claustro de un silencio que habló a flor de fuego. Y o nací un día que Dios estuvo enfermo. Hermano, escucha, escucha.......... Bueno. Y que no me vaya sin llevar diciembres, sin dejar eneros. Pues yo nací un día que Dios estuvo enfermo. T odos saben que vivo, que mastico... Y no saben por qué en mi verso chirrían, oscuro sinsabor de féretro, luyidos vientos Los heraldos negros 95 desenroscados de la Esfinge preguntona del Desierto. T odos saben... Y no saben que la Luz es tísica, y la Sombra gorda............... Y no saben que el Misterio sintetiza......... que él es la joroba musical y triste que a distancia denuncia el paso meridiano de las lindes a las Lindes. Y o nací un día que Dios estuvo enfermo, grave. CÉSAR V ALLEJO 96 PATERSON WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS Revised edition prepared by Christopher MacGowan A NEW DI RECTI ONS BOOK Contents Preface A STATEMENT BY WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS ABOUT THE POEM PATERSON B O O K I B O O K I I B O O K I I I B O O K I V B O O K V Appendix A: BOOK VI Appendix B: A NOTE ON THE TEXT Appendix C: ANNOTATIONS AND TEXTUAL NOTES ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Preface This volume completes the new editions of William Carlos Williams’ poetry begun with the Collected Poems: Volume I, 1909—1939 (1986), and Collected Poems: Volume II, 1939—1962 (1988). When Williams’ plans for Paterson began to take final shape in the early 1940s, he conceived of the poem as having four books, although he eventually published five, and in the last years of his life even started preliminary work on a sixth. The five books of Paterson were originally published in separate volumes, in limited editions, in 1946, 1948, 1949, 1951 and 1958, and as they sold out they were reprinted, starting with Books I and II in 1949, in the publisher’s popularly priced New Classics series. For this reprint the text was entirely reset. Book III was added in 1950 and Book IV in 1951. The five books of Paterson were first published together, with the fragments of the sixth, in 1963, and this edition was itself rearranged with the fifth printing in 1969 for a reprint that reduced the total pagination by forty pages. Throughout the printing history of the reprints, changes were made to various parts of the text, sometimes through error, sometimes apparently in response to directions by the poet, and in the case of the fifth book—for which the reprint appeared posthumously—in response to the large number of differences noticed between the poem’s transcription of its prose sources and the language of those sources themselves, many of which had become available in research collections. In preparing this edition I have studied the known manuscripts, galleys, and page proofs of the poem, as well as its various printings, and detail the general editorial procedures guiding my decisions in Appendix B, “A Note on the Text.” I outline the principles governing the annotations at the head of Appendix C. I have provided information on the sources of the prose and some of the other allusions in the poem, where these are known to me, and my indebtedness to earlier scholars and annotators of the poem is recorded in the acknowledgments. In general, I have avoided citing Williams’ comments on particular lines and passages in the poem since, unlike his observations on the shorter poems, these remarks were numerous and many have been widely published in interviews with the poet and in other sources. John Thirlwall, the assiduous recorder of many of Williams’ comments on his work in the 1950s, published an extended essay on Paterson reproducing material from his meetings with the poet, in New Directions 17 (1961): 252—310. However, I have included some of Williams’ comments on his sources where these seemed particularly helpful, contributed to the background information on the poem’s composition, or had not previously, to my knowledge, been published. I have included the introductory material on the poem that Williams published with the first editions. In addition, at the conclusion of this Preface I reproduce some extended comments by the poet on Books I—IV, and some subsequent remarks he made concerning Book V. My hope for the annotations and textual notes is that they illustrate the relationship of the poem to its sources, provide a sense of the later stages of the poem’s evolution, and demonstrate the ways in which its text reflects the intentions, the circumstances, and the mechanics of its composition. The reader interested in the evolution of Paterson as recorded in the poems that Williams published outside of his long poem needs to consult the Collected volumes. In a number of his comments on Paterson Williams noted as some of its antecedents his early poem “The Wanderer” (Collected Poems: Volume 1, 27—36 and 108—117), which contains a section on Paterson, and his 1927 prose/poetry sequence “A Folded Skyscraper” (pp. 273—277). In 1927 Williams published in The Dial an 85-line poem titled “Paterson” (pp. 263-266), parts of which were subsequently reworked into the published Book I. In the New Directions 2 anthology of 1937 Williams published “Patterson [sic] : Episode 17” (pp. 439-443), which contains many lines incorporated into the finished Book III, and includes the oppressed but vital negro woman, the gang rape, and the “beautiful thing” refrain that are three central features of that book. But much of Williams’ work on Paterson in the late 1930s and early 1940s went into a concept of the poem that he eventually rejected, a long series of short lyrics many of which were gathered into the manuscript “Detail & Parody for the poem Paterson” that Williams sent to his friend and publisher James Laughlin in March 1939. A version of this arrangement is now in the SUNY Buffalo collection (D4). During these years Williams published some of the poems arising from this conception of Paterson in magazines, and did not subsequently reprint some of them. These poems can be found among the first ninety-five pages of the Collected Poems, Volume II. In 1941 Williams published a fifteen-poem sequence titled “For the poem Paterson” in his pamphlet The Broken Span (see Volume II, pp. 14—22), but only the three lines serving as a headnote to the poems, beginning “A man like a city and a woman like a flower,” appeared in Paterson as he finally conceived it. Despite his struggles, Williams seems to have always felt close to the point of solving his formal difficulties. He told James Laughlin in 1942 that he would have the poem ready for the Spring 1943 list, but the book that he then did offer Laughlin was The Wedge (1944), which contains many poems pulled from the now-abandoned “Detail & Parody” concept. In April 1943 Williams published a short poem titled “Paterson: The Falls” (Volume II, 57 —58), which outlined a work in “4 sections” and detailed a number of the central themes and features that subsequently appeared in the poem. But he wrote to Laughlin on December 27, 1943, “That God damned and I mean God damned poem Paterson has me down. I am burned up to do it but don’t quite know how. I write and destroy, write and destroy. It’s all shaped up in outline and intent, the body of the thinking is finished but the technique, the manner and the method are unresolvable to date. I flounder and flunk.” In April 1944 he told Laughlin the poem was “near finished,” and nine months later that it was “nearing completion.” By May 1945 Book I was at the printer, but in September, on receiving the galleys, Williams was so dissatisfied he felt he must “slash it unmercifully ... I wish I had the guts to say to burn the whole Paterson script.” Book I, delayed by the extensive galley revisions, finally appeared the following June. Even while working on Book IV Williams began to consider a fifth book, noting to himself on a typescript now filed at the Beinecke Library (Za 189) “maybe even a 5th Book of facts—Recollections.” In October 1952, just over a year after the publication of Book IV, he published a twenty-four-line poem “Paterson, Book V: The River of Heaven,” but reported to Laughlin in 1954 that the poem had “got side-tracked. It turned into something else”—that “something else” being his well-known poem “Asphodel, That Greeny Flower.” Paterson V eventually appeared in 1958, on Williams ’ seventy-fifth birthday. Writing to Laughlin within the week to thank him for the publication party, Williams hinted at a possible Paterson VI, but the increasing handicaps produced by his periodic strokes left the four sheets Williams typed out in late 1960 and early 1961 as all there was to be of a sixth book. With the fourth (1968) and subsequent printings of the collected Paterson New Directions printed the first three pages of Chapter 58 from Williams’ Autobiography by way of an introduction to the first four books of the poem. The interested reader will find in that chapter a helpful supplement to the comments by Williams following this Preface. I reproduce below a statement by the poet from a New Directions press release marking the publication of Book IV in June 1951 that appeared two weeks before the publication date. Following the statement is the “Author’s Note” that introduced the poem in all the New Classics and subsequent printings of the collected Paterson. (For the substantially similar version that appeared with Book I in 1946 see page 253.) Williams’ comment on Book V that follows the “Author’s Note” is part of a letter he wrote to Robert MacGregor, vice-president of New Directions, on May 16, 1958 (New Directions archives), that was reprinted on the dust jacket of the first, 1958, edition of Book V. A shorter version was printed when Book V was reset and joined the collected Paterson in 1963. I reprint the version on the dust jacket of the first edition. C. M. A STATEMENT BY WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS ABOUT THE POEM PATERSON May 31, 1951 I have no recollection when it was that I first began thinking of writing a long poem upon the resemblance between the mind of modern man and a city. From something Vivienne Koch discovered among my notes it may be that 1925 was the year when I first made any record of the notion. Certainly by 1927 when I was given The Dial’s award following their publication of the poem “Paterson” my thoughts on the general theme I wanted to treat were well along. Having decided what I wanted to do I took my time deciding how I should go about the task. The thing was to use the multiple facets which a city presented as representatives for comparable facets of contemporary thought thus to be able to objectify the man himself as we know him and love him and hate him. This seemed to me to be what a poem was for, to speak for us in a language we can understand. But first before we can understand it the language must be recognizable. We must know it as our own, we must be satisfied that it speaks for us. And yet it must remain a language like all languages, a symbol of communication. Thus the city I wanted as my object had to be one that I knew in its most intimate details. New York was too big, too much a congeries of the entire world’s facets. I wanted something nearer home, something knowable. I deliberately selected Paterson as my reality. My own suburb was not distinguished or varied enough for my purpose. There were other possibilities but Paterson topped them. Paterson has a definite history associated with the beginnings of the United States. It has besides a central feature, the Passaic Falls which as I began to think about it became more and more the lucky burden of what I wanted to say. I began to read all I could about the history of the Falls, the park on the little hill beyond it and the early inhabitants. From the beginning I decided there would be four books following the course of the river whose life seemed more and more to resemble my own life as I more and more thought of it: the river above the Falls, the catastrophe of the Falls itself, the river below the Falls and the entrance at the end into the great sea. There were a hundred modifications of this general plan as, following the theme rather than the river itself, I allowed myself to be drawn on. The noise of the Falls seemed to me to be a language which we were and are seeking and my search, as I looked about, became to struggle to interpret and use this language. This is the substance of the poem. But the poem is also the search of the poet for his language, his own language which I, quite apart from the material theme had to use to write at all. I had to write in a certain way to gain a verisimilitude with the object I had in mind. So the objective became complex. It fascinated me, it instructed me besides. I had to think and write, I had to invent the means to get said, in the pattern of the terms I employed, what appeared as called for. And I had to think hard as to how I was going to end the poem. It wouldn’t do to have a grand and soul satisfying conclusion because I didn’t see any in my subject. Nor was I going to be confused or depressed or evangelical about it. It didn’t belong to the subject. It would have been easy to make a great smash up with a ‘beautiful’ sunset at sea, or a flight of pigeons, love’s end and the welter of man’s fate. Instead, after the little girl gets herself mixed up at last in the pathetic sophisticate of the great city, no less defeated and understandable, even lovable, than she is herself, we come to the sea at last. Odysseus swims in as man must always do, he doesn’t drown, he is too able but, accompanied by his dog, strikes inland again (toward Camden) to begin again. AUTHOR’S NOTE Paterson is a long poem in four parts—that a man in himself is a city, beginning, seeking, achieving and concluding his life in ways which the various aspects of a city may embody—if imaginatively conceived—any city, all the details of which may be made to voice his most intimate convictions. Part One introduces the elemental character of the place. The Second Part comprises the modern replicas. Three will seek a language to make them vocal, and Four, the river below the falls, will be reminiscent of episodes—all that any one man may achieve in a lifetime. In a letter to New Directions, Dr. Williams, now 75, commented on the making of Paterson, Five, as follows: “Were I younger, needless to say, it would have been a different poem. But then it would not have been written at all. After Paterson, Four ten years have elapsed. In that period I have come to understand not only that many changes have occurred in me and the world, but I have been forced to recognize that there can be no end to such a story I have envisioned with the terms which I had laid down for myself. I had to take the world of Paterson into a new dimension if I wanted to give it imaginative validity. Yet I wanted to keep it whole, as it is to me. As I mulled the thing over in my mind the composition began to assume a form which you see in the present poem, keeping, I fondly hope, a unity directly continuous with the Paterson of Pat. I to 4. Let’s hope I have succeeded in doing so.” BOOK ONE (1946) : a local pride; spring, summer, fall and the sea; a confession; a basket; a column; a reply to Greek and Latin with the bare hands; a gathering up; a celebration; in distinctive terms; by multiplication a reduction to one; daring; a fall; the clouds resolved into a sandy sluice; an enforced pause; hard put to it; an identification and a plan for action to supplant a plan for action; a taking up of slack; a dispersal and a metamorphosis. Paterson: Book I PREFACE “Rigor of beauty is the quest. But how will you find beauty when it is locked in the mind past all remonstrance?” To make a start, out of particulars and make them general, rolling up the sum, by defective means— Sniffing the trees, just another dog among a lot of dogs. What else is there? And to do? The rest have run out— after the rabbits. Only the lame stands—on three legs. Scratch front and back. Deceive and eat. Dig a musty bone For the beginning is assuredly the end—since we know nothing, pure and simple, beyond our own complexities. Yet there is no return: rolling up out of chaos, a nine months’ wonder, the city the man, an identity—it can’t be otherwise—an interpenetration, both ways. Rolling up! obverse, reverse; the drunk the sober; the illustrious the gross; one. In ignorance a certain knowledge and knowledge, undispersed, its own undoing. (The multiple seed, packed tight with detail, soured, is lost in the flux and the mind, distracted, floats off in the same scum) Rolling up, rolling up heavy with numbers. It is the ignorant sun rising in the slot of hollow suns risen, so that never in this world will a man live well in his body save dying—and not know himself dying; yet that is the design. Renews himself thereby, in addition and subtraction, walking up and down. and the craft, subverted by thought, rolling up, let him beware lest he turn to no more than the writing of stale poems . . . Minds like beds always made up, (more stony than a shore) unwilling or unable. Rolling in, top up, under, thrust and recoil, a great clatter: lifted as air, boated, multicolored, a wash of seas— from mathematics to particulars— divided as the dew, floating mists, to be rained down and regathered into a river that flows and encircles: shells and animalcules generally and so to man, to Paterson. The Delineaments of the Giants I. Paterson lies in the valley under the Passaic Falls its spent waters forming the outline of his back. He lies on his right side, head near the thunder of the waters filling his dreams! Eternally asleep, his dreams walk about the city where he persists incognito. Butterflies settle on his stone ear. Immortal he neither moves nor rouses and is seldom seen, though he breathes and the subtleties of his machinations drawing their substance from the noise of the pouring river animate a thousand automatons. Who because they neither know their sources nor the sills of their disappointments walk outside their bodies aimlessly for the most part, locked and forgot in their desires—unroused. —Say it, no ideas but in things— nothing but the blank faces of the houses and cylindrical trees bent, forked by preconception and accident — split, furrowed, creased, mottled, stained— secret—into the body of the light! From above, higher than the spires, higher even than the office towers, from oozy fields abandoned to grey beds of dead grass, black sumac, withered weed-stalks, mud and thickets cluttered with dead leaves— the river comes pouring in above the city and crashes from the edge of the gorge in a recoil of spray and rainbow mists— (What common language to unravel? . . combed into straight lines from that rafter of a rock’s lip.) A man like a city and a woman like a flower —who are in love. Two women. Three women. Innumerable women, each like a flower. B ut only one man—like a city. In regard to the poems I left with you; will you be so kind as to return them to me at my new address? And without bothering to comment upon them if you should find that embarrassing—for it was the human situation and not the literary one that motivated my phone call and visit. Besides, I know myself to be more the woman than the poet; and to concern myself less with the publishers of poetry than with ... living ... But they set up an investigation ... and my doors are bolted forever (I hope forever) against all public welfare workers, professional do-gooders and the like. Jostled as are the waters approaching the brink, his thoughts interlace, repel and cut under, rise rock-thwarted and turn aside but forever strain forward—or strike an eddy and whirl, marked by a leaf or curdy spume, seeming to forget . Retake later the advance and are replaced by succeeding hordes pushing forward—they coalesce now glass-smooth with their swiftness, quiet or seem to quiet as at the close they leap to the conclusion and fall, fall in air! as if floating, relieved of their weight, split apart, ribbons; dazed, drunk with the catastrophe of the descent floating unsupported to hit the rocks: to a thunder, as if lightning had struck All lightness lost, weight regained in the repulse, a fury of escape driving them to rebound upon those coming after— keeping nevertheless to the stream, they retake their course, the air full of the tumult and of spray connotative of the equal air, coeval, filling the void And there, against him, stretches the low mountain. The Park’s her head, carved, above the Falls, by the quiet river; Colored crystals the secret of those rocks; farms and ponds, laurel and the temperate wild cactus, yellow flowered . . facing him, his arm supporting her, by the Valley of the Rocks, asleep. Pearls at her ankles, her monstrous hair spangled with apple-blossoms is scattered about into the back country, waking their dreams—where the deer run and the wood-duck nests protecting his gallant plumage. In February 1857, David Hower, a poor shoemaker with a large family, out of work and money, collected a lot of mussels from Notch Brook near the City of Paterson. He found in eating them many hard substances. At first he threw them away but at last submitted some of them to a jeweler who gave him twenty-five to thirty dollars for the lot. Later he found others. One pearl of fine lustre was sold to Tiffany for $900 and later to the Empress Eugenie for $2,000 to be known thenceforth as the “Queen Pearl,” the finest of its sort in the world today. News of this sale created such excitement that search for the pearls was started throughout the country. The Unios (mussels) at Notch Brook and elsewhere were gathered by the millions and destroyed often with little or no result. A large round pearl, weighing 400 grains which would have been the finest pearl of modern times, was ruined by boiling open the shell. Twice a month Paterson receives communications from the Pope and Jacques Barzun (Isocrates). His works have been done into French and Portuguese. And clerks in the post- office ungum rare stamps from his packages and steal them for their childrens’ albums . Say it! No ideas but in things. Mr. Paterson has gone away to rest and write. Inside the bus one sees his thoughts sitting and standing. His thoughts alight and scatter— Who are these people (how complex the mathematic) among whom I see myself in the regularly ordered plateglass of his thoughts, glimmering before shoes and bicycles? They walk incommunicado, the equation is beyond solution, yet its sense is clear—that they may live his thought is listed in the Telephone Directory— And derivatively, for the Great Falls, PISS-AGH! the giant lets fly! good Muncie, too They craved the miraculous! A gentleman of the Revolutionary Army, after describing the Falls, thus describes another natural curiosity then existing in the community: In the afternoon we were invited to visit another curiosity in the neighborhood. This is a monster in human form, he is twenty-seven years of age, his face from the upper part of his forehead to the end of his chin, measures twenty-seven inches, and around the upper part of his head is twenty-one inches: his eyes and nose are remarkably large and prominent, chin long and pointed. His features are coarse, irregular and disgusting, his voice rough and sonorous. His body is twenty-seven inches in length, his limbs are small and much deformed, and he has the use of one hand only. He has never been able to sit up, as he cannot support the enormous weight of his head; but he is constantly in a large cradle, with his head supported on pillows. He is visited by great numbers of people, and is peculiarly fond of the company of clergymen, always inquiring for them among his visitors, and taking great pleasure in receiving religious instruction. General Washington made him a visit, and asked “whether he was a Whig or a Tory.” He replied that he had never taken an active part on either side. A wonder! A wonder! From the ten houses Hamilton saw when he looked (at the falls!) and kept his counsel, by the middle of the century—the mills had drawn a heterogeneous population. There were in 1870, native born 20,711, which would of course include children of foreign parents; foreign 12,868 of whom 237 were French, 1,420 German, 3,343 English—(Mr. Lambert who later built the Castle among them), 5,124 Irish, 879 Scotch, 1,360 Hollanders and 170 Swiss— Around the falling waters the Furies hurl! Violence gathers, spins in their heads summoning them: The twaalft, or striped bass was also abundant, and even sturgeon, of a huge bigness, were frequently caught:—On Sunday, August 31, 1817, one seven feet six inches long, and weighing 126 pounds, was captured a short distance below the Falls basin. He was pelted with stones by boys until he was exhausted, whereupon one of them, John Winters, waded into the water and clambered on the back of the huge fish, while another seized him by the throat and gills, and brought him ashore. The Bergen Express and. Paterson Advertiser of Wednesday, September 3, 1817, devoted half a column to an account of the incident, under the heading, “The Monster Taken.” They begin! The perfections are sharpened The flower spreads its colored petals wide in the sun But the tongue of the bee misses them They sink back into the loam crying out —you may call it a cry that creeps over them, a shiver as they wilt and disappear: Marriage come to have a shuddering implication Crying out or take a lesser satisfaction: a few go to the Coast without gain— The language is missing them they die also incommunicado. The language, the language fails them They do not know the words or have not the courage to use them . —girls from families that have decayed and taken to the hills: no words. They may look at the torrent in their minds and it is foreign to them. . They turn their backs and grow faint—but recover! Life is sweet they say: the language! —the language is divorced from their minds, the language . . the language! If there was not beauty, there was a strangeness and a bold association of wild and cultured life grew up together in the Ramapos: two phases. In the hills, where the brown trout slithered among the shallow stones, Ring- wood—where the old Ryerson farm had been—among its velvet lawns, was ringed with forest trees, the butternut, and the elm, the white oak, the chestnut and the beech, the birches, the tupelo, the sweet-gum, the wild cherry and the hackleberry with its red tumbling fruit. While in the forest clustered the ironworkers’ cabins, the charcoal burners, the lime kiln workers—hidden from lovely Ringwood—where General Washington, gracing any poem, up from Pompton for rest after the traitors’ hangings could be at ease—and the links were made for the great chain across the Hudson at West Point. Violence broke out in Tennessee, a massacre by the Indians, hangings and exile—standing there on the scaffold waiting, sixty of them. The Tuscaroras, forced to leave their country, were invited by the Six Nations to join them in Upper New York. The bucks went on ahead but some of the women and the stragglers got no further than the valley-cleft near Suffern. They took to the mountains there where they were joined by Hessian deserters from the British Army, a number of albinos among them, escaped negro slaves and a lot of women and their brats released in New York City after the British had been forced to leave. They had them in a pen there—picked up in Liverpool and elsewhere by a man named Jackson under contract with the British Government to provide women for the soldiers in America. The mixture ran in the woods and took the general name, Jackson’s Whites. (There had been some blacks also, mixed in, some West Indian negresses, a shipload, to replace the whites lost when their ship, one of six coming from England, had foundered in a storm at sea. He had to make it up somehow and that was the quickest and cheapest way.) New Barbadoes Neck, the region was called. Cromwell, in the middle of the seventeenth century, shipped some thousands of Irish women and children to the Barbadoes to be sold as slaves. Forced by their owners to mate with the others these unfortunates were succeeded by a few generations of Irish-speaking negroes and mulattos. And it is commonly asserted to this day the natives of Barbadoes speak with an Irish brogue. I remember a Geographic picture, the 9 women of some African chief semi-naked astraddle a log, an official log to be presumed, heads left: Foremost froze the young and latest, erect, a proud queen, conscious of her power, mud-caked, her monumental hair slanted above the brows—violently frowning. Behind her, packed tight up in a descending scale of freshness stiffened the others and then . . the last, the first wife, present! supporting all the rest growing up from her—whose careworn eyes serious, menacing—but unabashed; breasts sagging from hard use . . Whereas the uppointed breasts of that other, tense, charged with pressures unrelieved . and the rekindling they bespoke was evident. Not that the lightnings do not stab at the mystery of a man from both ends—and the middle, no matter how much a chief he may be, rather the more because of it, to destroy him at home . . . Womanlike, a vague smile, unattached, floating like a pigeon after a long flight to his cote. Mrs. Sarah Cumming, consort of the Rev. Hooper Cumming, of Newark, was a daughter of the late Mr. John Emmons, of Portland, in the district of Maine.... She had been married about two months, and was blessed with a flattering prospect of no common share of Temporal felicity and usefulness in the sphere which Providence had assigned her; but oh, how uncertain is the continuance of every earthly joy. On Saturday, the 20th of June, 1812, the Rev. Cumming rode with his wife to Paterson, in order to supply, by presbyterial appointment, a destitute congregation in that place, on the following day.... On Monday morning, he went with his beloved companion to show her the falls of the Passaic, and the surrounding beautiful, wild and romantic scenery,—little expecting the solemn event to ensue. Having ascended the flight of stairs (the Hundred Steps) Mr. and Mrs. Cumming walked over the solid ledge to the vicinity of the cataract, charmed with the wonderful prospect, and making various remarks upon the stupendous works of nature around them. At length they took their station on the brow of the solid rock, which overhangs the basin, six or eight rods from the falling water, where thousands have stood before, and where there is a fine view of the sublime curiosities of the place. When they had enjoyed the luxury of the scene for a considerable length of time, Mr. Cumming said, “My dear, I believe it is time for us to set our face homeward”; and at the same moment, turned round in order to lead the way. He instantly heard the voice of distress, looked back and his wife was gone! Mr. Cumming’s sensations on the distressing occasion may, in some measure, be conceived, but they cannot be described. He was on the borders of distraction, and, scarcely knowing what he did, would have plunged into the abyss, had it not been kindly ordered in providence that a young man should be near, who instantly flew to him, like a guardian angel, and held him from a step which his reason, at the time, could not have prevented. This young man led him from the precipice, and conducted him to the ground below the stairs. Mr. Cumming forced himself out of the hands of his protector, and ran with violence, in order to leap into the fatal flood. His young friend, however, caught him once more.... Immediate search was made, and diligently continued throughout the day, for the body of Mrs. Cumming; but to no purpose. On the following morning, her mortal part was found in a depth of 42 feet, and, the same day, was conveyed to Newark. A false language. A true. A false language pouring— a language (misunderstood) pouring (misinterpreted) without dignity, without minister, crashing upon a stone ear. At least it settled it for her. Patch too, as a matter of fact. He became a national hero in ’28, ’29 and toured the country diving from cliffs and masts, rocks and bridges—to prove his thesis: Some things can be done as well as others. THE GRRRREAT HISTORY of that old time Jersey Patriot N. F. P A T E R S O N ! (N for Noah; F for Faitoute; P for short) “Jersey Lightning” to the boys. So far everything had gone smoothly. The pulley and ropes were securely fastened on each side of the chasm, and everything made in readiness to pull the clumsy bridge into position. It was a wooden structure boarded up on both sides, and a roof. It was about two o’clock in the afternoon and a large crowd had gathered—a large crowd for that time, as the town only numbered about four thousand—to watch the bridge placed in position. That day was a great day for old Paterson. It being Saturday, the mills were shut down, so to give the people a chance to celebrate. Among those who came in for a good part of the celebration was Sam Patch, then a resident in Paterson, who was a boss over cotton spinners in one of the mills. He was my boss, and many a time he gave me a cuff over the ears. Well, this day the constables were on the look for Patch, because they thought he would be on a spree and cause trouble. Patch had declared so frequently that he would jump from the rocks that he was placed under arrest at various times. He had previously been locked up in the basement under the bank with a bad case of delirium tremens, but on the day the bridge was pulled across the chasm he was let out. Some thought he was crazy. They were not far wrong. But the happiest man in the town that day was Timothy B. Crane, who had charge of the bridge. Tim Crane was a hotel keeper and kept a tavern on the Manchester side of the Falls. His place was a great resort for circus men. Such famous circus men of the long ago as Dan Rice and James Cooke, the great bareback rider, visited him. Tim Crane built the bridge because his rival, Fyfield, who kept the tavern on the other side of the falls, was getting the benefit of the “Jacob’s Ladder,” as it was sometimes called—the “hundred steps,” a long, rustic, winding stairs in the gorge leading to the opposite side of the river—it making his place more easy to get to.... Crane was a very robust man over six feet tall. He wore side whiskers. He was well known to the other citizens as a man of much energy and no little ability. In his manner he resembled the large, rugged stature of Sam Patch. When the word was given to haul the bridge across the chasm, the crowd rent the air with cheers. But they had only pulled it half way over when one of the rolling pins slid from the ropes into the water below. While all were expecting to see the big, clumsy bridge topple over and land in the chasm, as quick as a flash a form leaped out from the highest point and struck with a splash in the dark water below, swam to the wooden pin and brought it ashore. This was the starting point of Sam Patch’s career as a famous jumper. I saw that, said the old man with satisfaction, and I don’t believe there is another person in the town today who was an eye-witness of that scene. These were the words that Sam Patch said: “Now, old Tim Crane thinks he has done something great; but I can beat him.” As he spoke he jumped. There’s no mistake in Sam Patch! The water pouring still from the edge of the rocks, filling his ears with its sound, hard to interpret. A wonder! After this start he toured the West, his only companions a fox and a bear which he picked up in his travels. He jumped from a rocky ledge at Goat Island into the Niagara River. Then he announced that before returning to the Jerseys he was going to show the West one final marvel. He would leap 125 feet from the falls of the Genesee River on November 13, 1829. Excursions came from great distances in the United States and even from Canada to see the wonder. A platform was built at the edge of the falls. He went to great trouble to ascertain the depth of the water below. He even successfully performed one practice leap. On the day the crowds were gathered on all sides. He appeared and made a short speech as he was wont to do. A speech! What could he say that he must leap so desperately to complete it? And plunged toward the stream below. But instead of descending with a plummet-like fall his body wavered in the air— Speech had failed him. He was confused. The word had been drained of its meaning. There’s no mistake in Sam Patch. He struck the water on his side and disappeared. A great silence followed as the crowd stood spellbound. Not until the following spring was the body found frozen in an ice-cake. He threw his pet bear once from the cliff overlooking the Niagara rapids and rescued it after, down stream. II. There is no direction. Whither? I cannot say. I cannot say more than how. The how (the howl) only is at my disposal (proposal) : watching— colder than stone . a bud forever green, tight-curled, upon the pavement, perfect in juice and substance but divorced, divorced from its fellows, fallen low— Divorce is the sign of knowledge in our time, divorce! divorce! with the roar of the river forever in our ears (arrears) inducing sleep and silence, the roar of eternal sleep . . challenging our waking— —unfledged desire, irresponsible, green, colder to the hand than stone, unready—challenging our waking: Two halfgrown girls hailing hallowed Easter, (an inversion of all out-of-doors) weaving about themselves, from under the heavy air, whorls of thick translucencies poured down, cleaving them away, shut from the light: bare- headed, their clear hair dangling— Two— disparate among the pouring waters of their hair in which nothing is molten— two, bound by an instinct to be the same: ribbons, cut from a piece, cerise pink, binding their hair: one— a willow twig pulled from a low leafless bush in full bud in her hand, (or eels or a moon!) holds it, the gathered spray, upright in the air, the pouring air, strokes the soft fur— Ain’t they beautiful! Certainly I am not a robin nor erudite, no Erasmus nor bird that returns to the same ground year by year. Or if I am . . the ground has undergone a subtle transformation, its identity altered. Indians! Why even speak of “I,” he dreams, which interests me almost not at all? The theme is as it may prove: asleep, unrecognized— all of a piece, alone in a wind that does not move the others— in that way: a way to spend a Sunday afternoon while the green bush shakes. . . a mass of detail to interrelate on a new ground, difficultly; an assonance, a homologue triple piled pulling the disparate together to clarify and compress The river, curling, full—as a bush shakes and a white crane will fly and settle later! White, in the shallows among the blue-flowered pickerel-weed, in summer, summer! if it should ever come, in the shallow water! On the embankment a short, compact cone (juniper) that trembles frantically in the indifferent gale: male—stands rooted there . The thought returns: Why have I not but for imagined beauty where there is none or none available, long since put myself deliberately in the way of death? Stale as a whale’s breath: breath! Breath! Patch leaped but Mrs. Cumming shrieked and fell—unseen (though she had been standing there beside her husband half an hour or more twenty feet from the edge). : a body found next spring frozen in an ice-cake; or a body fished next day from the muddy swirl— both silent, uncommunicative Only of late, late! begun to know, to know clearly (as through clear ice) whence I draw my breath or how to employ it clearly—if not well: Clearly! speaks the red-breast his behest. Clearly! clearly! —and watch, wrapt! one branch of the tree at the fall’s edge, one mottled branch, withheld, among the gyrate branches of the waist-thick sycamore, sway less, among the rest, separate, slowly with giraffish awkwardness, slightly on a long axis, so slightly as hardly to be noticed, in itself the tempest: Thus the first wife, with giraffish awkwardness among thick lightnings that stab at the mystery of a man: in sum, a sleep, a source, a scourge . on a log, her varnished hair trussed up like a termite’s nest (forming the lines) and, her old thighs gripping the log reverently, that, all of a piece, holds up the others— alert: begin to know the mottled branch that sings . certainly NOT the university, a green bud fallen upon the pavement its sweet breath suppressed: Divorce (the language stutters) unfledged: two sisters from whose open mouths Easter is born—crying aloud, Divorce! Whil e the green bush sways: is whence I draw my breath, swaying, all of a piece, separate, livens briefly, for the moment unafraid . . Which is to say, though it be poorly said, there is a first wife and a first beauty, complex, ovate— the woody sepals standing back under the stress to hold it there, innate a flower within a flower whose history (within the mind) crouching among the ferny rocks, laughs at the names by which they think to trap it. Escapes! Never by running but by lying still— A history that has, by its den in the rocks, bole and fangs, its own cane-brake whence, half hid, canes and stripes blending, it grins (beauty defied) not for the sake of the encyclopedia. Were we near enough its stinking breath would fell us. The temple upon the rock is its brother, whose majesty lies in jungles—made to spring, at the rifle-shot of learning: to kill and grind those bones: These terrible things they reflect: the snow falling into the water, part upon the rock, part in the dry weeds and part into the water where it vanishes—its form no longer what it was: the bird alighting, that pushes its feet forward to take up the impetus and falls forward nevertheless among the twigs. The weak-necked daisy bending to the wind . . . The sun winding the yellow bindweed about a bush; worms and gnats, life under a stone. The pitiful snake with its mosaic skin and frantic tongue. The horse, the bull the whole din of fracturing thought as it falls tinnily to nothing upon the streets and the absurd dignity of a locomotive hauling freight— Pithy philosophies of daily exits and entrances, with books propping up one end of the shaky table— The vague accuracies of events dancing two and two with language which they forever surpass—and dawns tangled in darkness— The giant in whose apertures we cohabit, unaware of what air supports us—the vague, the particular no less vague his thoughts, the stream and we, we two, isolated in the stream, we also: three alike— we sit and talk I wish to be with you abed, we two as if the bed were the bed of a stream —I have much to say to you We sit and talk, quietly, with long lapses of silence and I am aware of the stream that has no language, coursing beneath the quiet heaven of your eyes which has no speech; to go to bed with you, to pass beyond the moment of meeting, while the currents float still in mid-air, to fall— with you from the brink, before the crash— to seize the moment. We sit and talk, sensing a little the rushing impact of the giants’ violent torrent rolling over us, a few moments. If I should demand it, as it has been demanded of others and given too swiftly, and you should consent. If you would consent We sit and talk and the silence speaks of the giants who have died in the past and have returned to those scenes unsatisfied and who is not unsatisfied, the silent, Singac the rock-shoulder emerging from the rocks—and the giants live again in your silence and unacknowledged desire— And the air lying over the water lifts the ripples, brother to brother, touching as the mind touches, counter-current, upstream brings in the fields, hot and cold parallel but never mingling, one that whirls backward at the brink and curls invisibly upward, fills the hollow, whirling, an accompaniment—but apart, observant of the distress, sweeps down or up clearing the spray— brings in the rumors of separate worlds, the birds as against the fish, the grape to the green weed that streams out undulant with the current at low tide beside the bramble in blossom, the storm by the flood— song and wings— one unlike the other, twin of the other, conversant with eccentricities side by side, bearing the water-drops and snow, vergent, the water soothing the air when it drives in among the rocks fitfully— While at 10,000 feet, coming in over the sombre mountains of Haiti, the land- locked bay back of Port au Prince, blue vitreol streaked with paler streams, shabby as loose hair, badly dyed—like chemical waste mixed in, eating out the shores . . He pointed it down and struck the rough waters of the bay, hard; but lifted it again and coming down gradually, hit again hard but remained down to taxi to the pier where they were waiting— (Thence Carlos had fled in the 70’s leaving the portraits of my grandparents, the furniture, the silver, even the meal hot upon the table before the Revolutionists coming in at the far end of the street.) I was over to see my mother today. My sister, “Billy,” was at the schoolhouse. I never go when she is there. My mother had a sour stomach, yesterday. I found her in bed. However, she had helped “Billy” do up the work. My mother has always tried to do her part, and she is always trying to do something for her children. A few days before I left I found her starting to mend my trousers. I took them away from her and said, “Mother, you can’t do that for me, with your crippled head. You know, I always get Louisa or Mrs. Tony to do that work for me.” “Billy” looked up and said, “It’s too bad about you.” I have already told you I helped with the work, did dishes, three times daily, swept and mopped floors, porches and cleaned yards, mowed the lawn, tarred the roofs, did repair work and helped wash, brought in the groceries and carried out the pots and washed them each morning, even “Billy’s” with dung in it, sometimes, and did other jobs and then it was not uncommon for “Billy” to say: “You don’t do anything here.” Once she even said, “I saw you out there the other morning sweeping porches, pretending you were doing something.” Of course, “Billy” has been chopped on by the surgical chopper and has gone through the menopause and she had a stroke of facial paralysis, but she has always been eccentric and wanted to boss. My Hartford sister said she used to run over her until she became big enough to throsh her. I have seen her slap her husband square in the face. I would have knocked her so far she would not have got back in a week. She has run at me with a poker, etc., but I always told her not to strike, “Don’t make that mistake,” I would always caution. “Billy” is a good worker and thorough going but she wants to lay blame —always on the other fellow. I told my buddie, in Hartford, she was just like our landlady, THE PISTOL. He said he had a sister just like that. As to my mother, she is obsessed with fire. That’s why she doesn’t want me to stay there, alone, when she is dead. The children have all said for years, she thinks more of me than any child she has. T. They fail, they limp with corns. I think he means to kill me, I don’t know what to do. He comes in after midnight, I pretend to be asleep. He stands there, I feel him looking down at me, I am afraid! Who? Who? Who? What? A summer evening? A quart of potatoes, half a dozen oranges, a bunch of beets and some soup greens. Look, I have a new set of teeth. Why you look ten years younger . But never, in despair and anxiety, forget to drive wit in, in till it discover his thoughts, decorous and simple, and never forget that though his thoughts are decorous and simple, the despair and anxiety: the grace and detail of a dynamo— So in his high decorum he is wise. A delirium of solutions, forthwith, forces him into back streets, to begin again: up hollow stairs among acrid smells to obscene rendezvous. And there he finds a festering sweetness of red lollipops— and a yelping dog: Come YEAH, Chichi! Or a great belly that no longer laughs but mourns with its expressionless black navel love’s deceit . . They are the divisions and imbalances of his whole concept, made weak by pity, flouting desire; they are—No ideas but in the facts . . I positively feel no rancour against you, but will urge you toward those vapory ends, and implore you to submit to your own myths, and that any postponement in doing so is a lie for you. Delay makes us villainous and cheap: All that I can say of myself and of others is that it matters not so much how a man lies or fornicates or even loves money, provided that he has not a Pontius Pilate but an hungered Lazarus in his intestines. Once Plotinus asked, “What is philosophy?” and he replied, “What is most important.” The late Miguel de Unamuno also cried out, not “More light, more light!” as Goethe did when he was dying, but “More warmth, more warmth!” I hate more than anything else the mocking stone bowels of Pilate; I abhor that more than cozening and falsehoods and the little asps of malice that are on all carnal tongues. That is why I am attacking you, as you put it, not because I think you cheat or lie for pelf, but because you lie and chafe and gull whenever you see a jot of the torn Galilean in a man’s intestines. You hate it; it makes you writhe; that’s why all the Americans so dote upon that canaille word, extrovert. Of course, nature in you knows better as some very lovely passages that you have written show. But to conclude, you and I can do without each other, in the usual way of the sloughy habits and manners of people. I can continue with my monologue of life and death until inevitable annihilation. But it’s wrong. And as I have said, whatever snares I make for myself, I won’t weep over Poe, or Rilke, or Dickinson, or Gogol, while I turn away the few waifs and Ishmaels of the spirit in this country. I have said that the artist is an Ishmael; Call me Ishmael, says Melville in the very first line of Moby Dick; he is the wild ass of a man;—Ishmael means affliction. You see, I am always concerned with the present when I read the plaintive epitaphs in the American graveyard of literature and poetry, and in weighing the head and the heart that ached in the land, that you are not. With you the book is one thing, and the man who wrote it another. The conception of time in literature and in chronicles makes it easy for men to make such hoax cleavages. But I am getting garrulous:— E.D. III. How strange you are, you idiot! So you think because the rose is red that you shall have the mastery? The rose is green and will bloom, overtopping you, green, livid green when you shall no more speak, or taste, or even be. My whole life has hung too long upon a partial victory. But, creature of the weather, I don’t want to go any faster than I have to go to win. Music it for yourself. He picked a hairpin from the floor and stuck it in his ear, probing around inside— The melting snow dripped from the cornice by his window 90 strokes a minute— He descried in the linoleum at his feet a woman’s face, smelled his hands, strong of a lotion he had used not long since, lavender, rolled his thumb about the tip of his left index finger and watched it dip each time, like the head of a cat licking its paw, heard the faint filing sound it made: of earth his ears are full, there is no sound : And his thoughts soared to the magnificence of imagined delights where he would probe as into the pupil of an eye as through a hoople of fire, and emerge sheathed in a robe streaming with light. What heroic dawn of desire is denied to his thoughts? They are trees from whose leaves streaming with rain his mind drinks of desire: Who is younger than I? The contemptible twig? that I was? stale in mind whom the dirt recently gave up? Weak to the wind. Gracile? Taking up no place, too narrow to be engraved with the maps of a world it never knew, the green and dovegrey countries of the mind. A mere stick that has twenty leaves against my convolutions. What shall it become, Snot nose, that I have not been? I enclose it and persist, go on. Let it rot, at my center. Whose center? I stand and surpass youth’s leanness. My surface is myself. Under which to witness, youth is buried. Roots? Everybody has roots. We go on living, we permit ourselves to continue—but certainly not for the university, what they publish severally or as a group: clerks got out of hand forgetting for the most part to whom they are beholden. spitted on fixed concepts like roasting hogs, sputtering, their drip sizzling in the fire Something else, something else the same. He was more concerned, much more concerned with detaching the label from a discarded mayonnaise jar, the glass jar in which some patient had brought a specimen for examination, than to examine and treat the twenty and more infants taking their turn from the outer office, their mothers tormented and jabbering. He’d stand in the alcove pretending to wash, the jar at the bottom of the sink well out of sight and, as the rod of water came down, work with his fingernail in the splash at the edge of the colored label striving to loose the tightly glued paper. It must have been varnished over, he argued, to have it stick that way. One corner of it he’d got loose in spite of all and would get the rest presently: talking pleasantly the while and with great skill to the anxious parent. Will you give me a baby? asked the young colored woman in a small voice standing naked by the bed. Refused she shrank within herself. She too refused. It makes me too nervous, she said, and pulled the covers round her. Instead, this: In time of general privation a private herd, 20 quarts of milk to the main house and 8 of cream, all the fresh vegetables, sweet corn, a swimming pool, (empty!) a building covering an acre kept heated winter long (to conserve the plumbing) Grapes in April, orchids like weeds, uncut, at tropic heat while the snow flies, left to droop on the stem, not even exhibited at the city show. To every employee from the top down the same in proportion—as many as there are: butter daily by the pound lot, fresh greens—even to the gate-keeper. A special French maid, her sole duty to groom the pet Pomeranians—who sleep. Cornelius Doremus, who was baptized at Acquackanonk in 1714, and died near Montville in 1803, was possessed of goods and chattels appraised at $419.581⁄2. He was 89 years old when he died, and doubtless had turned his farm over to his children, so that he retained only what he needed for his personal comfort: 24 shirts at .821⁄2 cents, $19.88: 5 sheets, $7.00: 4 pillow cases, $2.12: 4 pair trousers, $2.00: 1 sheet, $ 1.371⁄2: a handkerchief, $1.75: 8 caps, .75 cents: 2 pairs shoebuckles and knife, .25 cents: 14 pairs stockings, $5.25: 2 pairs “Mittins” .63 cents: 1 linen jacket, .50 cents: 4 pairs breeches, $2.63: 4 waist coats, $3.50: 5 coats, $4.75: 1 yellow coat, $5.00: 2 hats, .25 cents: 1 pair shoes, .121⁄2 cents: 1 chest, .75 cents: 1 large chair, $1.50: 1 chest, .121⁄2 cents: 1 pair andirons, $2.00: 1 bed and bedding, $ 18.00: 2 pocketbooks, .371⁄2 cents: 1 small trunk, .191⁄2 cents: castor hat, .871⁄2 cents: 3 reeds, $1.66: 1 “Quill wheal,” .50 cents. Who restricts knowledge? Some say it is the decay of the middle class making an impossible moat between the high and the low where the life once flourished . . knowledge of the avenues of information— So that we do not know (in time) where the stasis lodges. And if it is not the knowledgeable idiots, the university, they at least are the non-purveyors should be devising means to leap the gap. Inlets? The outward masks of the special interests that perpetuate the stasis and make it profitable. They block the release that should cleanse and assume prerogatives as a private recompense. Others are also at fault because they do nothing. By nightfall of the 29th, acres of mud were exposed and the water mostly had been drawn off. The fish did not run into the nets. But a black crowd of people could be seen from the cars, standing about under the willows, watching the men and boys on the drained lake bottom ... some hundred yards in front of the dam. The whole bottom was covered with people, and the big eels, weighing from three to four pounds each, would approach the edge and then the boys would strike at them. From this time everybody got all they wanted in a few moments. On the morning of the 30th, the boys and men were still there. There seemed to be no end to the stock of eels especially. All through the year fine messes of fish have been taken from the lake; but nobody dreamt of the quantity that were living in it. Singularly to say not a snake had been seen. The fish and eels seemed to have monopolized the lake entirely. Boys in bathing had often reported the bottom as full of big snakes that had touched their feet and limbs but they were without doubt the eels. Those who prepared the nets were not the ones who got the most fish. It was the hoodlums and men who leaped into the mud and water where the nets could not work that rescued from the mud and water the finest load of fish. A man going to the depot with a peach basket gave the basket to a boy and he filled it in five minutes, deftly snapping the vertebrae back of the heads to make them stay in, and he charged the modest sum of .25 cents for the basket full of eels. The crowd increased. There were millions of fish. Wagons were sent for to carry away the heaps that lined both sides of the roadway. Little boys were dragging behind them all they could carry home, strung on sticks and in bags and baskets. There were heaps of catfish all along the walk, bunches of suckers and pike, and there were three black bass on one stick, a silk weaver had caught them. At a quarter past seven a wagon body was filled with fish and eels ... four wagon loads had been carried away. At least fifty men in the lake were hard at work and had sticks with which they struck the big eels and benumbed them as they glided along the top of the mud in shoal water, and so were able to hold them until they could carry them out: the men and boys splashed about in the mud.... Night did not put an end to the scene. All night long with lights on shore and lanterns over the mud, the work went on. Moveless he envies the men that ran and could run off toward the peripheries— to other centers, direct— for clarity (if they found it) loveliness and authority in the world— a sort of springtime toward which their minds aspired but which he saw, within himself—ice bound and leaped, “the body, not until the following spring, frozen in an ice cake” Shortly before two o’clock August 16, 1875, Mr. Leonard Sandford, of the firm of Post and Sandford, while at work on the improvements for the water company, at the Falls, was looking into the chasm near the wheel house of the water works. He saw what looked like a mass of clothing, and on peering intently at times as the torrent sank and rose, he could distinctly see the legs of a man, the body being lodged between two logs, in a very extraordinary manner. It was in the “crotch” of these logs that the body was caught. The sight of a human body hanging over the precipice was indeed one which was as novel as it was awful in appearance. The news of its finding attracted a very large number of visitors all that day. What more, to carry the thing through? Half the river red, half steaming purple from the factory vents, spewed out hot, swirling, bubbling. The dead bank, shining mud . What can he think else—along the gravel of the ravished park, torn by the wild workers’ children tearing up the grass, kicking, screaming? A chemistry, corollary to academic misuse, which the theorem with accuracy, accurately misses . . He thinks: their mouths eating and kissing, spitting and sucking, speaking; a partitype of five . He thinks: two eyes; nothing escapes them, neither the convolutions of the sexual orchid hedged by fern and honey-smells, to the last hair of the consent of the dying. And silk spins from the hot drums to a music of pathetic souvenirs, a comb and nail-file in an imitation leather case—to remind him, to remind him! and a photograph-holder with pictures of himself between the two children, all returned weeping, weeping—in the back room of the widow who married again, a vile tongue but laborious ways, driving a drunken husband . . What do I care for the flies, shit with them. I’m out of the house all day. Into the sewer they threw the dead horse. What birth does this foretell? I think he’ll write a novel bye and bye . P. Your interest is in the bloody loam but what I’m after is the finished product. I. Leadership passes into empire; empire begets in- solence; insolence brings ruin. Such is the mystery of his one two, one two. And so among the rest he drives in his new car out to the suburbs, out by the rhubarb farm—a simple thought— where the convent of the Little Sisters of St. Ann pretends a mystery What irritation of offensively red brick is this, red as poor-man’s flesh? Anachronistic? The mystery of streets and back rooms— wiping the nose on sleeves, come here to dream . . Tenement windows, sharp edged, in which no face is seen—though curtainless, into which no more than birds and insects look or the moon stares, concerning which they dare look back, by times. It is the complement exact of vulgar streets, a mathematic calm, controlled, the architecture mete, sinks there, lifts here . the same blank and staring eyes. An incredible clumsiness of address, senseless rapes—caught on hands and knees scrubbing a greasy corridor; the blood boiling as though in a vat, where they soak— Plaster saints, glass jewels and those apt paper flowers, bafflingly complex—have here their forthright beauty, beside: Things, things unmentionable, the sink with the waste farina in it and lumps of rancid meat, milk-bottle-tops: have here a tranquility and loveliness Have here (in his thoughts) a complement tranquil and chaste. He shifts his change: “The 7th December, this year, (1737) at night, was a large shock of an earthquake, accompanied with a remarkable rumbling noise; people waked in their beds, the doors flew open, bricks fell from the chimneys; the consternation was serious, but happily no great damage ensued.” Thought clambers up, snail like, upon the wet rocks hidden from sun and sight— hedged in by the pouring torrent — and has its birth and death there in that moist chamber, shut from the world—and unknown to the world, cloaks itself in mystery— And the myth that holds up the rock, that holds up the water thrives there— in that cavern, that profound cleft, a flickering green inspiring terror, watching . . And standing, shrouded there, in that din, Earth, the chatterer, father of all speech . . . . . . . . N.B. “In order apparently to bring the meter still more within the sphere of prose and common speech, Hipponax ended his iambics with a spondee or a trochee instead of an iambus, doing thus the utmost violence to the rhythmical structure. These deformed and mutilated verses were called χωλίαμβοι or ϊαμβοι бκάζοντες (lame or limping iambics). They communicated a curious crustiness to the style. The choliambi are in poetry what the dwarf or cripple is in human nature. Here again, by their acceptance of this halting meter, the Greeks displayed their acute aesthetic sense of propriety, recognizing the harmony which subsists between crabbed verses and the distorted subjects with which they dealt—the vices and perversions of humanity—as well as their agreement with the snarling spirit of the satirist. Deformed verse was suited to deformed morality.” —Studies of the Greek Poets, John Addington Symonds Vol. I, p. 284 BOOK TWO (1948) Sunday in the Park I. Outside outside myself there is a world, he rumbled, subject to my incursions —a world (to me) at rest, which I approach concretely— The scene’s the Park upon the rock, female to the city —upon whose body Paterson instructs his thoughts (concretely) —late spring, a Sunday afternoon! —and goes by the footpath to the cliff (counting: the proof) himself among the others, —treads there the same stones on which their feet slip as they climb, paced by their dogs! laughing, calling to each other— Wait for me! . . the ugly legs of the young girls, pistons too powerful for delicacy! . the men’s arms, red, used to heat and cold, to toss quartered beeves and . Yah! Yah! Yah! Yah! —over-riding the risks: pouring down! For the flower of a day! Arrived breathless, after a hard climb he, looks back (beautiful but expensive!) to the pearl-grey towers! Re-turns and starts, possessive, through the trees, — t hat love, that is not, is not in those terms to which I’m still the positive in spite of all; the ground dry, — passive-possessive Walking — Thickets gather about groups of squat sand-pine, all but from bare rock . . —a scattering of man-high cedars (sharp cones), antlered sumac . —roots, for the most part, writhing upon the surface (so close are we to ruin every day!) searching the punk-dry rot Walking — The body is tilted slightly forward from the basic standing position and the weight thrown on the ball of the foot, while the other thigh is lifted and the leg and opposite arm are swung forward (fig. 6B). Various muscles, aided . Despite my having said that I’d never write to you again, I do so now because I find, with the passing of time, that the outcome of my failure with you has been the complete damming up of all my creative capacities in a particularly disastrous manner such as I have never before experienced. For a great many weeks now (whenever I’ve tried to write poetry) every thought I’ve had, even every feeling, has been struck off some surface crust of myself which began gathering when I first sensed that you were ignoring the real contents of my last letters to you, and which finally congealed into some impenetrable substance when you asked me to quit corresponding with you altogether without even an explanation. That kind of blockage, exiling one’s self from one’s self—have you ever experienced it? I dare say you have, at moments; and if so, you can well understand what a serious psychological injury it amounts to when turned into a permanent day-to-day condition. How do I love you? These! (He hears! Voices . indeterminate! Sees them moving, in groups, by twos and fours—filtering off by way of the many bypaths.) I asked him, What do you do? He smiled patiently, The typical American question. In Europe they would ask, What are you doing? Or, What are you doing now? What do I do? I listen, to the water falling. (No sound of it here but with the wind!) This is my entire occupation. No fairer day ever dawned anywhere than May 2, 1880, when the German Singing Societies of Paterson met on Garret Mountain, as they did many years before on the first Sunday in May. However the meeting of 1880 proved a fatal day, when William Dalzell, who owned a piece of property near the scene of the festivities, shot John Joseph Van Houten. Dalzell claimed that the visitors had in previous years walked over his garden and was determined that this year he would stop them from crossing any part of his grounds. Immediately after the shot the quiet group of singers was turned into an infuriated mob who would take Dalzell into their own hands. The mob then proceeded to burn the barn into which Dalzell had retreated from the angry group. Dalzell fired at the approaching mob from a window in the barn and one of the bullets struck a little girl in the cheek.... Some of the Paterson Police rushed Dalzell out of the barn [to] the house of John Ferguson some half furlong away. The crowd now numbered some ten thousand, “a great beast!” for many had come from the city to join the conflict. The case looked serious, for the Police were greatly outnumbered. The crowd then tried to burn the Ferguson house and Dalzell went to the house of John McGuckin. While in this house it was that Sergeant John McBride suggested that it might be well to send for William McNulty, Dean of Saint Joseph’s Catholic Church. In a moment the Dean set on a plan. He proceeded to the scene in a hack. Taking Dalzell by the arm, in full view of the infuriated mob, he led the man to the hack and seating himself by his side, ordered the driver to proceed. The crowd hesitated, bewildered between the bravery of the Dean and . Signs everywhere of birds nesting, while in the air, slow, a crow zigzags with heavy wings before the wasp-thrusts of smaller birds circling about him that dive from above stabbing for his eyes Walking — he leaves the path, finds hard going across-field, stubble and matted brambles seeming a pasture—but no pasture . old furrows, to say labor sweated or had sweated here . a flame, spent. The file-sharp grass . When! from before his feet, half tripping, picking a way, there starts . a flight of empurpled wings! —invisibly created (their jackets dust-grey) from the dust kindled to sudden ardor! They fly away, churring! until their strength spent they plunge to the coarse cover again and disappear —but leave, livening the mind, a flashing of wings and a churring song . AND a grasshopper of red basalt, boot- long, tumbles from the core of his mind, a rubble-bank disintegrating beneath a tropic downpour Chapultepec! grasshopper hill! —a matt stone solicitously instructed to bear away some rumor of the living presence that has preceded it, out-precedented its breath . These wings do not unfold for flight— no need! the weight (to the hand) finding a counter-weight or counter buoyancy by the mind’s wings He is afraid! What then? Before his feet, at each step, the flight is renewed. A burst of wings, a quick churring sound : couriers to the ceremonial of love! —aflame in flight! —aflame only in flight! No flesh but the caress! He is led forward by their announcing wings. If that situation with you (your ignoring those particular letters and then your final note) had belonged to the inevitable lacrimae rerum (as did, for instance, my experience with Z.) its result could not have been (as it has been) to destroy the validity for me myself of myself, because in that case nothing to do with my sense of personal identity would have been maimed—the cause of one’s frustrations in such instances being not in one’s self nor in the other person but merely in the sorry scheme of things. But since your ignoring those letters was not “natural” in that sense (or rather since to regard it as unnatural I am forced, psychologically, to feel that what I wrote you about, was sufficiently trivial and unimportant and absurd to merit your evasion) it could not but follow that that whole side of life connected with those letters should in consequence take on for my own self that same kind of unreality and inaccessibility which the inner lives of other people often have for us. —his mind a red stone carved to be endless flight Love that is a stone endlessly in flight, so long as stone shall last bearing the chisel’s stroke . . and is lost and covered with ash, falls from an undermined bank and—begins churring! AND DOES, the stone after the life! The stone lives, the flesh dies —we know nothing of death. —boot long window-eyes that front the whole head, Red stone! as if a light still clung in them . Love combating sleep___________ the sleep piecemeal Shortly after midnight, August 20, 1878, special officer Goodridge, when in front of the Franklin House, heard a strange squealing noise down towards Ellison Street. Running to see what was the matter, he found a cat at bay under the water table at Clark’s hardware store on the corner, confronting a strange black animal too small to be a cat and entirely too large for a rat. The officer ran up to the spot and the animal got in under the grating of the cellar window, from which it frequently poked its head with a lightning rapidity. Mr. Goodridge made several strikes at it with his club but was unable to hit it. Then officer Keyes came along and as soon as he saw it, he said it was a mink, which confirmed the theory that Mr. Goodridge had already formed. Both tried for a while to hit it with their clubs but were unable to do so, when finally officer Goodridge drew his pistol and fired a shot at the animal. The shot evidently missed its mark, but the noise and powder so frightened the little joker that it jumped out into the street, and made down into Ellison Street at a wonderful gait, closely followed by the two officers. The mink finally disappeared down a cellar window under the grocery store below Spangermacher’s lager beer saloon, and that was the last seen of it. The cellar was examined again in the morning, but nothing further could be discovered of the little critter that had caused so much fun. Without invention nothing is well spaced, unless the mind change, unless the stars are new measured, according to their relative positions, the line will not change, the necessity will not matriculate: unless there is a new mind there cannot be a new line, the old will go on repeating itself with recurring deadliness: without invention nothing lies under the witch-hazel bush, the alder does not grow from among the hummocks margining the all but spent channel of the old swale, the small foot-prints of the mice under the overhanging tufts of the bunch-grass will not appear: without invention the line will never again take on its ancient divisions when the word, a supple word, lived in it, crumbled now to chalk. Under the bush they lie protected from the offending sun— 11 o’clock They seem to talk —a park, devoted to pleasure: devoted to . grasshoppers! 3 colored girls, of age! stroll by —their color flagrant, their voices vagrant their laughter wild, flagellant, dissociated from the fixed scene . But the white girl, her head upon an arm, a butt between her fingers lies under the bush . . Semi-naked, facing her, a sunshade over his eyes, he talks with her —the jalopy half hid behind them in the trees— I bought a new bathing suit, just pants and a brassiere : the breasts and the pudenda covered—beneath the sun in frank vulgarity. Minds beaten thin by waste—among the working classes SOME sort of breakdown has occurred. Semi-roused they lie upon their blanket face to face, mottled by the shadows of the leaves upon them, unannoyed, at least here unchallenged. Not undignified. . . talking, flagrant beyond all talk in perfect domesticity— And having bathed and having eaten (a few sandwiches) their pitiful thoughts do meet in the flesh—surrounded by churring loves! Gay wings to bear them (in sleep) —their thoughts alight, away . . among the grass Walking — across the old swale—a dry wave in the ground tho’ marked still by the line of Indian alders . . they (the Indians) would weave in and out, unseen, among them along the stream . come out whooping between the log house and men working the field, cut them off! they having left their arms in the block- house, and—without defense—carry them away into captivity. One old man . Forget it! for God’s sake, Cut out that stuff . Walking — he rejoins the path and sees, on a treeless knoll—the red path choking it— a stone wall, a sort of circular redoubt against the sky, barren and unoccupied. Mount. Why not? A chipmunk , with tail erect, scampers among the stones. (Thus the mind grows, up flinty pinnacles) . but as he leans, in his stride, at sight of a flint arrow-head (it is not) — there in the distance, to the north, appear to him the chronic hills . Well, so they are. He stops short: Who’s here? To a stone bench, to which she’s leashed, within the wall a man in tweeds—a pipe hooked in his jaw—is combing out a new-washed Collie bitch. The deliberate comb-strokes part the long hair—even her face he combs though her legs tremble slightly—until it lies, as he designs, like ripples in white sand giving off its clean-dog odor. The floor, stone slabs, she stands patiently before his caresses in that bare “sea chamber” . to the right from this vantage, the observation tower in the middle distance stands up prominently from its pubic grove DEAR B. Please excuse me for not having told you this when I was over to your house. I had no courage to answer your questions so I’ll write it. Your dog is going to have puppies although I prayed she would be okey. It wasn’t that she was left alone as she never was but I used to let her out at dinner time while I hung up my clothes. At the time, it was on a Thursday, my mother-in- law had some sheets and table cloths out on the end of the line. I figured the dogs wouldn’t come as long as I was there and none came thru my yard or near the apartment. He must have come between your hedge and the house. Every few seconds I would run to the end of the line or peek under the sheets to see if Musty was alright. She was until I looked a minute too late. I took sticks and stones after the dog but he wouldn’t beat it. George gave me plenty of hell and I started praying that I had frightened the other dog so much that nothing had happened. I know you’ll be cursing like a son-of-a-gun and probably won’t ever speak to me again for not having told you. Don’t think I haven’t been worrying about Musty. She’s occupied my mind every day since that awful event. You won’t think so highly of me now and feel like protecting me. Instead I’ll bet you could kill ... And still the picnickers come on, now early afternoon, and scatter through the trees over the fenced-in acres . Voices! multiple and inarticulate . voices clattering loudly to the sun, to the clouds. Voices! assaulting the air gaily from all sides. —among which the ear strains to catch the movement of one voice among the rest —a reed-like voice of peculiar accent Thus she finds what peace there is, reclines, before his approach, stroked by their clambering feet—for pleasure It is all for pleasure . their feet . aimlessly wandering The “great beast” come to sun himself as he may . . their dreams mingling, aloof Let us be reasonable! Sunday in the park, limited by the escarpment, eastward; to the west abutting on the old road: recreation with a view! the binoculars chained to anchored stanchions along the east wall— beyond which, a hawk s oars! —a trumpet sounds fitfully. Stand at the rampart (use a metronome if your ear is deficient, one made in Hungary if you prefer) and look away north by east where the church spires still spend their wits against the sky . to the ball-park in the hollow with its minute figures running —beyond the gap where the river plunges into the narrow gorge, unseen —and the imagination soars, as a voice beckons, a thundrous voice, endless —as sleep: the voice that has ineluctably called them— that unmoving roar! churches and factories (at a price) together, summoned them from the pit . —his voice, one among many (unheard) moving under all. The mountain quivers. Time! Count! Sever and mark time! So during the early afternoon, from place to place he moves, his voice mingling with other voices —the voice in his voice opening his old throat, blowing out his lips, kindling his mind (more than his mind will kindle) —following the hikers. At last he comes to the idlers’ favorite haunts, the picturesque summit, where the blue-stone (rust-red where exposed) has been faulted at various levels (ferns rife among the stones) into rough terraces and partly closed in dens of sweet grass, the ground gently sloping. Loiterers in groups straggle over the bare rock-table—scratched by their boot-nails more than the glacier scratched them—walking indifferent through each other’s privacy . —in any case, the center of movement, the core of gaiety. Here a young man, perhaps sixteen, is sitting with his back to the rock among some ferns playing a guitar, dead pan . The rest are eating and drinking. The big guy in the black hat is too full to move . but Mary is up! Come on! Wassa ma’? You got broken leg? It is this air! the air of the Midi and the old cultures intoxicates them: present! —lifts one arm holding the cymbals of her thoughts, cocks her old head and dances! raising her skirts: La la la la! What a bunch of bums! Afraid somebody see you? Blah! Excrementi! —she spits. Look a’ me, Grandma! Everybody too damn lazy. This is the old, the very old, old upon old, the undying: even to the minute gestures, the hand holding the cup, the wine spilling, the arm stained by it: Reme mber the peon in the lost Eisenstein film drinking from a wine-skin with the abandon of a horse drinking so that it slopped down his chin? down his neck, dribbling over his shirt-front and down onto his pants—laughing, toothless? Heavenly man! —the leg raised, verisimilitude . even to the coarse contours of the leg, the bovine touch! The leer, the cave of it, the female of it facing the male, the satyr — (Priapus!) with that lonely implication, goatherd and goat, fertility, the attack, drunk, cleansed . Rejected. Even the film suppressed : but . persistent The picnickers laugh on the rocks celebrating the varied Sunday of their loves with its declining light— Walking— look down (from a ledge) into this grassy den (somewhat removed from the traffic) above whose brows a moon! where she lies sweating at his side: She stirs, distraught, against him—wounded (drunk), moves against him (a lump) desiring, against him, bored . flagrantly bored and sleeping, a beer bottle still grasped spear-like in his hand . while the small, sleepless boys, who have climbed the columnar rocks overhanging the pair (where they lie overt upon the grass, besieged— careless in their narrow cell under the crowd’s feet) stare down, from history! at them, puzzled and in the sexless light (of childhood) bored equally, go charging off . There where the movement throbs openly and you can hear the Evangelist shouting! —moving nearer she—lean as a goat—leans her lean belly to the man’s backside toying with the clips of his suspenders . —to which he adds his useless voice: until there moves in his sleep a music that is whole, unequivocal (in his sleep, sweating in his sleep—laboring against sleep, agasp!) —and does not waken. Sees, alive (asleep) —the fall’s roar entering his sleep (to be fulfilled) reb orn in his sleep—scattered over the mountain severally . —by which he woos her, severally. And the amnesic crowd (the scattered), called about — strains to catch the movement of one voice . hears, Pleasure! Pleasure! — feels , half dismayed, the afternoon of complex voices its own— and is relieved (relived) A cop is directing traffic across the main road up a little wooded slope toward the conveniences: oaks, choke- cherry, dogwoods, white and green, iron-wood : humped roots matted into the shallow soil —mostly gone: rock out-croppings polished by the feet of the picnickers: sweetbarked sassafras . leaning from the rancid grease: defor mity— —to be deciphered (a horn, a trumpet!) an elucidation by multiplicity, a corrosion, a parasitic curd, a clarion for belief, to be good dogs : NO DOGS ALLOWED AT LARGE IN THIS PARK II. Blocked. (Make a song out of that: concretely) By whom? In its midst rose a massive church. . . And it all came to me then—that those poor souls had nothing else in the world, save that church, between them and the eternal stony, ungrateful and unpromising dirt they lived by ..... Cash is mulct of them that others may live secure . . and knowledge restricted. An orchestral dullness overlays their world I see they—the Senate, is trying to block Lilienthal and deliver “the bomb” over to a few industrialists. I don’t think they will succeed but . . that is what I mean when I refuse to get excited over the cry, Communist! they use to blind us. It’s terrifying to think how easily we can be destroyed, a few votes. Even though Communism is a threat, are Communists any worse than the guilty bastards trying in that way to undermine us? We leap awake and what we see fells us . Let terror twist the world! Faitoute, sick of his diversions but proud of women, his requites, standing with his back to the lions’ pit, (where the drunken lovers slept, now, both of them) indifferent, started again wandering—foot pacing foot outward into emptiness . . Up there. The cop points. A sign nailed to a tree: Women. You can see figures moving beyond the screen of the trees and, close at hand, music blurts out suddenly. Walking — a cramped arena has been left clear at the base of the observation tower near the urinals. This is the Lord’s line: Several broken benches drawn up in a curving row against the shrubbery face the flat ground, benches on which a few children have been propped by the others against their running off . Three middle aged men with iron smiles stand behind the benches—backing (watching) the kids, the kids and several women—and holding, a cornet, clarinet and trombone, severally, in their hands, at rest. There is also, played by a woman, a portable organ . . Before them an old man, wearing a fringe of long white hair, bareheaded, his glabrous skull reflecting the sun’s light and in shirtsleeves, is beginning to speak— calling to the birds and trees! Jumping up and down in his ecstasy he beams into the empty blue, eastward, over the parapet toward the city . . . . . . . . . There are people—especially among women—who can speak only to one person. And I am one of those women. I do not come easily to confidences (though it cannot but seem otherwise to you). I could not possibly convey to any one of those people who have crossed my path in these few months, those particular phases of my life which I made the subject of my letters to you. I must let myself be entirely misunderstood and misjudged in all my economic and social maladjustments, rather than ever attempt to communicate to anyone else what I wrote to you about. And so my having heaped these confidences upon you (however tiresome you may have found them and however far I may yet need to go in the attainment of complete self-honesty which is difficult for anyone) was enough in itself to have caused my failure with you to have so disastrous an effect upon me. Look, there lies the city! —calling with his back to the paltry congregation, calling the winds; a voice calling, calling . Behind him the drawn children whom his suit of holy proclamation so very badly fits, winkless, under duress, must feel their buttocks ache on the slats of the sodden benches. But as he rests, they sing—when prodded—as he wipes his prismed brow. The light fondles it as if inclined to form a halo— Then he laughs: One sees him first. Few listen. Or, in fact, pay the least attention, walking about, unless some Polock with his mouth open tries to make it out, as if it were some Devil (looks into the faces of a young couple passing, laughing together, for some hint) What kind of priest is this? Alarmed, goes off scowling, looking back. This is a Protestant! protesting—as though the world were his own . —another, twenty feet off, walks his dog absorbedly along the wall top)—thoughtful of the dog— at the cliff’s edge above a fifty foot drop . . . alternately the harangue, followed by horn blasts surmounting what other sounds . they quit now as the entranced figure of a man resumes— But his decoys bring in no ducks—other than the children with their dusty little minds and happiest non sequiturs. No figure from the clouds seems brought hovering near The detectives found a note on the kitchen table addressed to a soldier from Fort Bragg, N. C. The contents of the letter showed that she was in love with the soldier, the detective said. This is what the preacher said: Don’t think about me. Call me a stupid old man, that’s right. Yes, call me an old bore who talks until he is hoarse when nobody wants to listen. That’s the truth. I’m an old fool and I know it. BUT . ! You can’t ignore the words of Our Lord Jesus Christ who died on the Cross for us that we may have Eternal Life! Amen. Amen! Amen! shouted the disciples standing behind the benches. Amen! —the spirit of our Lord that gives the words of even such a plain, ignorant fellow as I a touch of His Own blessed dignity and and strength among you . . I tell you—lifting up his arms—I bring the riches of all the ages to you here today. It was windless and hot in the sun where he was standing bareheaded. Great riches shall be yours! I wasn’t born here. I was born in what we call over here the Old Country. But it’s the same people, the same kind of people there as here and they’re up to the same kind of tricks as over here—only, there isn’t as much money over there—and that makes the difference. My family were poor people. So I started to work when I was pretty young. —Oh, it took me a long time! but one day I said to myself, Klaus, that’s my name, Klaus, I said to myself, you’re a success. You have worked hard but you have been lucky. You’re rich—and now we’re going to enjoy ourselves. Hamilton saw more clearly than anyone else with what urgency the new government must assume authority over the States if it was to survive. He never trusted the people, “a great beast,” as he saw them and held Jefferson to be little better if not worse than any. So I came to America! Especially in the matter of finances a critical stage presented itself. The States were inclined to shrug off the debt incurred during the recent war—each state preferring to undertake its own private obligations separately. Hamilton saw that if this were allowed to ensue the effect would be fatal, to future credit. He came out with vigor and cunning for “Assumption,” assumption by the Federal Government of the national debt, and the granting to it of powers of taxation without which it could not raise the funds necessary for this purpose. A storm followed in which he found himself opposed by Madison and Jefferson. But when I got here I soon found out that I was a pretty small frog in a mighty big pool. So I went to work all over again. I suppose I was born with a gift for that sort of thing. I throve and I gloried in it. And I thought then that I was happy. And I was — as happy as money could make me. But did it make me GOOD? He stopped to laugh, healthily, and his wan assistants followed him, forcing it out—grinning against the rocks with wry smiles . NO! he shouted, bending at the knees and straightening himself up violently with the force of his emphasis—like Beethoven getting a crescendo out of an orchestra—NO! It did not make me good. (His clenched fists were raised above his brows.) I kept on making money, more and more of it, but it didn’t make me good. America the golden! with trick and money damned like Altgeld sick and molden we love thee bitter land Like Altgeld on the corner seeing the mourners pass we bow our heads before thee and take our hats in hand And so one day I heard a voice ... a voice—just as I am talking to you here today. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . And the voice said, Klaus, what’s the matter with you? You’re not happy. I am happy! I shouted back, I’ve got everything I want. No, it said. Klaus, that’s a lie. You’re not happy. And I had to admit it was the truth. I wasn’t happy. That bothered me a lot. But I was pig- headed and when I thought it over I said to myself, Klaus, you must be getting old to let things like that worry you. . . . . . . then one day our blessed Lord came to me and put His hand on my shoulder and said, Klaus, you old fool, you’ve been working too hard. You look tired and worried. Let me help you. I am worried, I replied, but I don’t know what to do about it. I got everything that money can buy but I’m not happy, that’s the truth. And the Lord said to me, Klaus, get rid of your money. You’ll never be happy until you do that. As a corollary to the famous struggle for assumption lay the realization among many leading minds in the young republic that unless industry were set upon its feet, unless manufactured goods could be produced income for taxation would be a myth. The new world had been looked on as a producer of precious metals, pelts and raw materials to be turned over to the mother country for manufactured articles which the colonists had no choice but to buy at advanced prices. They were prevented from making woolen, cotton or linen cloth for sale. Nor were they allowed to build furnaces to convert the native iron into steel. Even during the Revolution Hamilton had been impressed by the site of the Great Falls of the Passaic. His fertile imagination envisioned a great manufacturing center, a great Federal City, to supply the needs of the country. Here was water-power to turn the mill wheels and the navigable river to carry manufactured goods to the market centers: a national manufactury. Give up my money! —with monotonous insistence the falls of his harangue hung featureless upon the ear, yet with a certain strangeness as if arrested in space That would be a hard thing for me to do. What would my rich friends say? They’d say, That old fool Klaus Ehrens must be getting pretty crazy, getting rid of his cash. What! give up the thing I’d struggled all my life to pile up—so I could say I was rich? No! that I couldn’t do. But I was troubled in mind. He paused to wipe his brow while the singers struck up a lively hymn tune. I couldn’t eat, I couldn’t sleep for thinking of my trouble so that when the Lord came to me the third time I was ready and I kneeled down before Him and said, Lord, do what you will with me! Give away your money, He said, and I will make you the richest man in the world! And I bowed my head and said to Him, Yea, Lord. And His blessed truth descended upon me and filled me with joy, such joy and such riches as I had never in my life known to that day and I said to Him, Master! In the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. Amen. Amen! Amen! echoed the devout assistants. Is this the only beauty here? And is this beauty— torn to shreds by the lurking schismatists? Where is beauty among these trees? Is it the dogs the owners bring here to dry their coats? These women are not beautiful and reflect no beauty but gross . . Unless it is beauty to be, anywhere, so flagrant in desire . The beauty of holiness, if this it be, is the only beauty visible in this place other than the view and a fresh budding tree. So I started to get rid of my money. It didn’t take me long I can tell you! I threw it away with both hands. And I began to feel better . . . . —and leaned on the parapet, thinking From here, one could see him—that tied man, that cold blooded murderer . April! in the distance being hanged. Groups at various vantages along the cliff . having gathered since before daybreak to witness it. One kills for money but doesn’t always get it. Leans on the parapet thinking, while the preacher, outnumbered, addresses the leaves in the patient trees : The gentle Christ child of Pericles and femina practa Split between Athens and the amphioxus The gentle Christ— weed and worth wistfully forthright Weeps and is remembered as of the open tomb —threw it away with both hands. . until it was gone —he made a wide motion with both hands as of scattering money to the winds— —but the riches that had been given me are beyond all counting. You can throw them carelessly about you on all sides—and still you will have more. For God Almighty has boundless resources and never fails. There is no end to the treasures of our Blessed Lord who died on the Cross for us that we may be saved. Amen. The Federal Reserve System is a private enterprise ... a private monopoly ... (with power) ... given to it by a spineless Congress ... to issue and regulate all our money. They create money from nothing and lend it to private business (the same money over and over again at a high rate of interest), and also to the Government whenever it needs money in war and peace; for which we, the people, representing the Government (in this instance at any rate) must pay interest to the banks in the form of high taxes. The bird, the eagle, made himself small—to creep into the hinged egg until therein he disappeared, all but one leg upon which a claw opened and closed wretchedly gripping the air, and would not—for all the effort of the struggle, remain inside . Witnessing the Falls Hamilton was impressed by this show of what in those times was overwhelming power ... planned a stone aqueduct following a proposed boulevard, as the crow flies, to Newark with outlets every mile or two along the river for groups of factories: The Society for Useful Manufactures: SUM, they called it. The newspapers of the day spoke in enthusiastic terms of the fine prospects of the “National Manufactory” where they fondly believed would be produced all cotton, cassimeres, wall papers, books, felt and straw hats, shoes, carriages, pottery, bricks, pots, pans and buttons needed in the United States. But L’Enfant’s plans were more magnificent than practical and Peter Colt, Treasurer of the State of Connecticut, was chosen in his place. . . . . . The prominent purpose of the Society was the manufacture of cotton goods. Washington at his first inaugural . . . . . . wore a coat of Crow-black homespun woven in Paterson . . . . . . In other words, the Federal Reserve Banks constitute a Legalized National Usury System, whose Customer No. 1 is our Government, the richest country in the world. Every one of us is paying tribute to the money racketeers on every dollar we earn through hard work. . . . . In all our great bond issues the interest is always greater than the principle. All of the great public works cost more than twice the actual cost, on that account. Under the present system of doing business we SIMPLY ADD 120 to 150 per cent to the stated cost. The people must pay anyway; why should they be compelled to pay twice? THE WHOLE NATIONAL DEBT IS MADE UP ON INTEREST CHARGES. If the people ever get to thinking of bonds and bills at the same time, the game is up. If there is subtlety, you are subtle. I beg your indulgence: no prayer should cause you anything but tears. I had a friend . . . let it pass. I remember when as a child I stopped praying and shook with fear until sleep—your sleep calmed me — You also, I am sure, have read Frazer’s Golden Bough. It does you justice—a prayer such as might be made by a lover who appraises every feature of his bride’s comeliness, and terror— terror to him such as one, a man married, feels toward his bride— You are the eternal bride and father—quid pro quo, a simple miracle that knows the branching sea, to which the oak is coral, the coral oak. The Himalayas and prairies of your features amaze and delight— Why should I move from this place where I was born? knowing how futile would be the search for you in the multiplicity of your debacle. The world spreads for me like a flower opening—and will close for me as might a rose— wither and fall to the ground and rot and be drawn up into a flower again. But you never wither—but blossom all about me. In that I forget myself perpetually—in your composition and decomposition I find my . . despair! . . . . . . . . . Whatever your reasons were for that note of yours and for your indifferent evasion of my letters just previous to that note—the one thing that I still wish more than any other is that I could see you. It’s tied up with even more than I’ve said here. And more importantly, it is the one impulse I have that breaks through that film, that crust, which has gathered there so fatally between my true self and that which can make only mechanical gestures of living. But even if you should grant it, I wouldn’t want to see you unless with some little warmth of friendliness and friendship on your part.... Nor should I want to see you at your office under any circumstances. That is not what I mean (because I have no specific matter to see you about now as I had when I first called upon you as a complete stranger, nor as I could have had, just before your last note when I wanted so badly to have you go over some of my most faulty poems with me), I have been feeling (with that feeling increasingly stronger) that I shall never again be able to recapture any sense of my own personal identity (without which I cannot write, of course —but in itself far more important than the writing) until I can recapture some faith in the reality of my own thoughts and ideas and problems which were turned into dry sand by your attitude toward those letters and by that note of yours later. That is why I cannot throw off my desire to see you—not impersonally, but in the most personal ways, since I could never have written you at all in a completely impersonal fashion. III. Look for the nul defeats it all the N of all equations . that rock, the blank that holds them up which pulled away— the rock’s their fall. Look for that nul that’s past all seeing the death of all that’s past all being . But Spring shall come and flowers will bloom and man must chatter of his doom . . The descent beckons as the ascent beckoned Memory is a kind of accomplishment a sort of renewal even an initiation, since the spaces it opens are new places inhabited by hordes heretofore unrealized, of new kinds— since their movements are towards new objectives (even though formerly they were abandoned) No defeat is made up entirely of defeat—since the world it opens is always a place formerly unsuspected. A world lost, a world unsuspected beckons to new places and no whiteness (lost) is so white as the memory of whiteness . With evening, love wakens though its shadows which are alive by reason of the sun shining— grow sleepy now and drop away from desire . Love without shadows stirs now beginning to waken as night advances. The descent made up of despairs and without accomplishment realizes a new awakening : which is a reversal of despair. For what we cannot accomplish, what is denied to love, what we have lost in the anticipation— a descent follows, endless and indestructible . Listen! — the pouring water! The dogs and trees conspire to invent a world—gone! Bow, wow! A departing car scatters gravel as it picks up speed! Outworn! le pauvre petit ministre did his best, they cry, but though he sweat for all his worth no poet has come . Bow, wow! Bow, wow! Variously the dogs barked, the trees stuck their fingers to their noses. No poet has come, no poet has come. —soon no one in the park but guilty lovers and stray dogs . Unleashed! Alone, watching the May moon above the trees . At nine o’clock the park closes. You must be out of the lake, dressed, in your cars and going: they change into their street clothes in the back seats and move out among the trees . The “great beast” all removed before the plunging night, the crickets’ black wings and hylas wake . Missing was the thing Jim had found in Marx and Veblen and Adam Smith and Darwin—the dignified sound of a great, calm bell tolling the morning of a new age . . instead, the slow complaining of a door loose on its hinges. Faitoute, conscious by moments, rouses by moments, rejects him finally and strolls off . That the poem, the most perfect rock and temple, the highest falls, in clouds of gauzy spray, should be so rivaled . that the poet, in disgrace, should borrow from erudition (to unslave the mind): railing at the vocabulary (borrowing from those he hates, to his own disfranchisement) . —discounting his failures . seeks to induce his bones to rise into a scene, his dry bones, above the scene, (they will not) illuminating it within itself, out of itself to form the colors, in the terms of some back street, so that the history may escape the panders . . accomplish the inevitable poor, the invisible, thrashing, breeding . debased city Love is no comforter, rather a nail in the skull . reversed in the mirror of its own squalor, debased by the divorce from learning, its garbage on the curbs, its legislators under the garbage, uninstructed, incapable of self instruction . a thwarting, an avulsion : —flowers uprooted, columbine, yellow and red, strewn upon the path; dogwoods in full flower, the trees dismembered; its women shallow, its men steadfastly refusing—at the best . The language . words without style! whose scholars (there are none) . or dangling, about whom the water weaves its strands encasing them in a sort of thick lacquer, lodged under its flow . Caught (in mind) beside the water he looks down, listens! But discovers, still, no syllable in the confused uproar: missing the sense (though he tries) untaught but listening, shakes with the intensity of his listening . Only the thought of the stream comforts him, its terrifying plunge, inviting marriage—and a wreath of fur . And She — Stones invent nothing, only a man invents. What answer the waterfall? filling the basin by the snag-toothed stones? And He — Clearly, it is the new, uninterpreted, that remoulds the old, pouring down . And She — It has not been enacted in our day! Le pauvre petit ministre, swinging his arms, drowns under the indifferent fragrance of the bass-wood trees . My feelings about you now are those of anger and indignation; and they enable me to tell you a lot of things straight from the shoulder, without my usual tongue tied round- aboutness. You might as well take all your own literature and everyone else’s and toss it into one of those big garbage trucks of the Sanitation Department, so long as the people with the top-cream minds and the “finer” sensibilities use those minds and sensibilities not to make themselves more humane human beings than the average person, but merely as means of ducking responsibility toward a better understanding of their fellow men, except theoretically—which doesn’t mean a God damned thing. . and there go the Evangels! (their organ loaded into the rear of a light truck) scooting down-hill . the children are at least getting a kick out of this! His anger mounts. He is chilled to the bone. As there appears a dwarf, hideously deformed— he sees squirming roots trampled under the foliage of his mind by the holiday crowds as by the feet of the straining minister. From his eyes sparrows start and sing. His ears are toadstools, his fingers have begun to sprout leaves (his voice is drowned under the falls) . Poet, poet! sing your song, quickly! or not insects but pulpy weeds will blot out your kind. He all but falls . . And She — Marry us! Marry us! Or! be dragged down, dragged under and lost She was married with empty words: better to stumble at the edge to fall fall and be —divorced from the insistence of place— from knowledge, from learning—the terms foreign, conveying no immediacy, pouring down. —divorced from time (no invention more), bald as an egg . and leaped (or fell) without a language, tongue-tied the language worn out . The dwarf lived there, close to the waterfall— saved by his protective coloring. Go home. Write. Compose . Ha! Be reconciled, poet, with your world, it is the only truth! Ha! —the language is worn out. And She — You have abandoned me! —at the magic sound of the stream she threw herself upon the bed— a pitiful gesture! lost among the words: Invent (if you can) discover or nothing is clear—will surmount the drumming in your head. There will be nothing clear, nothing clear . He fled pursued by the roar. Seventy-five of the world’s leading scholars, poets and philosophers gathered at Princeton last week . . . Faitoute ground his heel hard down on the stone: Sunny today, with the highest temperature near 80 degrees; moderate southerly winds. Partly cloudy and continued warm tomorrow, with moderate southerly winds. Her belly . her belly is like a cloud . a cloud at evening . His mind would reawaken: He Me with my pants, coat and vest still on! She And me still in my galoshes! —the descent follows the ascent—to wisdom as to despair. A man is under the crassest necessity to break down the pinnacles of his moods fearlessly — to the bases; base! to the screaming dregs, to have known the clean air . From that base, unabashed, to regain the sun kissed summits of love! —obscurely in to scribble . and a war won! —saying over to himself a song written previously . inclines to believe he sees, in the structure, something of interest: On this most voluptuous night of the year the term of the moon is yellow with no light the air’s soft, the night bird has only one note, the cherry tree in bloom makes a blur on the woods, its perfume no more than half guessed moves in the mind. No insect is yet awake, leaves are few. In the arching trees there is no sleep. The blood is still and indifferent, the face does not ache nor sweat soil nor the mouth thirst. Now love might enjoy its play and nothing disturb the full octave of its run. Her belly . her belly is like a white cloud . a white cloud at evening . before the shuddering night! My attitude toward woman’s wretched position in society and my ideas about all the changes necessary there, were interesting to you, weren’t they, in so far as they made for literature? That my particular emotional orientation, in wrenching myself free from patterned standardized feminine feelings, enabled me to do some passably good work with poetry—all that was fine, wasn’t it—something for you to sit up and take notice of! And you saw in one of my first letters to you (the one you had wanted to make use of, then, in the Introduction to your Paterson) an indication that my thoughts were to be taken seriously, because that too could be turned by you into literature, as something disconnected from life. But when my actual personal life crept in, stamped all over with the very same attitudes and sensibilities and preoccupations that you found quite admirable as literature—that was an entirely different matter, wasn’t it? No longer admirable, but, on the contrary, deplorable, annoying, stupid, or in some other way unpardonable; because those very ideas and feelings which make one a writer with some kind of new vision, are often the very same ones which, in living itself, make one clumsy, awkward, absurd, ungrateful, confidential where most people are reticent, and reticent where one should be confidential, and which cause one, all too often, to step on the toes of other people’s sensitive egos as a result of one’s stumbling earnestness or honesty carried too far. And that they are the very same ones—that’s important, something to be remembered at all times, especially by writers like yourself who are so sheltered from life in the raw by the glass-walled conditions of their own safe lives. Only my writing (when I write) is myself: only that is the real me in any essential way. Not because I bring to literature and to life two different inconsistent sets of values, as you do. No, I don’t do that; and I feel that when anyone does do it, literature is turned into just so much intellectual excrement fit for the same stinking hole as any other kind. But in writing (as in all forms of creative art) one derives one’s unity of being and one’s freedom to be one’s self, from one’s relationship to those particular externals (language, clay, paints, et cetera) over which one has complete control and the shaping of which lies entirely in one’s own power; whereas in living, one’s shaping of the externals involved there (of one’s friendships, the structure of society, et cetera) is no longer entirely within one’s own power but requires the cooperation and the understanding and the humanity of others in order to bring out what is best and most real in one’s self. That’s why all that fine talk of yours about woman’s need to “sail free in her own element” as a poet, becomes nothing but empty rhetoric in the light of your behavior towards me. No woman will ever be able to do that, completely, until she is able first to “sail free in her own element” in living itself—which means in her relationships with men even before she can do so in her relationships with other women. The members of any underprivileged class distrust and hate the “outsider” who is one of them, and women therefore—women in general—will never be content with their lot until the light seeps down to them, not from one of their own, but from the eyes of changed male attitudes toward them—so that in the mean time, the problems and the awareness of a woman like myself are looked upon even more unsympathetically by other women than by men. And that, my dear doctor, is another reason why I needed of you a very different kind of friendship from the one you offered me. I still don’t know of course the specific thing that caused the cooling of your friendliness toward me. But I do know that if you were going to bother with me at all, there were only two things for you to have considered: (1) that I was, as I still am, a woman dying of loneliness—yes, really dying of it almost in the same way that people die slowly of cancer or consumption or any other such disease (and with all my efficiency in the practical world continually undermined by that loneliness); and (2) that I needed desperately, and still do, some ways and means of leading a writer’s life, either by securing some sort of writer’s job (or any other job having to do with my cultural interests) or else through some kind of literary journalism such as the book reviews—because only in work and jobs of that kind, can I turn into assets what are liabilities for me in jobs of a different kind. Those were the two problems of mine that you continually and almost deliberately placed in the background of your attempts to help me. And yet they were, and remain, much greater than whether or not I get my poetry published. I didn’t need the publication of my poetry with your name lent to it, in order to go on writing poetry, half as much as I needed your friendship in other ways (the very ways you ignored) in order to write it. I couldn’t, for that reason, have brought the kind of responsiveness and appreciation that you expected of me (not with any real honesty) to the kind of help from you which I needed so much less than the kind you withheld. Your whole relationship with me amounted to pretty much the same thing as your trying to come to the aid of a patient suffering from pneumonia by handing her a box of aspirin or Grove’s cold pills and a glass of hot lemonade. I couldn’t tell you that outright. And how were you, a man of letters, to have realized it when the imagination, so quick to assert itself most powerfully in the creation of a piece of literature, seems to have no power at all in enabling writers in your circumstances to fully understand the maladjustment and impotencies of a woman in my position? When you wrote to me up in W. about that possible censor job, it seemed a very simple matter to you, didn’t it, for me to make all the necessary inquiries about the job, arrange for the necessary interviews, start work (if I was hired) with all the necessary living conditions for holding down such a job, and thus find my life all straightened out in its practical aspects, at least—as if by magic? But it’s never so simple as that to get on one’s feet even in the most ordinary practical ways, for anyone on my side of the railway tracks—which isn’t your side, nor the side of your great admirer, Miss Fleming, nor even the side of those well cared for people like S. T. and S. S. who’ve spent most of their lives with some Clara or some Jeanne to look after them even when they themselves have been flat broke. A completely down and out person with months of stripped, bare hardship behind him needs all kinds of things to even get himself in shape for looking for a respectable, important white-collar job. And then he needs ample funds for eating and sleeping and keeping up appearances (especially the latter) while going around for various interviews involved. And even if and when a job of that kind is obtained, he still needs the eating and the sleeping and the carfares and the keeping up of appearances and what not, waiting for his first pay check and even perhaps for the second pay check since the first one might have to go almost entirely for back rent or something else of that sort. And all that takes a hell of a lot of money (especially for a woman)—a lot more than ten dollars or twenty five dollars. Or else it takes the kind of very close friends at whose apartment one is quite welcome to stay for a month or two, and whose typewriter one can use in getting off some of the required letters asking for interviews, and whose electric iron one can use in keeping one’s clothes pressed, et cetera—the kind of close friends that I don’t have and never have had, for reasons which you know. Naturally, I couldn’t turn to you, a stranger, for any such practical help on so large a scale; and it was stupid of me to have minimized the extent of help I needed when I asked you for that first money-order that got stolen and later for the second twenty five dollars—stupid because it was misleading. But the different kind of help I asked for, finally (and which you placed in the background) would have been an adequate substitute, because I could have carried out those plans which I mentioned to you in the late fall (the book reviews, supplemented by almost any kind of part-time job, and later some articles, and maybe a month at Yaddo this summer) without what it takes to get on one’s feet in other very different ways. And then, eventually, the very fact that my name had appeared here and there in the book review sections of a few publications (I’d prefer not to use poetry that way) would have enabled me to obtain certain kinds of jobs (such as an O. W. I. job for instance) without all that red tape which affects only obscure, unknown people. The anger and the indignation which I feel towards you now has served to pierce through the rough ice of that congealment which my creative faculties began to suffer from as a result of that last note from you. I find myself thinking and feeling in terms of poetry again. But over and against that is the fact that I’m even more lacking in anchorage of any kind than when I first got to know you. My loneliness is a million fathoms deeper, and my physical energies even more seriously sapped by it; and my economic situation is naturally worse, with living costs so terribly high now, and with my contact with your friend Miss X having come off so badly. However, she may have had another reason for paying no attention to that note of mine—perhaps the reason of having found out that your friendliness toward me had cooled—which would have made a difference to her, I suppose, since she is such a great “admirer” of yours. But I don’t know. That I’m in the dark about, too; and when I went up to the “Times” last week, to try, on my own, to get some of their fiction reviews (the “Times” publishes so many of those), nothing came of that either. And it’s writing that I want to do—not operating a machine or a lathe, because with literature more and more tied up with the social problems and social progress (for me, in my way of thinking) any contribution I might be able to make to the welfare of humanity (in war-time or peace-time) would have to be as a writer, and not as a factory worker. When I was very young, ridiculously young (of school-girl age) for a critical role, with my mind not at all developed and all my ideas in a state of first-week embryonic formlessness, I was able to obtain book-reviews from any number of magazines without any difficulty—and all of them books by writers of accepted importance (such as Cummings, Babette Deutsch, H. D.) whereas now when my ideas have matured, and when I really have something to say, I can get no work of that kind at all. And why is that? It’s because in all those intervening years, I have been forced, as a woman not content with woman’s position in the world, to do a lot of pioneer living which writers of your sex and with your particular social background do not have thrust upon them, and which the members of my own sex frown upon (for reasons I’ve already referred to)—so that at the very moment when I wanted to return to writing from living (with my ideas clarified and enriched by living) there I was (and still am)—because of that living—completely in exile socially. I glossed over and treated very lightly (in my first conversation with you) those literary activities of my early girlhood, because the work in itself was not much better than that which any talented college freshman or precocious prep-school senior contributes to her school paper. But, after all, that work, instead of appearing in a school paper where it belonged, was taken so seriously by editors of the acceptably important literary publications of that time, that I was able to average as much as $15 a week, very easily, from it. And I go into that now and stress it here; because you can better imagine, in the light of that, just how I feel in realizing that on the basis of just a few superficials (such as possessing a lot of appealingly youthful sex-appeal and getting in with the right set) I was able to maintain my personal identity as a writer in my relationship to the world, whereas now I am cut off from doing so because it was necessary for me in my living, to strip myself of those superficials. You’ve never had to live, Dr. P—not in any of the by-ways and dark underground passages where life so often has to be tested. The very circumstances of your birth and social background provided you with an escape from life in the raw; and you confuse that protection from life with an inability to live—and are thus able to regard literature as nothing more than a desperate last extremity resulting from that illusionary inability to live. (I’ve been looking at some of your autobiographical works, as this indicates.) But living (unsafe living, I mean) isn’t something one just sits back and decides about. It happens to one, in a small way, like measles; or in a big way, like a leaking boat or an earthquake. Or else it doesn’t happen. And when it does, then one must bring, as I must, one’s life to literature; and when it doesn’t then one brings to life (as you do) purely literary sympathies and understandings, the insights and humanity of words on paper only—and also, alas, the ego of the literary man which most likely played an important part in the change of your attitude toward me. That literary man’s ego wanted to help me in such a way, I think, that my own achievements might serve as a flower in his buttonhole, if that kind of help had been enough to make me bloom. But I have no blossoms to bring to any man in the way of either love or friendship. That’s one of the reasons why I didn’t want that introduction to my poems. And I’m not wanting to be nasty or sarcastic in the last lines of this letter. On the contrary a feeling of profound sadness has replaced now the anger and the indignation with which I started to write all this. I wanted your friendship more than I ever wanted anything else (yes, more, and I’ve wanted other things badly) I wanted it desperately, not because I have a single thing with which to adorn any man’s pride—but just because I haven’t. Yes, the anger which I imagined myself to feel on all the previous pages, was false. I am too unhappy and too lonely to be angry; and if some of the things to which I have called your attention here should cause any change of heart in you regarding me, that would be just about the only thing I can conceive of as occurring in my life right now. La votre C. P. S. That I’m back here at 21 Pine Street causes me to add that that mystery as to who forged the “Cress” on that money order and also took one of Brown’s checks (though his was not cashed, and therefore replaced later) never did get cleared up. And the janitor who was here at the time, is dead now. I don’t think it was he took any of the money. But still I was rather glad that the postoffice didn’t follow it through because just in case Bob did have anything to do with it, he would have gotten into serious trouble—which I shouldn’t have welcomed, because he was one of those miserably underpaid negroes and an awfully decent human being in lots of ways. But now I wish it had been followed through after he died (which was over two months ago) because the crooks may have been those low vile upstate farm people whose year-round exploitation of down and out farm help ought to be brought to light in some fashion, and because if they did steal the money order and were arrested for it, that in itself would have brought to the attention of the proper authorities all their other illegal activities as well: And yet that kind of justice doesn’t interest me greatly. What’s at the root of this or that crime or antisocial act, both psychologically and environmentally, always interests me more. But as I make that last statement, I’m reminded of how much I’d like to do a lot of things with people in some prose—some stories, maybe a novel. I can’t tell you how much I want the living which I need in order to write. And I simply can’t achieve them entirely alone. I don’t even possess a typewriter now, nor have even a rented one—and I can’t think properly except on a typewriter. I can do poetry (though only the first draft) in long-hand, and letters. But for any prose writing, other than letters, I can’t do any work without a typewriter. But that of course is the least of my problems—the typewriter; at least the easiest to do something about. C . Dr. P.: This is the simplest, most outright letter I’ve ever written to you; and you ought to read it all the way through, and carefully, because it’s about you, as a writer, and about the ideas regarding women that you expressed in your article on A. N., and because in regard to myself, it contains certain information which I did not think it necessary to give you before, and which I do think now you ought to have. And if my anger in the beginning makes you too angry to go on from there—well, that anger of mine isn’t there in the last part, now as I attach this post-script. C . And if you don’t feel like reading it even for those reasons, will you then do so, please, merely out of fairness to me—much time and much thought and much unhappiness having gone into those pages. BOOK THREE (1949) Cities, for Oliver, were not a part of nature. He could hardly feel, he could hardly admit even when it was pointed out to him, that cities are a second body for the human mind, a second organism, more rational, permanent and decorative than the animal organism of flesh and bone: a work of natural yet moral art, where the soul sets up her trophies of action and instruments of pleasure. —The Last Puritan. SANTAYANA. The Library I. I love the locust tree the sweet white locust How much? How much? How much does it cost to love the locust tree in bloom? A fortune bigger than Avery could muster So much So much the shelving green locust whose bright small leaves in June lean among flowers sweet and white at heavy cost A cool of books will sometimes lead the mind to libraries of a hot afternoon, if books can be found cool to the sense to lead the mind away. For there is a wind or ghost of a wind in all books echoing the life there, a high wind that fills the tubes of the ear until we think we hear a wind, actual . to lead the mind away. Drawn from the streets we break off our minds’ seclusion and are taken up by the books’ winds, seeking, seeking down the wind until we are unaware which is the wind and which the wind’s power over us . to lead the mind away and there grows in the mind a scent, it may be, of locust blossoms whose perfume is itself a wind moving to lead the mind away through which, below the cataract soon to be dry the river whirls and eddys first recollected. Spent from wandering the useless streets these months, faces folded against him like clover at nightfall, something has brought him back to his own mind . in which a falls unseen tumbles and rights itself and refalls—and does not cease, falling and refalling with a roar, a reverberation not of the falls but of its rumor unabated Beautiful thing, my dove, unable and all who are windblown, touched by the fire and unable, a roar that (soundless) drowns the sense with its reiteration unwilling to lie in its bed and sleep and sleep, sleep in its dark bed. Summer! it is summer . —and still the roar in his mind is unabated The last wolf was killed near the Weisse Huis in the year 1723 Books will give rest sometimes against the uproar of water falling and righting itself to refall filling the mind with its reverberation shaking stone. Blow! So be it. Bring down! So be it. Consume and submerge! So be it. Cyclone, fire and flood. So be it. Hell, New Jersey, it said on the letter. Delivered without comment. So be it! Run from it, if you will. So be it. (Winds that enshroud us in their folds— or no wind). So be it. Pull at the doors, of a hot afternoon, doors that the wind holds, wrenches from our arms — and hands. So be it. The Library is sanctuary to our fears. So be it. So be it. — the wind that has tripped us, pressed upon us, prurient or upon the prurience of our fears — laughter fading. So be it. Sit breathless or still breathless. So be it. Then, eased turn to the task. So be it : Old newspaper files, to find — a child burned in a field, no language. Tried, aflame, to crawl under a fence to go home. So be it. Two others, boy and girl, clasped in each other’s arms (clasped also by the water) So be it. Drowned wordless in the canal. So be it. The Paterson Cricket Club, 1896. A woman lobbyist. So be it. Two local millionaires — moved away. So be it. Another Indian rock shelter found — a bone awl. So be it. The old Rogers Locomotive Works. So be it. Shield us from loneliness. So be it. The mind reels, starts back amazed from the reading . So be it. He turns: over his right shoulder a vague outline, speaking . Gently! Gently! as in all things an opposite that awakes the fury, conceiving knowledge by way of despair that has no place to lay its glossy head— Save only—not alone! Never, if possible alone! to escape the accepted chopping block and a square hat! . The “Castle” too to be razed. So be it. For no reason other than that it is there, in- comprehensible; of no USE! So be it. So be it. Lambert, the poor English boy, the immigrant, who built it was the first to oppose the unions: This is MY shop. I reserve the right (and he did) to walk down the row (between his looms) and fire any son-of-a-bitch I choose without excuse or reason more than that I don’t like his face. Rose and I didn’t know each other when we both went to the Paterson strike around the first war and worked in the Pagent. She went regularly to feed Jack Reed in jail and I listened to Big Bill Haywood, Gurley Flynn and the rest of the big hearts and helping hands in Union Hall. And look at the damned thing now. They broke him all right . —the old boy himself, a Limey, his head full of castles, the pivots of that curt dialectic (while it lasted), built himself a Balmoral on the alluvial silt, the rock-fall skirt- ing the volcanic upthrust of the “Mountain” —some of the windows of the main house illuminated by translucent laminae of planed pebbles (his first wife admired them) by far the most authentic detail of the place; at least the best to be had there and the best artifact . The province of the poem is the world. When the sun rises, it rises in the poem and when it sets darkness comes down and the poem is dark . and lamps are lit, cats prowl and men read, read—or mumble and stare at that which their small lights distinguish or obscure or their hands search out in the dark. The poem moves them or it does not move them. Faitoute, his ears ringing . no sound . no great city, as he seems to read — a roar of books from the wadded library oppresses him until his mind begins to drift . Beautiful thing: — a dark flame, a wind, a flood—counter to all staleness. Dead men’s dreams, confined by these walls, risen, seek an outlet. The spirit languishes, unable, unable not from lack of innate ability — (barring alone sure death) but from that which immures them pressed here together with their fellows, for respite . Flown in from before the cold or nightbound (the light attracted them) they sought safety (in books) but ended battering against glass at the high windows The Library is desolation, it has a smell of its own of stagnation and death . Beautiful Thing! —the cost of dreams. in which we search, after a surgery of the wits and must translate, quickly step by step or be destroyed—under a spell to remain a castrate (a slowly descending veil closing about the mind cutting the mind away) . SILENCE ! Awake, he dozes in a fever heat, cheeks burning . . loaning blood to the past, amazed . risking life. And as his mind fades, joining the others, he seeks to bring it back—but it eludes him, flutters again and flies off and again away . O Thalassa, Thalassa! the lash and hiss of water The sea! How near it was to them! Soon! Too soon . —and still he brings it back, battering with the rest against the vents and high windows (They do not yield but shriek as furies, shriek and execrate the imagination, the impotent, a woman against a woman, seeking to destroy it but cannot, the life will not out of it) . A library — of books! decrying all books that enfeeble the mind’s intent Beautiful thing! The Indians were accused of killing two or three pigs—this was untrue, as afterward proved, because the pigs had been butchered by the white men themselves. The following incident is concerned with two of the Indians who had been captured by Kieft’s soldiers because of the accusations: The braves had been turned over to the soldiers, by Kieft, to do with as they pleased. The first of these savages, having received a frightful wound, desired them to permit him to dance the Kinte Kaye, a religious use among them before death; he received, however, so many wounds that he dropped dead. The soldiers then cut strips down the other’s body.... While this was going forward Director Kieft, with his Councillor (the first trained physician in the colony) Jan de la Montagne, a Frenchman, stood laughing heartily at the fun, and rubbing his right arm, so much delight he took in such scenes. He then ordered him (the brave) to be taken out of the fort, and the soldiers bringing him to the Beaver’s Path, he dancing the Kinte Kaye all the time, mutilated him, and at last cut off his head. There stood at the same time, 24 or 25 female savages, who had been taken prisoners, at the north-west corner of the fort: they held up their arms, and in their language exclaimed. “For shame! for shame! such unheard of cruelty was never known, or even thought of, among us.” They made money of sea-shells. Bird feathers. Beaver skins. When a priest died and was buried they encased him with such wealth as he possessed. The Dutch dug up the body, stole the furs and left the carcass to the wolves that roamed the woods. Doc, listen — fiftyish, a grimy hand pushing back the cap: In gold — Volunteers of America I got a woman outside I want to marry, will you give her a blood test? From 1869 to 1879 several crossed the falls on a tight rope (in the old pictures the crowd, below, on the dry rocks in their short sleeves and summer dresses look more like water-lilies or penguins than men and women staring up at them): De Lave, Harry Leslie and Geo. Dobbs—the last carrying a boy upon his shoulders. Fleetwood Miles, a semi-lunatic, announced that he too would perform the feat but could not be found when the crowd had assembled. The place sweats of staleness and of rot a back-house stench . a library stench It is summer! stinking summer Escape from it—but not by running away. Not by “composition.” Embrace the foulness —the being taut, balanced between eternities A spectator on Morris Mountain, when Leslie had gone out with a cookstove strapped to his back—tugged at one of the guy-ropes, either out of malice or idleness, so that he almost fell off. Having carried the stove to the center of the rope he kindled a fire in it, cooked an omelet and ate it. It rained that night so that the later performance had to be postponed. But on Monday he did the Washerwoman’s Frolic, in female attire, staggering drunkenly across the chasm, going backward, hopping on one foot and at the rope’s center lay down on his side. He retired after that having “busted” his tights—to the cottage above for repairs. The progress of the events was transmitted over the new telephone to the city from the tower of the water works. The boy, Tommy Walker, was the real hero of these adventures. And as reverie gains and your joints loosen the trick’s done! Day is covered and we see you— but not alone! drunk and bedraggled to release the strictness of beauty under a sky full of stars Beautiful thing and a slow moon — The car had stopped long since when the others came and dragged those out who had you there indifferent to whatever the anesthetic Beautiful Thing might slum away the bars— Reek of it! What does it matter? could set free only the one thing— But you! —in your white lace dress . . . Haunted by your beauty (I said), exalted and not easily to be attained, the whole scene is haunted: Take off your clothes, (I said) Haunted, the quietness of your face is a quietness, real out of no book. Your clothes (I said) quickly, while your beauty is attainable. Put them on the chair (I said. Then in a fury, for which I am ashamed) You smell as though you need a bath. Take off your clothes and purify yourself . . And let me purify myself —to look at you, to look at you (I said) (Then, my anger rising) TAKE OFF YOUR CLOTHES! I didn’t ask you to take off your skin . I said your clothes, your clothes. You smell like a whore. I ask you to bathe in my opinions, the astonishing virtue of your lost body (I said) . —that you might send me hurtling to the moon . . let me look at you (I said, weeping) Let’s take a ride around, to see what the town looks like . Indifferent, the indifference of certain death or incident upon certain death propounds a riddle (in the Joyceian mode— or otherwise, it is indifferent which) A marriage riddle: So much talk of the language—when there are no ears. . . . . . . . . What is there to say? save that beauty is unheeded . tho’ for sale and bought glibly enough But it is true, they fear it more than death, beauty is feared more than death, more than they fear death Beautiful thing —and marry only to destroy, in private, in their privacy only to destroy, to hide (in marriage) that they may destroy and not be perceived in it—the destroying Death will be too late to bring us aid . What end but love, that stares death in the eye? A city, a marriage — that stares death in the eye The riddle of a man and a woman For what is there but love, that stares death in the eye, love, begetting marriage — not infamy, not death tho’ love seem to beget only death in the old plays, only death, it is as tho’ they wished death rather than to face infamy, the infamy of old cities . . . . a world of corrupt cities, nothing else, that death stares in the eye, lacking love: no palaces, no secluded gardens, no water among the stones; the stone rails of the balustrades, scooped out, running with clear water, no peace . The waters are dry. It is summer, it is . ended Sing me a song to make death tolerable, a song of a man and a woman: the riddle of a man and a woman. What language could allay our thirsts, what winds lift us, what floods bear us past defeats but song but deathless song? The rock married to the river makes no sound And the river passes—but I remain clamant calling out ceaselessly to the birds and clouds (listening) Who am I? —the voice! —the voice rises, neglected (with its new) the unfaltering language. Is there no release? Give it up. Quit it. Stop writing. “Saintlike” you will never separate that stain of sense, an offense to love, the mind’s worm eating out the core, unappeased —never separate that stain of sense from the inert mass. Never. Never that radiance quartered apart, unapproached by symbols . Doctor, do you believe in “the people,” the Democracy? Do you still believe — in this swill-hole of corrupt cities? Do you, Doctor? Now? Give up the poem. Give up the shilly- shally of art. What can you, what can YOU hope to conclude — on a heap of dirty linen? — you a poet (ridded) from Paradise? Is it a dirty book? I’ll bet it’s a dirty book, she said. Death lies in wait, a kindly brother — full of the missing words, the words that never get said— a kindly brother to the poor. The radiant gist that resists the final crystallization . in the pitch-blend the radiant gist . There was an earlier day, of prismatic colors : whence to New Barbadoes came the Englishman . Thus it began . Certainly there is no mystery to the fact that COSTS SPIRAL ACCORDING TO A REBUS—known or unknown, plotted or automatic. The fact of poverty is not a matter of argument. Language is not a vague province. There is a poetry of the movements of cost, known or unknown . The cost. The cost and dazzled half sleepy eyes Beautiful thing of some trusting animal makes a temple of its place of savage slaughter . . . . . . Try another book. Break through the dry air of the place An insane god —nights in a brothel . And if I had . What then? —made brothels my home? (Toulouse Lautrec again. . ) Say I am the locus where two women meet One from the backwoods a touch of the savage and of T.B. (a scar on the thigh) The other — wanting, from an old culture . —and offer the same dish different ways Let the colors run . Toulouse Lautrec witnessed it: limbs relaxed —all religions have excluded it— at ease, the tendons untensed . And so he recorded them —a stone thrust flint-blue up through the sandstone of which, broken, but unbreakable we build our roads . —we stammer and elect . Quit it. Quit this place. Go where all mouths are rinsed: to the river for an answer for relief from “meaning” A tornado approaches (We don’t have tornados in these latitudes. What, at Cherry Hill?) It pours over the roofs of Paterson, ripping, twisting, tortuous : a wooden shingle driven half its length into an oak (the wind must have steeled it, held it hard on both sides) The church moved 8 inches through an arc, on its foundations — Hum, hum! —the wind where it poured its heavy plaits (the face unshowing) from the rock’s edge — where in the updraft, summer days, the red-shouldered hawks ride and play (in the up-draft) and the poor cotton- spinner, over the roofs, preparing to dive . looks down Searching among books; the mind elsewhere looking down . Seeki ng. II. Fire burns; that is the first law. When a wind fans it the flames are carried abroad. Talk fans the flames. They have manoeuvred it so that to write is a fire and not only of the blood. The writing is nothing, the being in a position to write (that’s where they get you) is nine tenths of the difficulty: seduction or strong arm stuff. The writing should be a relief, relief from the conditions which as we advance become — a fire, a destroying fire. For the writing is also an attack and means must be found to scotch it — at the root if possible. So that to write, nine tenths of the problem is to live. They see to it, not by intellection but by sub-intellection (to want to be blind as a pretext for saying, We’re so proud of you! A wonderful gift! How do you find the time for it in your busy life? It must be a great thing to have such a pastime. But you were always a strange boy. How’s your mother?) —the cyclonic fury, the fire, the leaden flood and finally the cost— Your father was such a nice man. I remember him well . Or, Geeze, Doc, I guess it’s all right but what the hell does it mean? With due ceremony a hut would be constructed consisting of twelve poles, each of a different species of wood. These they run into the ground, tie them together at the top, cover them entirely with bark, skins or blankets joined close together. . Now here is where one sits who will address the Spirit of Fire, He- Who-Lies-With-His-Eyes-Bulging-In-The-Smoke-Hole . Twelve manittos attend him as subordinate deities, half representing animals and the others vegetables. A large oven is built in the house of sacrifice . heated with twelve large red-hot stones. Meanwhile an old man throws twelve pipefuls of tobacco upon the hot stones, and directly another follows and pours water on them, which occasions a smoke or vapor almost powerful enough to suffocate the persons in the tent — Ex qua re, quia sicubi fumus adscendit in altum; ita sacrificulus, duplicata altiori voce, Kännakä, kännakä! vel aliquando Hoo Hoo! faciem versus orientem convertit. Whereupon as the smoke ascends on high, the sacrificer crying with a loud voice, Kännakä, Kännakä! or sometimes Hoo, Hoo! turns his face towards the east. While some are silent during the sacrifice, certain make a ridiculous speech, while others imitate the cock, the squirrel and other animals, and make all kinds of noises. During the shouting two roast deer are distributed. (breathing the books in) the acrid fumes, for what they could decipher . warping the sense to detect the norm, to break through the skull of custom to a place hidden from affection, women and offspring — an affection for the burning . It started in the car barns of the street railway company, in the paint shop. The men had been working all day refinishing old cars with the doors and windows kept closed because of the weather which was very cold. There was paint and especially varnish being used freely on all sides. Heaps of paint soaked rags had been thrown into the corners. One of the cars took fire in the night. Breathless and in haste the various night (of books) awakes! awakes and begins (a second time) its song, pending the obloquy of dawn . It will not last forever against the long sea, the long, long sea, swept by winds, the “wine-dark sea” . A cyclotron, a sifting . And there, in the tobacco hush: in a tepee they lie huddled (a huddle of books) antagonistic, and dream of gentleness—under the malignity of the hush they cannot penetrate and cannot waken, to be again active but remain—books that is, men in hell, their reign over the living ended Clearly, they say. Oh clearly! Clearly? What more clear than that of all things nothing is so unclear, between man and his writing, as to which is the man and which the thing and of them both which is the more to be valued When discovered it was a small blaze, though it was hot but it looked as tho’ the firemen could handle it. But at dawn a wind came up and the flames (which they thought were subsiding) got suddenly out of control— sweeping the block and heading toward the business district. Before noon the whole city was doomed — Beautiful thing —the whole city doomed! And the flames towering . like a mouse, like a red slipper, like a star, a geranium a cat’s tongue or — thought, thought that is a leaf, a pebble, an old man out of a story by Pushkin . Ah! rotten beams tum- bling, . an old bottle mauled The night was made day by the flames, flames on which he fed—grubbing the page (the burning page) like a worm—for enlightenment Of which we drink and are drunk and in the end are destroyed (as we feed). But the flames are flames with a requirement, a belly of their own that destroys—as there are fires that smolder smolder a lifetime and never burst into flame Paper s (consumed) scattered to the winds. Black. The ink burned white, metal white. So be it. Come overall beauty. Come soon. So be it. A dust between the fingers. So be it. Come tatterdemalion futility. Win through. So be it. So be it. An iron dog, eyes aflame in a flame-filled corridor. A drunkenness of flames. So be it. A bottle, mauled by the flames, belly-bent with laughter: yellow, green. So be it—of drunkenness survived, in guffaws of flame. All fire afire! So be it. Swallowing the fire. So be it. Torqued to laughter by the fire, the very fire. So be it. Chortling at flames sucked in, a multiformity of laughter, a flaming gravity surpassing the sobriety of flames, a chastity of annihilation. Recreant, calling it good. Calling the fire good. So be it. The beauty of fire-blasted sand that was glass, that was a bottle: unbottled. Unabashed. So be it. An old bottle, mauled by the fire gets a new glaze, the glass warped to a new distinction, reclaiming the undefined. A hot stone, reached by the tide, crackled over by fine lines, the glaze unspoiled . Annihilation ameliorated: Hottest lips lifted till no shape but a vast molt of the news flows. Drink of the news, fluid to the breath. Shouts its laughter, crying out—by an investment of grace in the sand —or stone: oasis water. The glass splotched with concentric rainbows of cold fire that the fire has bequeathed there as it cools, its flame defied—the flame that wrapped the glass deflowered, reflowered there by the flame: a second flame, surpassing heat . Hell’s fire. Fire. Sit your horny ass down. What’s your game? Beat you at your own game, Fire. Outlast you: Poet Beats Fire at Its Own Game! The bottle! the bottle! the bottle! the bottle! I give you the bottle! What’s burning now, Fire? The Library? Whirling flames, leaping from house to house, building to building carried by the wind the Library is in their path Beautiful thing! aflame . a defiance of authority —burnt Sappho’s poems, burned by intention (or are they still hid in the Vatican crypts?) : beauty is a defiance of authority : for they were unwrapped, fragment by fragment, from outer mummy cases of papier mâché, inside Egyptian sarcophagi . flying papers from old conflagrations, picked up haphazard by the undertakers to make moulds, layer after layer for the dead Beautiful thing The anthology suppressed, revived even by the dead, you who understand nothing of this: Dürer’s Melancholy, the gears lying disrelated to the mathematics of the machine Useless. Beautiful thing, your vulgarity of beauty surpasses all their perfections! Vulgarity surpasses all perfections —it leaps from a varnish pot and we see it pass — in flames! Beautiful thing —intertwined with the fire. An identity surmounting the world, its core — from which we shrink squirting little hoses of objection — and I along with the rest, squirting at the fire Poet. Are you there? How shall I find examples? Some boy who drove a bull-dozer through the barrage at Iwo Jima and turned it and drove back making a path for the others — Voiceless, his action gracing a flame —but lost, lost because there is no way to link the syllables anew to imprison him No twist of the flame in his own image : he goes nameless until a Niké shall live in his honor— And for that, invention is lacking, the words are lacking: the waterfall of the flames, a cataract reversed, shooting upward (what difference does it make?) The language, Beautiful thing— that I make a fool of myself, mourning the lack of dedication mourning its losses, for you Scarred, fire swept (by a nameless fire, that is unknown even to yourself) nameless, drunk. Rising, with a whirling motion, the person passed into the flame, becomes the flame— the flame taking over the person —with a roar, an outcry which none can afford (we die in silence, we enjoy shamefacedly—in silence, hiding our joy even from each other keeping a secret joy in the flame which we dare not acknowledge) a shriek of fire with the upwind, whirling the room away—to reveal the awesome sight of a tin roof (1880) entire, half a block long, lifted like a skirt, held by the fire—to rise at last, almost with a sigh, rise and float, float upon the flames as upon a sweet breeze, and majestically drift off, riding the air, sliding upon the air, easily and away over the frizzled elms that seem to bend under it, clearing the railroad tracks to fall upon the roofs beyond, red hot darkening the rooms (but not our minds) While we stand with our mouths open, shaking our heads and saying, My God, did you ever see anything like that? As though it were wholly out of our dreams, as indeed it is, unparalleled in our most sanguine dreams . The person submerged in wonder, the fire become the person . But the pathetic library (that contained, perhaps, not one volume of distinction) must go down also — BECAUSE IT IS SILENT. IT IS SILENT BY DEFECT OF VIRTUE IN THAT IT CONTAINS NOTHING OF YOU That which should be rare, is trash; because it contains nothing of you. They spit on you, literally, but without you, nothing. The library is muffled and dead But you are the dream of dead men Beautiful Thing! Let them explain you and you will be the heart of the explanation. Nameless, you will appear Beautiful Thing the flame’s lover — The pitiful dead cry back to us from the fire, cold in the fire, crying out—wanting to be chaffed and cherished those who have written books We read: not the flames but the ruin left by the conflagration Not the enormous burning but the dead (the books remaining). Let us read . and digest: the surface glistens, only the surface. Dig in—and you have a nothing, surrounded by a surface, an inverted bell resounding, a white-hot man become a book, the emptiness of a cavern resounding Hi Kid I know you just about to shot me. But honest Hon. I have really been to busy to write. Here there, and everywhere. Bab I haven’t wrote since October so I will go back to Oct. 31, (Oh by the way are friend Madam B. Harris had a party the 31, but only high browns and yellow so I wasn’t invited) But I pay that no mind, cause I really (pitched myself a ball) Went to the show early in the day, and then to the dance at the club, had me a (some kinded fine time) I was a feeling good believe me you. child. But, child, Nov 1, I did crack you know yourself I been going full force on the (jug) will we went out (going to Newark) was raining, car slaped on brakes, car turned around a few times, rocked a bit and stopped facing the other way, from which we was going. Pal, believe me for the next few days. Honey, I couldn’t even pick up a half filled bucket of hot water for fear of scalding myself. Now I don’t know which did it the jug or the car skidding but all I know is I was nowhere on nerves. But as they say alls well that ends well So Nov 15, I mean Kid I was so teaed that I didn’t know a from z I really mean I was teaed Since Nov 15 I Have been at it again ever since. But now for the (Boys) How Raymond James People going with Sis but is in jail for giving Joseble Miller a baby. Robert Blocker has taken his ring from Sally Mitchell Little Sonny Jones is supposed to be the father of a girl’s baby on Liberty St. Sally Mund Barbara H Jean C and Mary M are all supposed to be going to have kids Nelson W. a boy on 3rd St is father to 3 kids on their way. . . . . . . . . . P. S. Kid do you think in your next letter of your you could tell me how to get over there. Tell Raymond I said I bubetut hatche isus cashutute Just a new way of talking kid. It is called (Tut) maybe you heard of it. Well here hoping you can read it D J B So long. Later Beautiful thing I saw you : Ye s, said the Lady of the House to my questioning. Downstairs (by the laundry tubs) and she pointed, smiling, to the basement, still smiling, and went out and left me with you (alone in the house) lying there, ill (I don’t at all think that you were ill) by the wall on your damp bed, your long body stretched out negligently on the dirty sheet . Where is the pain? (You put on a simper designed not to reveal) —the small window with two panes, my eye level of the ground, the furnace odor . Perse phone gone to hell, that hell could not keep with the advancing season of pity. —for I was overcome by amazement and could do nothing but admire and lean to care for you in your quietness — who looked at me, smiling, and we remained thus looking, each at the other . in silence . You lethargic, waiting upon me, waiting for the fire and I attendant upon you, shaken by your beauty Shaken by your beauty . Shaken. —flat on your back, in a low bed (waiting) under the mud plashed windows among the scabrous dirt of the holy sheets . You showed me your legs, scarred (as a child) by the whip . Read. Bring the mind back (attendant upon the page) to the day’s heat. The page also is the same beauty: a dry beauty of the page — beaten by whips A tapestry hound with his thread teeth drawing crimson from the throat of the unicorn . . . a yelping of white hounds —under a ceiling like that of San Lorenzo, the long painted beams, straight across, that preceded the domes and arches more primitive, square edged . a docile queen, not bothered to stick her tongue out at the moon, indifferent, through loss, but . queenly, in bad luck, the luck of the stars, the black stars . the night of a mine Dear heart It’s all for you, my dove, my chan geling But you! —in your white lace dress “the dying swan” and high-heeled slippers—tall as you already were— till your head through fruitful exaggeration was reaching the sky and the prickles of its ecstasy Beautiful Thing! And the guys from Paterson beat up the guys from Newark and told them to stay the hell out of their territory and then socked you one across the nose Beautiful Thing for good luck and emphasis cracking it till I must believe that all desired women have had each in the end a busted nose and live afterward marked up Beautiful Thing for memory’s sake to be credible in their deeds Then back to the party! and they maled and femaled you jealously Beautiful Thing as if to discover whence and by what miracle there should escape, what? still to be possessed, out of what part Beautiful Thing should it look? or be extinguished— Three days in the same dress up and down . I can’t be half gentle enough, half tender enough toward you, toward you, inarticulate, not half loving enough BRIGHTen the cor ner where you are! —a flame, black plush, a dark flame. III. It is dangerous to leave written that which is badly written. A chance word, upon paper, may destroy the world. Watch carefully and erase, while the power is still yours, I say to myself, for all that is put down, once it escapes, may rot its way into a thousand minds, the corn become a black smut, and all libraries, of necessity, be burned to the ground as a consequence. Only one answer: write carelessly so that nothing that is not green will survive. There is a drumming of submerged engines, a beat of propellers. The ears are water. The feet listen. Boney fish bearing lights stalk the eyes—which float about, indifferent. A taste of iodine stagnates upon the law of percent- ages: thick boards bored through by worms whose calcined husks cut our fingers, which bleed We walk into a dream, from certainty to the unascertained, in time to see . from the roseate past . a ribbed tail deploying Tra la la la la la la la la La tra tra tra tra tra tra Upon which there intervenes a sour stench of embers. So be it. Rain falls and surfeits the river’s upper reaches, gathering slowly. So be it. Draws together, runnel by runnel. So be it. A broken oar is found by the searching waters. Loosened it begins to move. So be it. Old timbers sigh—and yield. The well that gave sweet water is sullied. So be it. And lilies that floated quiet in the shallows, anchored, tug as fish at a line. So be it. And are by their stems pulled under, drowned in the muddy flux. The white crane flies into the wood. So be it. Men stand at the bridge, silent, watching. So be it. So be it. And there rises a counterpart, of reading, slowly, overwhelming the mind; anchors him in his chair. So be it. He turns . O Paradiso! The stream grows leaden within him, his lilies drag. So be it. Texts mount and complicate them- selves, lead to further texts and those to synopses, digests and emendations. So be it. Until the words break loose or—sadly hold, unshaken. Unshaken! So be it. For the made-arch holds, the water piles up debris against it but it is unshaken. They gather upon the bridge and look down, unshaken. So be it. So be it. So be it. The sullen, leaden flood, the silken flood —to the teeth to the very eyes (light grey) Henry’s the name. Just Henry, ever’body knows me around here: hat pulled down hard on his skull, thick chested, fiftyish . I’ll hold the baby. That was your little dog bit me last year. Yeah, and you had him killed on me. (the eyes) I didn’t know he’d been killed. You reported him and they come and took him. He never hurt anybody. He bit me three times. They come and took him and killed him. I’m sorry but I had to report him . . A dog, head dropped back, under water, legs sticking up : a skin tense with the wine of death downstream on the swift current : Above the silence a faint hissing, a seething hardly at first to be noticed —headlong! Speed! —marked as by the lines on slate, mottled by petty whirlpools (to the teeth, to the very eyes) a formal progression The remains—a man of gigantic stature—were transported on the shoulders of the most renowned warriors of the surrounding country . for many hours they travelled without rest. But half way on the journey the carriers had to quit overcome by fatigue—they had walked many hours and Pogatticut was heavy. So by the side of the trail, at a place called “Whooping Boys Hollow,” they scooped out a shallow hole and laid the dead chieftain down in it while they rested. By so doing, the spot became sacred, held in veneration by the Indians. Arrived at the burial place the funeral procession was met by Pogatticut’s brothers and their followers. There was great lamentation and the Kinte Kaye was performed in sadness. Wyandach, the most illustrious brother, performed the burial sacrifice. Having his favorite dog, a much loved animal, brought forth, he killed him, and laid him, after painting his muzzle red, beside his brother. For three days and three nights the tribes mourned . Pursued by the whirlpool-mouths, the dog descends toward Acheron . Le Néant . the sewer a dead dog turning upon the water: Come yeah, Chi Chi! turning as he passes . It is a sort of chant, a sort of praise, a peace that comes of destruction: to the teeth, to the very eyes (cut lead) I bin nipped hundreds of times. He never done anybody any harm . helpless . You had him killed on me. About Merselis Van Giesen a curious story illustrative of the superstition of the day is to this effect: His wife was ill for a long time, confined to her bed. As she lay there, a black cat would come, night after night, and stare at her through the window, with wicked, blazing eyes. An uncanny fact about this visitation was that no one else could see the cat. That Jane was bewitched was the belief of the whole neighborhood. Moreover, the witch who exercised this spell, and who made these weird visits to the sufferer, in the guise of a cat invisible to everybody but the bewitched, was believed to be Mrs. B. who lived in the gorge in the hill beyond. Happy souls! whose devils lived so near. Talking the matter over with his neighbors, Merselis (he was called “Sale”) was told that if he could shoot the spectral cat with a silver bullet he would kill the creature, and put a stop to the spells exercised over his wife. He did not have a silver bullet, but he had a pair of silver sleeve buttons. Who of us thinks so fast to switch the category of our loves and hatreds? Loading his gun with one of these buttons, he seated himself on the bed beside his wife, and declared his intention of shooting the witch cat. But how could he shoot a creature he could not see? Are we any better off? “When the cat comes,” said he to his wife, “do you point out just where it is, and I will shoot at that spot.” So they waited, she in a tremor of hope and dread— hope that the spells afflicting her would soon be ended; dread that some new torment might come to her from this daring attempt of her husband; he, in grim determination to forever end the unholy power exercised over his wife by Mrs. B., in the guise of the invisible feline. Long and silently they waited. —what a picture of marital fidelity! dreaming as one. At last, when their feelings had been wrought up, by the suspense to the highest pitch, Jane exclaimed “There is the black cat!” “Where?” “At the window, it’s walking on the sill, it is in the lower left-hand corner!” Quick as a flash “Sale” raised his gun and fired the silver bullet at the black cat which he could not see. With a snarl that was a scream the mysterious creature vanished forever from the gaze of Mrs. Van Giesen, who from that hour began to recover her health. The next day “Sale” started out on a hunt through what is now known as Cedar Cliff Park. On the way he met the husband of the suspected witch. There was the usual exchange of courteous neighborly inquiries regarding the health of their respective families. Mr. B. said his wife was troubled with a sore on her leg for some time. “I would like to see that sore leg,” said “Sale.” After some demur he was taken to the house, and on one plea or another was finally permitted to examine the sore. But what particularly attracted his notice was a fresh wound, just where his silver sleeve button had struck the unfortunate creature when she had last visited his wife in the form of the spectral black witch cat! Needless to say Mrs. B. never more made those weird visitations. Perhaps it was from a sense of thanksgiving for her miraculous deliverance that Mrs. Van Giesen joined the First Presbyterian Church on Confession, Sept. 26, 1823. Merselis Van Giesen was assessed in 1807 for 62 acres of unimproved land, two horses and five cattle. — 62 acres of unimproved land, two horses and five cattle — (that cures the fantasy) The Book of Lead, he cannot lift the pages (Why do I bother with this rubbish?) Heavy plaits tumbling massive, yellow into the cleft, bellowing —giving way to the spread of the flood as it lifts to recognition in a rachitic brain (the water two feet now on the turnpike and still rising) There is no ease. We close our eyes, get what we use and pay. He owes who cannot, double. Use. Ask no whys? None wants our ayes. But somehow a man must lift himself again— again is the magic word . turning the in out : Speed against the inundation He feels he ought to do more. He had a young girl there. Her mother told her, Go jump off the falls, who cares? — She was only fifteen. He feels so frustrated. I tell him, What do you expect, you have only two hands . ? It was a place to see, she said, The White Shutters. He said I’d be perfectly safe there with him. But I never went. I wanted to, I wasn’t afraid but it just never happened. He had a small orchestra that played there, The Clipper Crew he called it—like in all the speakeasies of those days. But one night they came leaping downstairs from the banquet hall tearing their clothes off, the women throwing their skirts over their heads, and joined in the dancing, naked, with the others on the main floor. He took one look and then went out the back window just ahead of the police, in his dress shoes into the mud along the river bank. Let me see, Puerto Plata is the port of Santo Domingo. There was a time when they didn’t want any whites to own anything—to hold anything—to say, This is mine . I see things, . . —the water at this stage no lullaby but a piston, cohabitous, scouring the stones . the rock floating on the water (as at Mt Katmai the pumice-covered sea was white as milk) One can imagine the fish hiding or at full speed stationary in the leaping stream —it’s undermining the railroad embankment Hi, open up a dozen, make it two dozen! Easy girl! You wanna blow a fuse? All manner of particularizations to stay the pocky moon : January sunshine . 1949 Wednesday, II (10,000,000 times plus April) —a red-butted reversible minute-glass loaded with salt-like white crystals flowing for timing eggs Salut à Antonin Artaud pour les lignes, très pures : “et d’évocations plastiques d’éléments de” a nd “Funeral designs” (a beautiful, optimistic word . . ) and “Plants” (it should be explained that in this case “plants” does NOT refer to interment.) “Wedding bouquets” —the association is indefensible. S. Liz 13 Oct (re. C.O.E. Panda Panda ) Fer got sake don’t so exaggerate I never told you to read it. let erlone REread it. I didn’t say it wuz ! ! henjoyable readin. I sd the guy had done some honest work devilupping his theatre technique That don’t necess/y mean making reading matter @ all. Enny how there must be one hundred books (not that one) that you need to read fer yr/mind’s sake. re read all the Gk tragedies in Loeb. — plus Frobenius, plus Gesell. plus Brooks Adams ef you ain’t read him all. — Then Golding’s Ovid is in Everyman’s lib. & nif you want a readin list ask papa—but don’t go rushin to read a book just cause it is mentioned eng passang—is fraugs. S U B S T R A T U M ARTESIAN WELL AT THE PASSAIC ROLLING MILL, PATERSON. The following is the tabular account of the specimens found in this well, with the depths at which they were taken, in feet. The boring began in September, 1879, and was continued until November, 1880. DEPTH DESCRIPTION OF MATERIALS 65 feet. . . Red sandstone, fine 110 feet. . . Red sandstone, coarse 182 feet. . . Red sandstone, and a little shale 400 feet. . . Red sandstone, shaly 404 feet. . . Shale 430 feet. . . Red sandstone, fine grained 540 feet. . . Sandy shale, soft 565 feet. . . Soft shale 585 feet. . . Soft shale 600 feet. . . Hard sandstone 605 feet. . . Soft shale 609 feet. . . Soft shale 1,170 feet. . . Selenite, 2 x 1 x 1/16 in. 1,180 feet. . . Fine quicksand, reddish 1,180 feet. . . Pyrites 1,370 feet. . . Sandy rock, under quicksand 1,400 feet. . . Dark red sandstone 1,400 feet. . . Light red sandstone 1,415 feet. . . Dark red sandstone 1,415 feet. . . Light red sandstone 1,415 feet. . . Fragments of red sandstone 1,540 feet. Red sandstone, and a pebble of kaolin . . 1,700 feet. . . Light red sandstone 1,830 feet. . . Light red sandstone 1,830 feet. . . Light red sandstone 1,830 feet. . . Light red stone 2,000 feet. . . Red shale 2,020 feet. . . Light red sandstone 2,050 feet. . . 2,100 feet. . . Shaly sandstone At this depth the attempt to bore through the red sandstone was abandoned, the water being altogether unfit for ordinary use.... The fact that the rock salt of England, and of some of the other salt mines of Europe, is found in rocks of the same age as this, raises the question whether it may not also be found here. — to the teeth, to the very eyes uh, uh FULL STOP —and leave the world to darkness and to me When the water has receded most things have lost their form. They lean in the direction the current went. Mud covers them —fertile (?) mud. If it were only fertile. Rather a sort of muck, a detritus, in this case—a pustular scum, a decay, a choking lifelessness—that leaves the soil clogged after it, that glues the sandy bottom and blackens stones—so that they have to be scoured three times when, because of an attractive brokenness, we take them up for garden uses. An acrid, a revolting stench comes out of them, almost one might say a granular stench—fouls the mind . How to begin to find a shape—to begin to begin again, turning the inside out: to find one phrase that will lie married beside another for delight . ? —seems beyond attainment . American poetry is a very easy subject to discuss for the simple reason that it does not exist Degraded. The leaf torn from the calendar. All forgot. Give it over to the woman, let her begin again—with insects and decay, decay and then insects : the leaves—that were varnished with sediment, fallen, the clutter made piecemeal by decay, a digestion takes place . —of this, make it of this, this this, this, this, this . Where the dredge dumped the fill, something, a white hop-clover with cordy roots (of iron) gripped the sand in its claws—and blossomed massively, where the old farm was and the man broke his wife’s cancerous jaw because she was too weak, too sick, that is, to work in the field for him as he thought she should . So thinking, he composed a song to her: to entertain her in her reading: * * * The birds in winter and in summer the flowers those are her two joys —to cover her secret sorrow Love is her sorrow over which at heart she cries for joy by the hour —a secret she will not reveal Her ohs are ahs her ahs are ohs and her sad joys fly with the birds and blossom with the rose —the edema subsides Who is it spoke of April? Some insane engineer. There is no recurrence. The past is dead. Women are legalists, they want to rescue a framework of laws, a skeleton of practices, a calcined reticulum of the past which, bees, they will fill with honey . It is not to be done. The seepage has rotted out the curtain. The mesh is decayed. Loosen the flesh from the machine, build no more bridges. Through what air will you fly to span the continents? Let the words fall any way at all—that they may hit love aslant. It will be a rare visitation. They want to rescue too much, the flood has done its work . Go down, peer among the fishes. What do you expect to save, muscle shells? Here’s a fossil conch (a paper weight of sufficient quaintness) mud and shells baked by a near eternity into a melange, hard as stone, full of tiny shells —baked by endless desiccations into a shelly rime—turned up in an old pasture whose history— even whose partial history, is death itself Vercingetorix, the only hero . Let’s give the canary to that old deaf woman; when he opens his bill, to hiss at her, she’ll think he is singing . Does the pulp need further maceration? take down the walls, invite the trespass. After all, the slums unless they are (living) wiped out they cannot be re- constituted . The words will have to be rebricked up, the —what? What am I coming to . pouring down? When an African Ibibio man is slain in battle, married women who are his next of kin rescue the corpse. No man may touch it. Weeping and singing songs, the scouts bear the dead warrior to a forest glade called Owokafai—the place of those slain by sudden death. They lay him on a bed made of fresh leaves. Then they cut young branches from a sacred tree and wave the bough over the genital organs of the warrior to extract the spirit of fertilty into the leaves. Knowledge of the rites must be kept from men and from unmarried girls. Only married women, who have felt the fertility of men in their bodies, can know the secret of life. To them it was entrusted by their great goddess “in the days when woman, not man, was the dominant sex. . ; on the guarding of this secret depended the strength of the tribe. Were the rites once disclosed—few or no babies would be born, barns and herds would yield but scanty increase, while the arms of future generations of fighting men would lose their strength and hearts their courage.” This ceremony is conducted to the accompaniment of low, wailing chants, which only these wives of warriors have authority to sing, or even to know. —in a hundred years, perhaps— the syllables (with genius) or perhaps two lifetimes Sometimes it takes longer . Did I do more than share your guilt, sweet woman. The cherimoya is the most delicately flavored of all tropic fruit. . . Either I abandon you or give up writing . I was thinking about her all day long yesterday. You know she’s been dead four years? And that son of a bitch only has one more year to serve. Then he’ll be out and we can’t do a thing about it.—I suppose he killed her.—You know he killed her, just shot her to death. And do you remember that Clifford that used to follow her around, poor man? He’d do anything she asked him to—the most harmless creature in the world; he’s been sick. He had rheumatic fever when he was a child and can’t leave the house any more. He wrote to us to send him some dirty jokes because he can’t get out to hear them himself. And we can’t either of us think of one new one to send him. The past above, the future below and the present pouring down: the roar, the roar of the present, a speech— is, of necessity, my sole concern . They plunged, they fell in a swoon . or by intention, to make an end—the roar, unrelenting, witnessing . Neither the past nor the future Neither to stare, amnesic—forgetting. The language cascades into the invisible, beyond and above : the falls of which it is the visible part— Not until I have made of it a replica will my sins be forgiven and my disease cured—in wax: la capella di S. Rocco on the sandstone crest above the old copper mines—where I used to see the images of arms and knees hung on nails (de Montpellier) . No meaning. And yet, unless I find a place apart from it, I am its slave, its sleeper, bewildered—dazzled by distance . I cannot stay here to spend my life looking into the past: the future’s no answer. I must find my meaning and lay it, white, beside the sliding water: myself — comb out the language—or succumb —whatever the complexion. Let me out! (Well, go!) this rhetoric is real! BOOK FOUR (1951) The Run to the Sea I. A N I D Y L Corydon & Phyllis Two silly women! (Look, Dad, I’m dancing!) What’s that? I didn’t say anything . except you don’t look silly . Semantics, my dear . —and I know I’m not . Ouch! you have hands like a man . Some day, sweetheart, when we know each other better I’ll tell you a few things . . Thank you. Very satisfactory. My secretary will be at the door with your money . No. I prefer it that way O. K. Good- bye Miss . eh Phyllis Tiens! I’ll phone the agency . Until tomorrow, then, Phyllis, at the same hour. Shall I be walking again soon, do you think? Why not? . . . . . . A Letter Look, Big Shot, I refuse to come home until you promise to cut out the booze. It’s no use your talking about Mother needs me and all that bologney. If you thought anything of her you wouldn’t carry on the way you do. Maybe your family did once own the whole valley. Who owns it now? What you need is to be slapped down. I’m having a fine time in the Big City as a Professional Woman, ahem! Believe me there’s plenty of money here—if you can get it. With your brains and ability this should be your meat. But you’d rather hit the bottle. That’s all right with me—only I won’t wrestle with you all night on the bed any more because you got the D.Ts. I can’t take it, your too strong for me. So make up your mind—one way or the other. . . . . . . Corydon & Phyllis And how are you today, darling? (She calls me darling now!) What sort of life can you lead in that horrid place . Rach-a-mo, did you say? Ramapo To be sure, how stupid of me. Right. What was that? Really you’ll have to speak louder I said . Never mind. You mentioned a city? Paterson, where I trained Paterson! Yes, of course. Where Nicholas Murray Butler was born . and his sister, the lame one. They used to have silk mills there . until the unions ruined them. Too bad. Wonderful hands! I completely forget myself . Some hands are silver, some gold and some, a very few, like yours, diamonds (If only I could keep you!) You like it here? . Go look out of that window . That is the East River. The sun rises there. And beyond, is Blackwell’s Island. Welfare Island, City Island . whatever they call it now . where the city’s petty criminals, the poor the superannuated and the insane are housed . Look at me when I talk to you — and then the three rocks tapering off into the water all . that’s left of the elemental, the primitive in this environment. I call them my sheep . Sheep, huh? Docile, are they not? What’s the idea? Lonesomeness perhaps. It’s a long story. Be their shepherdess Phyllis. And I shall be Corydon . inoffensively, I hope? Phyllis and Corydon. How lovely! Do you care for almonds? Nope. I hate all kinds of nuts. They get in your hair . your teeth, I mean . . . . . . . A Letter Lay off that stuff. I can take care of myself. And if not, so what? This is a racket, all I got to do is give her “massage” — and what do I know about massage? I just rub her, and how I rub her! And does she like it! And does she pay! Oh boy! So I rub her and read to her. The place is full of books—in all languages! But she’s a nut, of the worst kind. Today she was telling me about some rocks in the river here she calls her three sheep. If they’re sheep I’m the Queen of England. They’re white all right but it’s from the gulls that crap them up all day long. You ought to see this place. There was a hellicopter (?) flying all over the river today looking for the body of a suicide, some student, some girl about my age (she says . a Hindu Princess.) It was in the papers this morning but I didn’t take notice. You ought to have seen the way those gulls were winging it around. They went crazy . . . . . . . Corydon & Phyllis You must have lots of boy friends, Phyllis Only one Incredible! Only one I’m interested in right now What is he like? Who? Your lover Oh him. He’s married. I haven’t got a chance with him You hussy! And what do you do together? Just talk. . . . . . . Phyllis & Paterson Are you happy Happy I’ve come? Happy? No, I’m not happy Never? Well . The couch looks comfortable . . . . . . The Poet Oh Paterson! Oh married man! He is the city of cheap hotels and private entrances . of taxis at the door, the car standing in the rain hour after hour by the roadhouse entrance . Good-bye, dear. I had a wonderful time. Wait! there’s something . but I’ve forgotten what it was . something I wanted to tell you. Completely gone! Completely. Well, good-bye . . . . . . . Phyllis & Paterson How long can you stay? Six-thirty . I’ve got to meet the boy friend Take off your clothes No. I’m good at saying that. She stood quietly to be undressed . the buttons were difficult . This is one of my father’s best. You ought to have heard him this morning when I cut the tails off . He drew back the white shirt . slid aside the ribbons . Glory be to God . — then stripped her and all His Saints! . No, just broad shouldered . — on the couch, kissing and talking while his hands explored her body, slowly . courteously . persistent . Be careful . I’ve got an awful cold It’s the first this year. We went fishing in all that rain last week Who? Your father? — and my boy friend Fly fishing? No. Bass. But it isn’t the season. I know that but nobody saw us I got soaked to the skin Can you fish? Oh I have a pole and a line and just fish along We caught quite a few . . . . . . Corydon & Phyllis Good morning, Phyllis. You are beautiful this morning (in a common sort of way) I wonder if you know how lovely you really are, Phyllis, my little Milk Maid (That’s good! The lucky man!) I dreamt of you last night. . A Letter I don’t care what you say. Unless Mother writes me, herself, that you’ve stopped drinking—and I mean stopped drinking—I won’t come home. . Corydon & Phyllis What sort of people do you come from, Phyllis? My father’s a drunk. That’s more humility than the situation demands. Never be ashamed of your origins. I’m not. It’s just the truth. The truth! Virtue, my dear, if one had it! is only interesting in the aggregate, as you will discover . or perhaps you have already found it so. That’s our Christian teaching: not denial but forgiveness, the Prodigal Daughter. Have you ever been to bed with a man? Have you? Good shot! With this body? I think I’m more horse than woman. Did you ever see such skin as mine? Speckled like a Guinea hen . Only their speckles are white. More like a toad, perhaps? I didn’t say that. Why not? It’s the truth, my little Oread. Indomitable. Let’s change names. You be Corydon! And I’ll play Phyllis. Young! Innocent! One can fairly hear the pelting of apples and the stomp and clatter of Pan’s hoofbeats. Tantamount to nothing . . . . . . . Phyllis & Paterson Look at us! Why do you torment yourself? You think I’m a virgin. Suppose I told you I’d had intercourse. What would you say then? What would you say? Suppose I told you that . She leaned forward in the half light, close to his face. Tell me, what would you say? Have you had many lovers? No one who has mauled me the way you have. Look, we’re all sweaty . . My father’s trying to get me a horse . . I went out, once, with a boy I only knew him a short time He asked me . . No, I said, of course not! He acted so surprised. Why, he said, most girls are crazy for it. I thought they all were . You ought to have seen my eyes. I never heard of such a thing . . I don’t know why I can’t give myself to you. A man like you should have everything he wants . I guess I care too much, that’s the trouble . . . . . . . Corydon & Phyllis Phyllis, good morning. Could you stand a drink at this early hour? I’ve written you a poem . and the worst is, I’m about to read it to you . You don’t have to like it. But, hell take it, you damn well better listen to it. Look at me shake! Or better, let me give you a short one, to begin with: If I am virtuous condemn me If my life is felicitous condemn me The world is iniquitous Mean anything? Not much. Well, here’s another: You dreamy Communist where are you going? To world’s end Via? Chemistry Oh oh oh oh That will really be the end . you dreamy Communist won’t it? Together together “With that she split her girdle.” Gimme another shot. I always fell on my face when I wanted to step out. But here goes! Here it is. This is what I’ve been leading up to. It’s called, Corydon, a Pastoral. We’ll skip the first part, about the rocks and sheep, begin with the helicopter. You remember that? . . drives the gulls up in a cloud Um . no more woods and fields. Therefore present, forever present . a whirring pterodactyl of a contrivance, to remind one of Da Vinci, searches the Hellgate current for some corpse, lest the gulls feed on it and its identity and its sex, as its hopes, and its despairs and its moles and its marks and its teeth and its nails be no longer decipherable and so lost . therefore present, forever present . The gulls, vortices of despair, circle and give voice to their wild responses until the thing is gone . then, ravening, having scattered to survive, close again upon the focus, the bare stones, three harbor stones, except for that . useless unprofaned . It stinks! If this were rhyme, Sweetheart such rhyme as might be made jaws would hang open . But the measure of it is the thing . None can wish for an embellishment and keep his mind lean, fit for action . such action as I plan — to turn my hand up and hold it open, to the rain . of their deaths that I brood . and find none ready but mine own . Nuts! After that, how about a story that’s a little recherché, a little strong? To hide my embarrassment? O.K.? Sure. Skip it. A ring is round but cannot bind though it may bound a lover’s mind Phyllis, I think I’m quite well now . . How would you like to go fishing with me somewhere? You like to fish . Can I bring my father? No, you can’t bring your father. You’re a big girl now. A month with me, in the woods! I have a concession. Don’t answer at once. You’ve never been to Anticosti . ? What’s it like, pizza? Phyllis, you’re a bad girl. Let me go on with my poem . . . . . . Dear Pappy: How yuh doin’? Are you behaving? because she wants me to go fishing with her. For a month! What do you say? You’d like that. Is that so? Well, you know where you can get off at. And don’t think you can start coming in here. Because if you do I’ll never go home. And you haven’t stopped drinking! Don’t try to kid me. Alright, if you think I’m in danger then learn to behave yourself. Are you a weakling or something? But I won’t go through all that again. Never. Don’t worry, as I told you, I can take care of myself. And if anything happens me, so what? Blame it on I’ve got a father who is a drunk. Your daughter P. . . . . . . Phyllis & Paterson This dress is sweaty. I’ll have to have it cleaned It lifted past the shoulders. Under it, her stockings Big thighs . . Let us read, said the King lightly. Let us redivagate, said the Queen even more lightly and without batting an eye . He took her nipples gently in his lips. No I don’t like it . . . . . . Corydon & Phyllis You remember where we left off? At the entrance to the 45th Street tunnel . Let’s see . houses placarded: Unfit for human habitation etc etc Oh yes . Condemned . But who has been condemned . where the tunnel under the river starts? Voi ch’entrate revisited! Under ground, under rock, under river under gulls . under the insane . . the traffic is engulfed and disappears . to emerge . never A voice calling in the hubbub (Why else are there newspapers, by the cart-load?) blaring the news no wit shall evade, no rhyme cover. Necessity gripping the words . scouting evasion, that love is begrimed, befouled . I’d like to spill the truth, on that one. Why don’t you? This is a POEM! begrimed yet lifts its head, having suffered a sea- change! shorn of its eyes and its hair its teeth kicked out . a bitter submersion in darkness . a gelding, not to be listed . to be made ready! fit to serve (vermin trout, that eat the salmon eggs, gaze up through the dazzle . in glass necklaces . picturesque peasant stuff without value) . pulp While in the tall buildings (sliding up and down) is where the money’s made up and down directed missiles in the greased shafts of the tall buildings . They stand torpid in cages, in violent motion unmoved but alert! predatory minds, un- affected UNINCONVENIENCED unsexed, up and down (without wing motion) This is how the money’s made . using such plugs. At the sanitary lunch hour packed woman to woman (or man to woman, what’s the difference?) the flesh of their faces gone to fat or gristle, without recognizable outline, fixed in rigors, adipose or sclerosis expressionless, facing one another, a mould for all faces (canned fish) this . Move toward the back, please, and face the door! is how the money’s made, money’s made pressed together talking excitedly . of the next sandwich . reading, from one hand, of some student, come waterlogged to the surface following last night’s thunderstorm . the flesh a flesh of tears and fighting gulls . Oh I could cry! cry upon your young shoulder for what I know. I feel so alone . . . . . . . Phyllis & Paterson I think I’ll go on the stage, said she, with a deprecating laugh, Ho, ho! Why don’t you? he replied though the legs, I’m afraid, would beat you . . . . . . . Corydon & Phyllis . with me, Phyllis (I’m no Simaetha) in all your native loveliness that these spiked rumors may not tear that sweet flesh It sounds as tho’ I wanted to eat you, I’ll have to change that. Come with me to Anticosti, where the salmon lie spawning in the sun in the shallow water I think that’s Yeats . — and we shall fish for the salmon fish No, I think that’s the Yeats . — and its silver shall be our crest and guerdon (what’s a guerdon?) drawn struggling . Believe me, some tussle! from the icy water . I wish you’d come, dear, I’ve got my yacht all stocked and ready. Let me take you on a tour . of Paradise! That I’d like to see. Then why not come? I’m not ready to die yet, not even for that. You don’t need to. . . . . . . Dear Pappy: For the last time! All day today, believe it or not, we’ve been coasting along what they call up here the North Shore on our way to the place we’re going to fish at. It sounds like an Italian dinner, Anticosti, but it’s really french. It’s wild, they say, but we have a marvellous guide, an Indian I think but it’s not sure (maybe I’ll marry him and stay up there for the rest of my life) Anyway he speaks french and the Missis talks to him in that language. I don’t know what they’re saying (and I don’t care, I can talk my own language). I can hardly keep my eyes open, I’ve been out almost every night this week. To go on. We have wine, mostly Champagne on board. She showed it to me, 24 cases for the party but I don’t want any of it, thanks. I’ll stick to my rum and coke. Don’t worry. Tell Ma everything’s all right. But remember, I’m through. . . . . . Phyllis & Paterson Do you know that tall dark girl with the long nose? She’s my friend. She says she’s going West next fall. I’m saving every cent I can put together. I’m going with her. I haven’t told my mother yet . Why do you torment yourself? I can’t think unless you’re naked. I wouldn’t blame you if you beat me up, punched me, anything at all . I wouldn’t do you that much honor. What! what did you say? I said I wouldn’t do you that much honor . So that’s all? I’m afraid so. Something I shall always desire, you’ve seen to that. Talk to me. This is not the time for it. Why did you let me come? Who knows, why did you? I like coming here, I need you. I know that . hoping I’d take it from you, lacking your consent. I’ve lost out, haven’t I? You have. Pull down my slip . He lay upon his back upon the couch. She came, half dressed, and straddled him. My thighs are sore from riding . Oh let me breathe! After I’m married you must take me out sometime. If that’s what you want . Corydon & Phyllis Have any of these men you speak of . ? —and has he? No. Good. What’s good about it? Then you’re still a virgin What’s it to you? II. You were not more than 12, my son 14 perhaps, the high school age when we went, together, a first for both of us, to a lecture, in the Solarium topping the hospital, on atomic fission. I hoped to discover an “interest” on your part. You listened . Smash the world, wide! —if I could do it for you — Smash the wide world . a fetid womb, a sump! No river! no river but bog, a . swale sinks into the mind or the mind into it, a? Norman Douglas (South Wind) said to me, The best thing a man can do for his son, when he is born, is to die . I gave you another, bigger than yourself, to contend with. To resume: (What I miss, said your mother, is the poetry, the pure poem of the first parts . ) The moon was in its first quarter. As we approached the hospital the air above it, having taken up the glow through the glass roof seemed ablaze, rivalling night’s queen. The room was packed with doctors. How pale and young the boy seemed among those pigs, myself among them! who surpassed him only in experience, that drug, sitting erect to their talk: valences . For years a nurse-girl an unhatched sun corroding her mind, eating away a rind of impermanences, through books remorseless . Curie (the movie queen) upon the stage at the Sorbonne . a half mile across! walking solitary as tho’ in a forest, the silence of a great forest (of ideas) before the assembly (the little Polish baby-nurse) receives international acclaim (a drug) Come on up! Come up Sister and be saved (splitting the atom of bitterness)! And Billy Sunday evangel and ex-rightfielder sets himself to take one off the wall . He’s on the table now! Both feet, singing ( a foot song ) his feet canonized . . as paid for by the United Factory Owners’ Ass’n . . to “break” the strike and put those S.O.Bs in their places, be Geezus, by calling them to God! —getting his 27 Grand in the hotel room after the last supper (at the Hamilton) on the eve of quitting town, exhausted in his efforts to split (a split personality) . the plate What an arm! Come to Jesus! . Someone help that old woman up the steps . Come to Jesus and be . All together now, give it everything you got! Brighten . . the corner where you are! Dear Doctor: In spite of the grey secrecy of time and my own self-shuttering doubts in these youthful rainy days, I would like to make my presence in Paterson known to you, and I hope you will welcome this from me, an unknown young poet, to you, an unknown old poet, who live in the same rusty county of the world. Not only do I inscribe this missive somewhat in the style of those courteous sages of yore who recognized one another across the generations as brotherly children of the muses (whose names they well know) but also as fellow citizenly Chinamen of the same province, whose gastanks, junkyards, fens of the alley, millways, funeral parlors, river-visions—aye! the falls itself—are images white-woven in their very beards. I went to see you once briefly two years ago (when I was 21), to interview you for a local newspaper. I wrote the story in fine and simple style, but it was hacked and changed and came out the next week as a labored joke at your expense which I assume you did not get to see. You invited me politely to return, but I did not, as I had nothing to talk about except images of cloudy light, and was not able to speak to you in your own or my own concrete terms. Which failing still hangs with me to a lesser extent, yet I feel ready to approach you once more. As to my history: I went to Columbia on and off since 1943, working and travelling around the country and aboard ships when I was not in schools, studying English. I won a few poetry prizes there and edited the Columbia Review. I liked Van Doren most there. I worked later on the Associated Press as a copyboy, and spent most of the last year in a mental hospital; and now I am back in Paterson which is home for the first time in seven years. What I’ll do there I don’t know yet—my first move was to try and get a job on one of the newspapers here and in Passaic, but that hasn’t been successful yet. My literary liking is Melville in Pierre and the Confidence Man, and in my own generation, one Jack Kerouac whose first book came out this year. I do not know if you will like my poetry or not—that is, how far your own inventive persistence excludes less independent or youthful attempts to perfect, renew, transfigure, and make contemporarily real an old style or lyric machinery, which I use to record the struggle with imagination of the clouds, with which I have been concerned. I enclose a few samples of my best writing. All that I have done has a program, consciously or not, running on from phase to phase, from the beginnings of emotional breakdown, to momentary raindrops from the clouds become corporeal, to a renewal of human objectivity which I take to be ultimately identical with no ideas but in things. But this last development I have yet to turn into poetic reality. I envision for myself some kind of new speech—different at least from what I have been writing down—in that it has to be clear statement of fact about misery (and not misery itself), and splendor if there is any out of the subjective wanderings through Paterson. This place is as I say my natural habitat by memory, and I am not following in your traces to be poetic: though I know you will be pleased to realize that at least one actual citizen of your community has inherited your experience in his struggle to love and know his own world- city, through your work, which is an accomplishment you almost cannot have hoped to achieve. It is misery I see (like a tide out of my own fantasy) but mainly the splendor which I carry within me and which all free men do. But harking back to a few sentences previous, I may need a new measure myself, but though I have a flair for your style I seldom did exactly what you are doing with cadences, line length, sometimes syntax, etc., and cannot handle your work as a solid object—which properties I assume you rightly claim. I don’t understand the measure. I haven’t worked with it much either, though, which must make the difference. But I would like to talk with you concretely on this. I enclose these poems. The first shows you where I was 2 years ago. The second, a kind of dense lyric I instinctively try to imitate—after Crane, Robinson, Tate, and old Englishmen. Then, the Shroudy Stranger (3) less interesting as a poem (or less sincere) but it connects observations of things with an old dream of the void—I have real dreams about a classic hooded figure. But this dream has become identified with my own abyss—and with the abyss of old Smokies under the Erie R.R. tracks on straight street—so the shroudy stranger (4) speaking from the inside of the old wracked bum of a paterson or anywhere in america. This is only a half made poem (using a few lines and a situation I had in a dream). I contemplated a long work on the shroudy stranger, his wanderings. Next (5) an earlier poem, Radio City, a long lyric written in sickness. Then a mad song (to be sung by Groucho Marx to a Bop background) (6). The (7) an old style ballad-type ghost dream poem. Then, an ode to the Setting Sun of abstract (8) ideas, written before leaving the hospital, and last an Ode to Judgment, which I just wrote, but which is unfinished. (9) What will come of all this I do not know yet. I know this letter finds you in good health, as I saw you speak at the Museum in N. Y. this week. I ran backstage to accost you, but changed my mind, after waving at you, and ran off again. Respectfully yours, A. G. Paris, a fifth floor room, bread milk and chocolate, a few apples and coal to be carried, des briquettes, their special smell, at dawn: Paris . the soft coal smell, as she leaned upon the window before de- parting, for work . —a furnace, a cavity aching toward fission; a hollow, a woman waiting to be filled —a luminosity of elements, the current leaping! Pitchblende from Austria, the valence of Uranium inexplicably increased. Curie, the man, gave up his work to buttress her. But she is pregnant! Poor Joseph, the Italians say. Glory to God in the highest and on earth, peace, goodwill to men! Believe it or not. A dissonance in the valence of Uranium led to the discovery Dissonance (if you are interested) leads to discovery — to dissect away the block and leave a separate metal: hydrogen the flame, helium the pregnant ash . — the elephant takes two years Love is a kitten, a pleasant thing, a purr and a pounce. Chases a piece of string, a scratch and a mew a ball batted with a paw . a sheathed claw . Love, the sledge that smashes the atom? No, No! antagonistic cooperation is the key, says Levy . Sir Thopas (The Canterbury Pilgrims) says (to Chaucer) Namoor— Thy drasty rymyng is not worth a toord —and Chaucer seemed to think so too for he stopped and went on in prose . REPORT OF CASES CASE I.—M. N., a white woman aged 35, a nurse in the pediatric ward, had no history of previous intestinal disturbance. A sister who lived with her suffered with cramps and diarrhea, later found by us to be due to amebiasis. On Nov. 8, 1944 a stool submitted by the nurse for the usual monthly examination was found to be positive for Salmonella montevideo. The nurse was at once removed from duty with full pay, a measure found to be of advantage in having hospital personnel report diarrheal disturbances without fear of economic reprisal. — with ponderous belly, full of thought! stirring the cauldrons . in the old shed used by the medical students for dissections. Winter. Snow through the cracks Pauvre étudiant . en l’an trentième de mon âge Item . with coarsened hands by the hour, the day, the week to get, after months of labor . a stain at the bottom of the retort without weight, a failure, a nothing. And then, returning in the night, to find it . LUMINOUS! On Friday, the twelfth of October, we anchored before the land and made ready to go ashore . There I sent the people for water, some with arms, and others with casks: and as it was some little distance, I waited two hours for them. During that time I walked among the trees which was the most beautiful thing which I had ever known. . knowledge, the contaminant Uranium, the complex atom, breaking down, a city in itself, that complex atom, always breaking down . to lead. But giving off that, to an exposed plate, will reveal . And so, with coarsened hands she stirs And love, bitterly contesting, waits that the mind shall declare itself not alone in dreams . A man like you should have everything he wants . not half asleep waiting for the sun to part the labia of shabby clouds . but a man (or a woman) achieved flagrant! adept at thought, playing the words following a table which is the synthesis of thought, a symbol that is to him, sun up! a Mendelief, the elements laid out by molecular weight, identity predicted before found! and . Oh most powerful connective, a bead to lie between continents through which a string passes . Ah Madam! this is order, perfect and controlled on which empires, alas, are built But there may issue, a contaminant, some other metal radioactive a dissonance, unless the table lie, may cure the cancer . must lie in that ash . Helium plus, plus what? Never mind, but plus . a woman, a small Polish baby-nurse unable . Woman is the weaker vessel, but the mind is neutral, a bead linking continents, brow and toe and will at best take out its spate in mathematics replacing murder Sappho vs Elektra! The young conductor gets his orchestra and leaves his patroness with child. . les idées Wilsoniennes nous gâtent . the vague irrelevances and the destructive silences inertia As Carrie Nation to Artemis so is our life today . They took her out West on a photographing expedition to study chiaroscuro to Denver, I think. Somewhere around there . the marriage was annulled. When she returned with the baby openly taking it to her girls’ parties, they were shocked —and the Abbess Hildegard, at her own funeral, Rupertsberg, 1179 had enjoined them to sing the choral, all women, she had written for the occasion and it was done, the peasants kneeling in the background . as you may see Advertisement The Constitution says: To borrow money on the credit of the United States. It does not say: To borrow money from Private bankers. To explain the fallacies and illusions upon which our present method of financing the national budget is based would take too much space and time. To win the cold war we must reform our finance system. The Russians understand only force. We must be stronger than they and build more airplanes. FINANCE THE BUILDING OF AIRPLANES AS FOLLOWS: 1. Pay the manufacturer with a NATIONAL CREDIT CERTIFICATE. 2. Manufacturer deposits the Certificate with his bank the same as a check. 3. Banker returns National Credit Certificate to Treasury Dept., which opens UNITED STATES NATIONAL CREDIT for banker. 4. Banker in turn now opens BANKER’S CREDIT for depositor. Manufacturer draws checks against his credit as usual. 5. Manufacturer pays his workers with checks upon his bank. 6. Treasury Dept. pays banker a service charge of 1% for handling the Treasury transaction. If the airplanes cost 1 million dollars the banker’s profit would be $10,000. WHAT DO WE ACCOMPLISH BY USING THIS SYSTEM? 1. Manufacturer is paid in full. 2. Workers are paid in full. 3. Bankers make a $10,000. profit every time he handles a 1 million dollar National Credit Certificate. 4. We do not add to the National Debt. 5. We do not have to increase federal taxation. 6. The only cost of the 1 million dollar airplane is only $10,000, the cost of the banker’s service charges. 7. We can build 100 airplanes for the price of one. I would like to have some smart economist or banker stick out his neck and contradict one single claim I present herewith to the nation. ENFORCE THE CONSTITUTION ON MONEY August Walters, Newark, N. J. MONEY : JOKE (i.e., crime under the circumstances : value chipped away at accelerated pace.) — do you joke when a man is dying of a brain tumor? Take up the individual misfortune by buffering it into the locality — not penalize him with surgeon’s fees and accessories at an advance over the market price for “hospital income” Who gets that? The poor? What poor? — at $8.50 a day, ward rate? short of the possibility of recovery And not enrich the widow either long past fertility Money: Uranium (bound to be lead) throws out the firez . — the radium’s the credit — the wind in the trees, the hurricane in the palm trees, the tornado that lifts oceans . Trade winds that broached a continent drive the ship forward . Money sequestered enriches avarice, makes poverty: the direct cause of disaster . while the leak drips Let out the fire, let the wind go! Release the Gamma rays that cure the cancer . the cancer, usury. Let credit out . out from between the bars before the bank windows . credit, stalled in money, conceals the generative that thwarts art or buys it (without understanding), out of poverty of wit, to win, vicariously, the blue ribbon to win the Congressional Medal for bravery beyond the call of duty but not to end as a bridge-tender on government dole . Defeat may steel us in knowledge : money : joke to be wiped out sooner or later at stroke of pen . . just because they ain’t no water fit to drink in that spot (or you ain’t found none) don’t mean there ain’t no fresh water to be had NOWHERE . . —and to Tolson and to his ode and to Liberia and to Allen Tate (Give him credit) and to the South generally Selah! — and to 100 years of it — splits off the radium, the Gamma rays will eat their bastard bones out who are opposed Selah! Pobres bastardos, misquierdos Pobrecitos Ay! que pobres — yuh wanna be killed with your face in the dirt and a son-of-a-bitch of a Guardia Civil giving you the coup de (dis) grace right in the puss . ? Selah! Selah! Credit! I hope you have a long credit and a dirty one Selah! What is credit? the Parthenon What is money? the gold entrusted to Phideas for the statue of Pallas Athena, that he “put aside” for private purposes — the gold, in short, that Phideas stole You can’t steal credit : the Parthenon. — let’s skip any reference, at this time, to the Elgin marbles. Reuther — shot through a window, at whose pay? — then there’s Ben Shahn . Here follows a list of the mayors of 120 American cities in the years following the Civil War. . or the War Between the States, if you prefer . like cubes of fat in the blutwurst of the times . Credit. Credit. Credit. Give them all credit. They were the fathers of many a later novelist, no worse than the rest. Money : Joke could be wiped out at stroke of pen and was when gold and pound were devalued Money : small time reciprocal action relic precedent to stream-lined turbine : credit Uranium : basic thought—leadward Fractured : radium : credit Curie : woman (of no importance) genius : radium THE GIST credit : the gist IN venshun. O.KAY In venshun and seeinz az how yu hv/started. Will you consider a remedy of a lot : i.e. LOCAL control of local purchasing power . ? ? Difference between squalor of spreading slums and splendour of renaissance cities. Credit makes solid is related directly to the effort, work: value created and received, “the radiant gist” against all that scants our lives. III. Haven’t you forgot your virgin purpose, the language? What language? “The past is for those who lived in the past,” is all she told me. Shh! the old man’s asleep —all but for the tides, there is no river, silent now, twists and turns in his dreams . The ocean yawns! It is almost the hour —and did you ever know of a sixty year woman with child . ? Liste n! someone’s coming up the path, . perhaps it is not too late? Too late . JONATAN, bap. Oct. 29, 1752; m. Gritie (Haring?). He was born and brought up at Hoppertown (Hohokus), but in 1779 was running the grist and saw- mill at Wagaraw, now owned by the Alyeas. On the night of April 21, 1779, his wife was aroused by a noise as of someone trying to get into the lower part of the mill, where, for better security, he kept his horses. “Yawntan,” said she in Dutch, “someone is stealing your horses.” Lighting a lantern, he threw open the upper half-door and challenged the marauders. Instantly a shot was fired through the lower half-door, wounding him in the abdomen. He staggered back into the house and fell upon a bed, covering himself up in the blankets. A party of Tories, masked and disguised, rushed in, and, compelling his young wife to hold a candle, they savagely attacked the prostrate form. Once he seized one of the bayonettes and holding it for a moment, cried at his assailant: “Andries, this is an old grudge.” With redoubled fury the inhuman savages bayonetted him, until with a groan he expired. His two infant children who were wont to sleep in a trundle bed beneath his, were horrified spectators of their father’s massacre. After the murderers were gone, his wife and a neighbor took the blood out of the bed in double handfuls. The murdered man had received nineteen or twenty cruel bayonette thrusts. It was believed that some neighbor had led the Tories to the attack, less from political or pecuniary considerations than from motives of private revenge. Hopper was a captain in the Bergen County militia. One of his children was Albert, bap. Oct. 6, 1776. It is said that Jonathan’s children removed to Cincinnati, and there attained some prominence. Come on, get going. The tide’s in Leise, leise! Lentement! Che va piano, va lontano! Virtue, my kitten, is a complex reward in all languages, achieved slowly. . which reminds me of an old friend, now gone . —while he was still in the hotel business, a tall and rather beautiful young woman came to his desk one day to ask if there were any interesting books to be had on the premises. He, being interested in literature, as she knew, replied that his own apartment was full of them and that, though he couldn’t leave at the moment—Here’s my key, go up and help yourself. She thanked him and went off. He forgot all about her. After lunch he too went to his rooms not remembering until he was at the door that he had no key. But the door was unlatched and as he entered, a girl was lying naked on the bed. It startled him a little. So much so that all he could do was to remove his own clothes and lie beside her. Quite comfortable, he soon fell into a heavy sleep. She also must have slept. They wakened later, simultaneously, much refreshed. —another, once gave me an old ash-tray, a bit of porcelain inscribed with the legend, La Vertue est toute dans l’effort baked into the material, maroon on white, a glazed Venerian scallop . for ashes, fit repository for legend, a quieting thought: Virtue is wholly in the effort to be virtuous . This takes connivance, takes convoluted forms, takes time! A sea-shell . Let’s not dwell on childhood’s lecherous cousins. Why should we? Or even on as comparatively simple a thing as the composite dandelion that changes its face overnight . Virtue, a mask: the mask, virtuous . Kill the explicit sentence, don’t you think? and expand our meaning—by verbal sequences. Sentences, but not grammatical sentences: dead-falls set by schoolmen. Do you think there is any virtue in that? better than sleep? to revive us? She used to call me her country bumpkin Now she is gone I think of her as in Heaven She made me believe in it . a little Where else could she go? There was Something grandiose about her . Man and woman are not much emphasized as such at that age: both want the same thing . to be amused. Imagine me at her funeral. I sat way back. Stupid, perhaps but no more so than any funeral. You might think she had a private ticket. I think she did; some people, not many, make you feel that way. It’s in them. Virtue, she would say . (her version of it) is a stout old bird, unpredictable. And so I remember her, adding, as she did, clumsily, not being used to such talk, that — Nothing does, does as it used to do do do! I loved her. All the professions, all the arts, idiots, criminals to the greatest lack and deformity, the stable parts making up a man’s mind — fly after him attacking ears and eyes: small birds following marauding crows, in ecstasies . of fear and daring The brain is weak. It fails mastery, never a fact. To bring himself in, hold together wives in one wife and at the same time scatter it, the one in all of them . Weakness, weakness dogs him, fulfillment only a dream or in a dream. No one mind can do it all, runs smooth in the effort: toute dans l’ effort The greyhaired President (of Haiti), his women and children, at the water’s edge, sweating, leads off finally, after delays, huzzahs, songs for pageant reasons over the blue water . in a private plane with his blonde secretary. Scattered, the fierceness of knowledge comes flocking down again— souvenir of childhood, the skull of the white stone . There was Margaret of the big breasts and daring eyes who carried her head, where her small brain rattled, as the mind might wish, at the best, to be carried. There was Lucille, gold hair and blue eyes, very straight, who to the amazement of many, married a saloon keeper and lost her modesty. There was loving Alma, who wrote a steady hand, whose mouth never wished for relief. And the cold Nancy, with small firm breasts . You remember? . a high forehead, she who never smiled more than was sufficient but whose broad mouth was icy with pleasure startling the back and knees! whose words were few and never wasted. There were others — half hearted, the over-eager, the dull, pity for all of them, staring out of dirty windows, hopeless, indifferent, come too late and a few, too drunk with it — or anything — to be awake to receive it. All these and more — shining, struggling flies caught in the meshes of Her hair, of whom there can be no complaint, fast in the invisible net — from the back country, half awakened — all desiring. Not one to escape, not one . a fragrance of mown hay, facing the rapacious, the “great” . The whereabouts of Peter the Dwarf’s grave was unknown until the end of the last century, when, in 1885, P. Doremus, undertaker, was moving bodies from the cellar of the old church to make room for a new furnace, he disinterred a small coffin and beside it a large box. In the coffin was the headless skeleton of what he took to be a child until he opened the large box and found therein an enormous skull. In referring to the burial records it was learned that Peter the Dwarf had been so buried. Yellow, for genius, the Jap said. Yellow is your color. The sun. Everybody looked. And you, purple, he added, wind over water. My serpent, my river! genius of the fields, Kra, my adored one, unspoiled by the mind, observer of pigeons, rememberer of cataracts, voluptuary of gulls! Knower of tides, counter of hours, wanings and waxings, enumerator of snowflakes, starer through thin ice, whose corpuscles are minnows, whose drink, sand . Here’s to the baby, may it thrive! Here’s to the labia that rive to give it place in a stubborn world. And here’s to the peak from which the seed was hurled! In a deep-set valley between hills, almost hid by dense foliage lay the little village. Dominated by the Falls the surrounding country was a beautiful wilderness where mountain pink and wood violet throve: a place inhabited only by straggling trappers and wandering Indians. A print in colors by Paul Sandby, a well known water color artist of the eighteenth century, a rare print in the Public Library shows the old Falls restudied from a drawing made by Lieut. Gov. Pownall (excellent work) as he saw it in the year 1700. The wigwam and the tomahawk, the Totowa tribe . On either side lay the river-farms resting in the quiet of those colonial days: a hearty old Dutch stock, with a toughness to stick and hold fast, although not fast in making improvements. Clothing homespun. The people raised their own stock. Rude furniture, sanded floors, rush bottomed chair, a pewter shelf of Brittania ware. The wives spun and wove — many things that might appear disgraceful or distasteful today The Benson and Doremus estates for years were the only ones on the north side of the river. Dear Doc: Since I last wrote I have settled down more, am working on a Labor newspaper (N. J. Labor Herald, AFL) in Newark. The owner is an Assemblyman and so I have a chance to see many of the peripheral intimacies of political life which is in this neighborhood and has always had for me the appeal of the rest of the landscape, and a little more, since it is the landscape alive and busy. Do you know that the west side of the City Hall, the street, is nicknamed the Bourse, because of the continual political and banking haggle and hassel that goes on there? Also I have been walking the streets and discovering the bars— especially around the great Mill and River streets. Do you know this part of Paterson? I have seen so many things—negroes, gypsies, an incoherent bartender in a taproom overhanging the river, filled with gas, ready to explode, the window facing the river painted over so that the people can’t see in. I wonder if you have seen River Street most of all, because that is really the heart of what is to be seen. I keep wanting to write you a long letter about deep things I can show you, and will some day—the look of streets and people, events that have happened here and there. A.G. . . . . . . There were colored slaves. In 1791 only ten houses, all farm houses save one, The Godwin Tavern, the most historic house in Paterson, on River Street: a swinging sign on a high post with a full length picture of Washington painted on it, giving a squeaking sound when touched by the wind. Branching trees and ample gardens gave the village streets a delightful charm and the narrow old-fashioned brick walls added a dignity to the shading trees. It was a fair resort for summer sojourners on their way to the Falls, the main object of interest. The sun goes beyond Garret Mountain as evening descends, the green of its pine trees, fading under a crimson sky until all color is lost. In the town candle light appears. No lighted streets. It is as dark as Egypt. There is the story of the cholera epidemic the well known man who refused to bring his team into town for fear of infecting them but stopped beyond the river and carted his produce in himself by wheelbarrow — to the old market, in the Dutch style of those days. Paterson, N. J., Sept. 17—Fred Goodell Jr., twenty-two, was arrested early this morning and charged with the murder of his six-months-old daughter Nancy, for whom police were looking since Tuesday, when Goodell reported her missing. Continued questioning from last night until 1 a.m. by police headed by Chief James Walker drew the story of the slaying, police said, from the $40- a-week factory worker a few hours after he refused to join his wife, Marie, eighteen, in taking a lie detector test. At 2 a.m. Goodell led police a few blocks from his house to a spot on Garrett Mountain and showed them a heavy rock under which he had buried Nancy, dressed only in a diaper and placed in a paper shopping bag. Goodell told the police he had killed the child by twice snapping the wooden tray of a high chair into the baby’s face Monday morning when her crying annoyed him as he was feeding her. Dr. George Surgent, the county physician, said she died of a fractured skull. There was an old wooden bridge to Manchester, as Totowa was called in those days, which Lafayette crossed in 1824, while little girls strewed flowers in his path. Just across the river in what is now called the Old Gun Mill Yard was a nail factory where they made nails by hand. I remember going down to the old cotton mill one morning when the thermometer was down to 13 degrees below on the old bell post. In those days there were few steam whistles. Most of the mills had a bell post and bell, to ring out the news, “Come to work!” Stepping out of bed into a snow drift that had sifted in through the roof; then, after a porridge breakfast, walk five miles to work. When I got there I did pound the anvil for sartin’, to keep up circulation. In the early days of Paterson, the breathing spot of the village was the triangle square bounded by Park Street (now lower Main St.) and Bank Street. Not including the Falls it was the prettiest spot in town. Well shaded by trees with a common in the center where the country circus pitched its tents. On the Park Street side it ran down to the river. On the Bank Street side it ran to a roadway leading to the barnyard of the Goodwin House, the barnyard taking up part of the north side of the park. The circus was an antiquated affair, only a small tent, one ring show. They didn’t allow circuses to perform in the afternoon because that would close up the mills. Time in those days was precious. Only in the evenings. But they were sure to parade their horses about the town about the time the mills stopped work. The upshot of the matter was, the town turned out to the circus in the evening. It was lighted in those days by candles especially made for the show. They were giants fastened to boards hung on wires about the tent, a peculiar contrivance. The giant candles were placed on the bottom boards, and two rows of smaller candles one above the other tapering to a point, forming a very pretty scene and giving plenty of light. The candles lasted during the performance presenting a weird but dazzling spectacle in contrast with the showy performers — Many of the old names and some of the places are not remembered now: McCurdy’s Pond, Goffle Road, Boudinot Street. The Town Clock Building. The old-fashioned Dutch Church that burned down Dec. 14, 1871 as the clock was striking twelve midnight. Collet, Carrick, Roswell Colt, Dickerson, Ogden, Pennington . . The part of town called Dublin settled by the first Irish immigrants. If you intended residing in the old town you’d drink of the water of Dublin Spring. The finest water he ever tasted, said Lafayette. Just off Gun Mill yard, on the gully was a long rustic winding stairs leading to a cliff on the opposite side of the river. At the top was Fyfield’s tavern — watching the birds flutter and bathe in the little pools in the rocks formed by the falling mist — of the Falls . . Paterson, N. J., January 9, 1850:—The murder last night of two persons living at the Goffle, within two or three miles of this place has thrown our community into a state of intense excitement. The victims are John S. Van Winkle and his wife, an aged couple, and long residents of this county. The atrocious deed was accomplished as there appears no doubt by one John Johnson, a laboring farmer, and who at the time was employed by some of his neighbors in the same capacity. So far as we have been able to gather the particulars, it would seem that Johnson effected an entrance into the house through an upper window, by means of a ladder, and descending to the bedroom of his victims below, accomplished his murderous purpose by first attacking the wife who slept in front, then the husband, and again the wife. The second attack appears to have immediately deprived the wife of life; the husband is still living but his death is momentarily expected. The chief instrument used appears to have been a knife, though the husband bears one or more marks of a hatchet. The hatchet was found next morning either in bed or on the floor, and the knife on the window sill, where it was left by the murderer in descending to the ground. A boy only slept in the same dwelling..... The fresh snow, however, enabled his pursuers to find and arrest their man..... His object was doubtless money (which, however, he seemed not to have obtained). Johnson inquired why they had tied him, “what have I done?” .... He was taken to the scene of murder and shown the objects of his barbarous cruelty, but the sight produced no other sensible effect than to extort from him an expression of pity, he denying any knowledge of participation in the inhuman butchery. Trip a trap o’troontjes De vaarkens in de boontjes— De koeien in de klaver— De paarden in de haver— De eenden in de waterplas, Plis! Plas! Zoo groot mijn kleine Derrick was! You come today to see killed killed, killed as if it were a conclusion —a conclusion! a convincing strewing of corpses —to move the mind as tho’ the mind can be moved, the mind, I said by an array of hacked corpses: War! a poverty of resource . . Twenty feet of guts on the black sands of Iwo “What have I done?” —to convince whom? the sea worm? They are used to death and jubilate at it . . Murder. —you cannot believe that it can begin again, again, here again . here Waken from a dream, this dream of the whole poem . sea-bound, rises, a sea of blood —the sea that sucks in all rivers, dazzled, led by the salmon and the shad . Turn back I warn you (October 10, 1950) from the shark, that snaps at his own trailing guts, makes a sunset of the green water . But lullaby, they say, the tame sea is no more than sleep is . afloat with weeds, bearing seeds . Ah! float wrack, float words, snaring the seeds . I warn you, the sea is not our home. the sea is not our home The sea is our home whither all rivers (wither) run . the nostalgic sea sopped with our cries Thalassa! Thalassa! calling us home . I say to you, Put wax rather in your ears against the hungry sea it is not our home! . draws us in to drown, of losses and regrets . Oh that the rocks of the Areopagus had kept their sounds, the voices of the law! Or that the great theatre of Dionysius could be aroused by some modern magic to release what is bound in it, stones! that music might be wakened from them to melt our ears . The sea is not our home . —though seeds float in with the scum and wrack . among brown fronds and limp starfish . Yet you will come to it, come to it! The song is in your ears, to Oceanus where the day drowns . No! it is not our home. You will come to it, the blood dark sea of praise. You must come to it. Seed of Venus, you will return . to a girl standing upon a tilted shell, rose pink . Listen! Thalassa! Thalassa! Drink of it, be drunk! Thalassa immaculata: our home, our nostalgic mother in whom the dead, enwombed again cry out to us to return . the blood dark sea! nicked by the light alone, diamonded by the light . from which the sun alone lifts undamped his wings of fire! . . not our home! It is NOT our home. What’s that? —a duck, a hell-diver? A swimming dog? What, a sea-dog? There it is again. A porpoise, of course, following the mackerel . No. Must be the up- end of something sunk. But this is moving! Maybe not. Flotsam of some sort. A large, compact bitch gets up, black, from where she has been lying under the bank, yawns and stretches with a half suppressed half whine, half cry . She looks to sea, cocking her ears and, restless, walks to the water’s edge where she sits down, half in the water . When he came out, lifting his knees through the waves she went to him frisking her rump awkwardly . Wiping his face with his hand he turned to look back to the waves, then knocking at his ears, walked up to stretch out flat on his back in the hot sand . there were some girls, far down the beach, playing ball. —must have slept. Got up again, rubbed the dry sand off and walking a few steps got into a pair of faded overalls, slid his shirt on overhand (the sleeves were still rolled up) shoes, hat where she had been watching them under the bank and turned again to the water’s steady roar, as of a distant waterfall . Climbing the bank, after a few tries, he picked some beach plums from a low bush and sampled one of them, spitting the seed out, then headed inland, followed by the dog John Johnson, from Liverpool, England, was convicted after 20 minutes conference by the Jury. On April 30th, 1850, he was hung in full view of thousands who had gathered on Garrett Mountain and adjacent house tops to witness the spectacle. This is the blast the eternal close the spiral the final somersault the end. BOOK FIVE (1958) To the Memory of HENRI TOULOUSE LAUTREC, Painter I. In old age the mind casts off rebelliously an eagle from its crag — the angle of a forehead or far less makes him remember when he thought he had forgot — remember confidently only a moment, only for a fleeting moment — with a smile of recognition . . It is early . . . the song of the fox sparrow reawakening the world of Paterson — its rocks and streams frail tho it is from their long winter sleep In March — the rocks the bare rocks speak! — it is a cloudy morning. He looks out the window sees the birds still there — Not prophecy! NOT prophecy! but the thing itself! — the first phase, Lorca’s The Love of Don Perlimplin, the young girl no more than a child leads her aged bridegroom innocently enough to his downfall — —at the end of the play, (she was a hot little bitch but nothing unusual—today we marry women who are past their prime, Juliet was 13 and Beatrice 9 when Dante first saw her). Love’s whole gamut, the wedding night’s promiscuity in the girl’s mind, her determination not to be left out of the party, as a moral gesture, if ever there was one The moral proclaimed by the whorehouse could not be better proclaimed by the virgin, a price on her head, her maidenhead! sharp practice to hold on to that cheapening it: Throw it away! (as she did) The Unicorn the white one-horned beast thrashes about root toot a toot! faceless among the stars calling for its own murder Paterson, from the air above the low range of its hills across the river on a rock-ridge has returned to the old scenes to witness What has happened since Soupault gave him the novel the Dadaist novel to translate — The Last Nights of Paris. “What has happened to Paris since that time? and to myself”? A WORLD OF ART THAT THROUGH THE YEARS HAS SURVIVED! — the museum became real The Cloisters — on its rock casting its shadow — “laréa lité! la réalité! la réa, la réa, la réalité!” Dear Bill: I wish you and F. could have come. It was a grand day and we missed you two, one and all missed you. Forgetmenot, Wild columbine, white and purple violets, white narcissus, wild anemones and yards and yards of delicate wild windflowers along the brook showed up at their best. We didn’t have hard cider or applejack this time but wine and vodka and lots of victuals. The farm buildings are not “long gone” but exactly as you saw them. The erstwhile chicken house has been a studio for years, one D.E. envied when he saw it and it has been occupied by one person or another writing every summer when I am here which has been pretty continuously for some time. The barn too has a big roomy floor which anyone who finds a table and a chair in space enlivening is welcome to. E’s even fondled the idea of “doing something” about the barn and I wish they would. Their kids went in bathing in the brook, painted pictures and explored. If you ever feel like coming and get transportation please come. E’s will be up again before leaving Princeton in June. They will be in H. next year. J.G. is occupying the “Guest House” now. How lovely to read your memories of the place; a place is made of memories as well as the world around it. Most of the flowers were put in many years ago and thrive each spring, the wild ones in some new spot that is exciting to see. Hepatica and bloodroot are now all over the place, and trees that were infants are now tall creatures filled this season with orioles, some rare warblers like the Myrtle and magnolia warbler and a wren has the best nest in the garage (not to be confused with any uptodate shelter) where I had a coat lined with sheepskin hanging and the wren simply used it to back her nest against where she is sitting warm and pretty on five eggs. Best wishes and love from everyone who was here Josie The whore and the virgin, an identity: — through its disguises thrash about — but will not succeed in breaking free . an identity Audubon (Au-du-bon), (the lost Dauphin) left the boat downstream below the falls of the Ohio at Louisville to follow a trail through the woods across three states northward of Kentucky . . He saw buffalo and more a horned beast among the trees in the moonlight following small birds the chicadee in a field crowded with small flowers . . its neck circled by a crown! from a regal tapestry of stars! lying wounded wounded on his belly legs folded under him the bearded head held regally aloft . What but indirection will get to the end of the sphere? Here is not there, and will never be. The Unicorn has no match or mate . the artist has no peer . Death has no peer: wandering in the woods, a field crowded with small flowers in which the wounded beast lies down to rest We shall not get to the bottom: death is a hole in which we are all buried Gentile and Jew The flower dies down and rots away . But there is a hole in the bottom of the bag. It is the imagination which cannot be fathomed. It is through this hole we escape . . So through art alone, male and female, a field of flowers, a tapestry, spring flowers unequaled in loveliness, through this hole at the bottom of the cavern of death, the imagination escapes intact . he bears a collar round his neck hid in the bristling hair. Dear Dr. Williams: Thanks for your introduction. The book is over in England being printed, and will be out in July sometime. Your foreword is personal and compassionate and you got the point of what has happened. You should see what strength & gaiety there is beyond that though. The book will contain . . . I have never been interested in writing except for the splendor of actual experience etc. bullshit, I mean I’ve never been really crazy, confused at times. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I am leaving for the North pole this time on a ship in a few weeks. . . . I’ll see icebergs and write great white polar rhapsodies. Love to you, back in October and will pass thru Paterson to see family on my first trip to Europe. I have NOT absconded from Paterson. I have a whitmanesque mania & nostalgia for cities and detail & panorama and isolation in jungle and pole, like the image you pick up. When I’ve seen enough I’ll be back to splash in the Passaic again only with a body so naked and happy City Hall will have to call out the Riot Squad. When I come back I’ll make big political speeches in the mayoralty campaigns like I did when I was 16 only this time I’ll have W. C. Fields on my left and Jehovah on my right. Why not? Paterson is only a big sad poppa who needs compassion. . In any case Beauty is where I hang my hat. And reality. And America. There is no struggle to speak to the city, out of the stones etc. Truth is not hard to find . . . I’m not being clear, so I’ll shut up . . . I mean to say paterson is not a task like milton going down to hell, it’s a flower to the mind etc etc A magazine will be put out . . . etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Adios. A.G. IF YOU DON’T HAVE ANY TIME FOR ANYTHING ELSE PLEASE READ THE ENCLOSED SUNFLOWER SUTRA —the virgin and the whore, which most endures? the world of the imagination most endures: Pollock’s blobs of paint squeezed out with design! pure from the tube. Nothing else is real . . WALK in the world (you can’t see anything from a car window, still less from a plane, or from the moon!? Come off of it.) — a present, a “present” world, across three states (Ben Shahn saw it among its rails and wires, and noted it down) walked across three states for it . . a secret world, a sphere, a snake with its tail in its mouth rolls backward into the past . . . The whores grasping for your genitals, faces almost pleading—“two dolla, two dolla” till you almost go in with the sheer brute desire straining at your loins, the whisky and the fizzes and the cognac in you till a friend grabs you . . . “No . . . to a real house, this is shit.” A real house, a real house? Casa real? Casa de putas? And then the walk through the dark streets, joy of living, in being drunk and walking with other drunks, walking the streets of dust in a dusty year in a dusty century where everything is dust but you are young and you are drunk and there are women ready to love for some paper in your pocket. Through the streets with dozens of bands of other soldiers (they are soldiers even with civilian clothes, soldiers as you are but different and this band is different because you are you — and drunk and Baudelaire and Rimbaud and a soul with a book in it and drunk) A woman steps into the open door of a cafe and puts her hand between her legs and smiles at you . . . at you a whore smiles! And you yell back and all yell back and she yells and laughs and laughter fills . . . the . . . guitar soaked night air. And then the house, . . . and see a smooth faced girl against a door, all white . . . snow, the virgin, O bride . . . crook her finger and the vestal not-color of it, the clean hair of her and the beauty of her body in the orchid stench, in the vulgar assailing stench the fragility and you walk and sway across the floor, and reel against the dancers and push away the voice that embraces your ear and find her, still standing against the door and she is smooth-faced and wants four dollars but you make it three but four she says you argue and her hand on your belly and she moves it and four and you can hear the music spinning out its tropical redness the beer you gulp and touch the breast, the firmness FOUR no three and smile a girl is carried out of the room by a soldier (bride eternal) smile FOUR no three the hand! the breast, you touch grasp hold lust feel the curve of a buttock silent- smooth sliding under your palm, the dress, the hand! high heels clack clack laughs noise and her eyes are black and four? please and you pay four? no . three . and then yes four cuatro . . . cuatro dolares but twice, I go twice, ’andsome, come on, ’andsome. A child you follow her, the light whirling in your eyes the noise the other girls in the babel friend’s voice unintelligible, edged with laughter his face at which you smile though there is nothing to smile at but smile absurdly because making love to a whore is funny but it is not funny as her blood beneath flesh, her fingers fragile touches yours in rhythm not funny but heat and passion bright and white, brighter-white than lights of whorehouses, than the gin fizz white, white and deep as birth, deeper than death. G.S. A lady with the tail of her dress on her arm . her hair is slicked back showing the round head, like her cousin’s, the King, the royal consort’s, young as she . in a velvet bonnet, puce, slanted above the eyes, his legs are in striped hose, green and brown. The lady’s brow is serene to the sound of a huntsman’s horn — the birds and flowers, the castle showing through the leaves of the trees, a pheasant drinks at the fountain, his shadow drinks there also . cyclamen, columbine, if the art with which these flowers have been put down is to be trusted — and again oak leaves and twigs that brush the deer’s antlers . . the brutish eyes of the deer not to be confused with the eyes of the Queen are glazed with death . . a rabbit’s rump escaping through the thicket . One warm day in April, G.B. had the inspiration to go in swimming naked with the boys, among whom, of course, was her brother, a satyr if there ever was one, to beat anybody up who presumed to molest her. It was at Sandy Bottom, near Willow Point where in later years we used to have picnics. That was before she turned whore and got syphilis. L.M. about that time, a young sailor, went to Rio unafraid of “children’s diseases” as the French (and others) called them—but it was no joke as Gauguin found out when his brains began to rot away . the times today are safer for the fornicators the moral’s as you choose but the brain need not putrefy or petrify for fear of venereal disease unless you wish it “Loose your love to flow” while you are yet young male and female (if it is worth it to you) ’n cha cha cha you’d think the brain ’d be grafted on a better root II. “ . I am no authority on Sappho and do not read her poetry particularly well. She wrote for a clear gentle tinkling voice. She avoided all roughness. ‘The silence that is in the starry sky,’ gives something of her tone, . ” A.P. Peer of the gods is that man, who face to face, sits listening to your sweet speech and lovely laughter. It is this that rouses a tumult in my breast. At mere sight of you my voice falters, my tongue is broken. Straightway, a delicate fire runs in my limbs; my eyes are blinded and my ears thunder. Sweat pours out: a trembling hunts me down. I grow paler than dry grass and lack little of dying. 13 Nv Oke Hay my BilBill The Bull Bull, ameer. Is there anything in Ac Bul 2/ vide enc that seems cloudy to you, or INComprehensible/ or that having comprehended you disagree with? The hardest thing to discover is WHY someone else, apparently not an ape or a Roosevelt cannot understand something as simple as 2 plus 2 makes four. McNair Wilson has just writ me, that Soddy got interested and started to study “economics” and found out what they offered him wasn’t economics but banditry Wars are made to make debt, and the late one started by the ambulating dunghill FDR has been amply successful. and the stink that elevated him still emits a smell. Also the ten vols/treasury reports sent me to Rapallo show that in the years from departure of Wiggin till the mail stopped you suckers had paid ten billion for gold that cd/have been bought for SIX billion. Is this clear or do you still want DEEtails? That sovereignty inheres in the POWER to issue money, whether you have the right to do it or not. don’t let me crowd you. If there is anything here that is OBskewer , say so. don’t worry re Beum, He didnt say you told him to send me the book, merely that he had metChu. let the young educ the young. Only naive remark I found in Voltaire wuz when he found two good books on econ/ and wrote : “Now people will understand it.” end quote. But if the buzzards on yr( and Del M’s) list had been CLEAR I wdn’t have spent so much time clarifying their indistinctnesses. You agree that the offering da shittahd aaabull instead of history is undesirable ?????? There is a woman in our town walks rapidly, flat bellied in worn slacks upon the street where I saw her. Neither short nor tall, nor old nor young her face would attract no adolescent. Grey eyes looked straight before her. Her hair was gathered simply behind the ears under a shapeless hat. Her hips were narrow, her legs thin and straight. She stopped me in my tracks — until I saw her disappear in the crowd. An inconspicuous decoration made of sombre cloth, meant I think to be a flower, was pinned flat to her right breast — any woman might have done the same to say she was a woman and warn us of her mood. Otherwise she was dressed in male attire, as much as to say to hell with you. Her expression was serious, her feet were small. And she was gone! . if ever I see you again as I have sought you daily without success I’ll speak to you, alas too late! ask, What are you doing on the streets of Paterson? a thousand questions: Are you married? Have you any children? And, most important, your NAME! which of course she may not give me — though I cannot conceive it in such a lonely and intelligent woman . have you read anything that I have written? It is all for you or the birds . or Mezz Mezzrow who wrote . Knocking around with Rapp and the Rhythm Kings put the finishing touches on me and straightened me out. To be with those guys made me know that any white man, if he thought straight and studied hard, could sing and dance and play with the Negro. You didn’t have to take the finest and most original and honest music in America and mess it up because you were a white man; you could dig the colored man’s real message and get in there with him, like Rapp. I felt good all over after a session with the Rhythm Kings, and I began to miss that tenor sax. Man, I was gone with it — inspiration’s mammy was with me. And to top it all, I walked down Madison Street one day and what I heard made me think my ears were lying. Bessie Smith was shouting the Downhearted Blues from a record in a music shop. I flew in and bought up every record they had by the mother of the blues — Cemetery Blues, Bleedin’ Hearted, and Midnight Blues — then I ran home and listened to them for hours on the victrola. I was put in a trance by Bessie’s mournful stories and the patterns of true harmony in the piano background, full of little runs that crawled up and down my spine like mice. Every note that woman wailed vibrated on the tight strings of my nervous system; every word she sang answered a question I was asking. You couldn’t drag me away from that victrola, even to eat. . . or the Satyrs, a pre-tragic play, a satyric play! All plays were satyric when they were most devout. Ribald as a Satyr! Satyrs dance! all the deformities take wing Centaurs leading to the rout of the vocables in the writings of Gertrude Stein — but you cannot be an artist by mere ineptitude The dream is in pursuit! The neat figures of Paul Klee fill the canvas but that is not the work of a child . the cure began, perhaps with the abstraction of Arabic art Dürer with his Melancholy was aware of it — the shattered masonry. Leonardo saw it, the obsession, and ridiculed it in La Gioconda. Bosch’s congeries of tortured souls and devils who prey on them fish swallowing their own entrails Freud Picasso Juan Gris. A letter from a friend saying: For the last three nights I have slept like a baby without liquor or dope of any sort! we know that a stasis from a chrysalis has stretched its wings . like a bull or a Minotaur or Beethoven in the scherzo from the Fifth Symphony stomped his heavy feet I saw love mounted naked on a horse on a swan the tail of a fish the bloodthirsty conger eel and laughed recalling the Jew in the pit among his fellows when the indifferent chap with the machine gun was spraying the heap . he had not yet been hit but smiled comforting his companions . comforting his companions Dreams possess me and the dance of my thoughts involving animals the blameless beasts (Q. Mr. Williams, can you tell me, simply, what poetry is? A. Well . . . I would say that poetry is language charged with emotion. It’s words, rhythmically organized . . . A poem is a complete little universe. It exists separately. Any poem that has worth expresses the whole life of the poet. It gives a view of what the poet is. Q. All right, look at this part of a poem by E. E. Cummings, another great American poet: (im)c-a-t(mo) b,j;l:e FallleA ps.!fl OattumblI sh?dr IftwhirlF (U1) (1Y) &&& Is this poetry? A. I would reject it as a poem. It may be, to him, a poem. But I would reject it. I can’t understand it. He’s a serious man. So I struggle very hard with it — and I get no meaning at all. Q. You get no meaning? But here’s part of a poem you yourself have written: “2 partridges/2 mallard ducks/a Dungeness crab/24 hours out/of the Pacific/and 2 live-frozen/trout/from Denmark . . .” Now, that sounds just like a fashionable grocery list! A. It is a fashionable grocery list. Q. Well — is it poetry? A. We poets have to talk in a language which is not English. It is the American idiom. Rhythmically it’s organized as a sample of the American idiom. It has as much originality as jazz. If you say “2 partridges, 2 mallard ducks, a Dungeness crab” — if you treat that rhythmically, ignoring the practical sense it forms a jagged pattern. It is, to my mind, poetry. Q. But if you don’t “ignore the practical sense” . . . you agree that it is a fashionable grocery list. A. Yes. Anything is good material for poetry. Anything. I’ve said it time and time again. Q. Aren’t we supposed to understand it? A. There is a difference of poetry and the sense. Sometimes modern poets ignore sense completely. That’s what makes some of the difficulty . . . The audience is confused by the shape of the words. Q. But shouldn’t a word mean something when you see it? A. In prose, an English word means what it says. In poetry, you’re listening to two things . . . you’re listening to the sense, the common sense of what it says. But it says more. That is the difficulty. . . . . ) III. Peter Brueghel, the elder, painted a Nativity, painted a Baby new born! among the words. Armed men, savagely armed men armed with pikes, halberds and swords whispering men with averted faces got to the heart of the matter as they talked to the pot bellied greybeard (center) the butt of their comments, looking askance, showing their amazement at the scene, features like the more stupid German soldiers of the late war — but the Baby (as from an illustrated catalogue in colors) lies naked on his Mother’s knees — it is a scene, authentic enough, to be witnessed frequently among the poor (I salute the man Brueghel who painted what he saw — many times no doubt among his own kids but not of course in this setting The crowned and mitred heads of the 3 men, one of them black, who had come, obviously from afar (highwaymen?) by the rich robes they had on — offered to propitiate their gods Their hands were loaded with gifts — they had eyes for visions in those days — and saw, saw with their proper eyes, these things to the envy of the vulgar soldiery He painted the bustle of the scene, the unkempt straggling hair of the old man in the middle, his sagging lips —— incredulous that there was so much fuss about such a simple thing as a baby born to an old man out of a girl and a pretty girl at that But the gifts! (works of art, where could they have picked them up or more properly have stolen them?) — how else to honor an old man, or a woman? — the soldiers’ ragged clothes, mouths open, their knees and feet broken from 30 years of war, hard campaigns, their mouths watering for the feast which had been provided Peter Brueghel the artist saw it from the two sides: the imagination must be served — and he served dispassionately It is no mortal sin to be poor — anything but this featureless tribe that has the money now — staring into the atom, completely blind — without grace or pity, as if they were so many shellfish. The artist, Brueghel, saw them . : the suits of his peasants were of better stuff, hand woven, than we can boast. — we have come in our time to the age of shoddy, the men are shoddy, driven by their bosses, inside and outside the job to be done, at a profit. To whom? But not true of the Portuguese mason, his own boss “in the new country” who is building a wall for me, moved by oldworld knowledge of what is “virtuous” . “that stuff they sell you in the stores now-a-days, no good, break in your hands . that manufactured stuff, from the factory, break in your hands, no care what they turn out” The Gospel according to St. Matthew, Chapter I, verse 18, — Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Miriam was espoused to Joseph before they came together she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. 19 Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away privately. 20 But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord, appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Miriam thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. Luke . . And Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart. . no woman is virtuous who does not give herself to her lover — forthwith Dear Bill: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I am told by a dear friend in Paris, G.D. who is married to Henri Matisse’s daughter, and who is the one vibrant head I have met in Europe, that France today is ruled by the gendarme and the concierge. In socialist Denmark I knew a highly intelligent author, a woman, who had come to America and there had a child by a wretched scribbler. Poor and forsaken she had returned to Copenhagen, where she earned her niggard indigence doing reviews for the Politiken, and giving occasional lectures on Middle English and early Danish. She lived in the slummy part of that beautiful city, trying to support a wonderful boy, sturdy, loving, and very masculine. It was my joy to bring him oranges, chocolate, and those precious morsels which his mother could not afford. She told me that the socialist police had called on her one night, asking why she had not paid her taxes to the government. Poverty was her reply. Do you recall the epitaph on Thomas Churchyard’s tombstone? ‘Poverty and Obscurity doth this tomb enclose.’ A week later they returned, threatening to remove her furniture and have it impounded by the government. When she again pleaded that if she gave what Kroners she had her little boy would starve, the police said: ‘We went to the Vin Handel last evening, and learned from the proprietor that you had bought a bottle of wine; if you can afford to drink wine you certainly can pay your taxes.’ She then said ‘I am so poor, and so driven to despair by it that I had to have a bottle of wine to relieve me of my melancholia.’ I am quite sure too that people only have the kind of government that their bellies crave. Furthermore, I cannot cure one soul in the earth. Plato took three journeys to Dionysius, the Tyrant of Syracuse, and once was almost killed and on another occasion was nearly sold into slavery because he imagined that he influenced a devil to model his tyranny upon The Republic. Seneca was the teacher of Nero, and Aristotle tutored Alexander of Macedon. What did they teach? We are content here because it is cheap; my wife can eat chateaubriand for seven pesetas, about 15 or 16 cents. Going to the shops in the morning is a ritual; there is the greeting from the woman who runs the Panaderia, and the salutation (courtesy always eases the spirit and relieves the nervous system), from the man or his wife at the lecheria (where you get milk), and an expansive smile from the humble woman who sells you three pesetas worth of helio, ice.... Edward Paterson has grown older the dog of his thoughts has shrunk to no more than “a passionate letter” to a woman, a woman he had neglected to put to bed in the past . And went on living and writing answering letters and tending his flower garden, cutting his grass and trying to get the young to foreshorten their errors in the use of words which he had found so difficult, the errors he had made in the use of the poetic line: “ . the unicorn against a millefleurs background, . ” There’s nothing sentimental about the technique of writing. It can’t be learned, you’ll say, by a fool. But any young man with a mind bursting to get out, to get down on a page even a clean sentence — gets courage from an older man who stands ready to help him — to talk to. A flight of birds, all together, seeking their nests in the season a flock before dawn, small birds “That slepen al the night with open yë,” moved by desire, passionately, they have come a long way, commonly. Now they separate and go by pairs each to his appointed mating. The colors of their plumage are undecipherable in the sun’s glare against the sky but the old man’s mind is stirred by the white, the yellow, the black as if he could see them there. Their presence in the air again calms him. Though he is approaching death he is possessed by many poems. Flowers have always been his friends, even in paintings and tapestries which have lain through the past in museums jealously guarded, treated against moths. They draw him imperiously to witness them, make him think of bus schedules and how to avoid the irreverent — to refresh himself at the sight direct from the 12th century what the old women or the young or men or boys wielding their needles to put in her green thread correctly beside the purple, myrtle beside holly and the brown threads besides: together as the cartoon has plotted it for them. All together, working together — all the birds together. The birds and leaves are designed to be woven in his mind eating and . . all together for his purposes — the aging body with the deformed great-toe nail makes itself known coming to search me out — with a rare smile among the thronging flowers of that field where the Unicorn is penned by a low wooden fence in April! the same month when at the foot of the post he saw the man dig up the red snake and kill it with a spade. Godwin told me its tail would not stop wriggling till after the sun goes down — he knew everything or nothing and died insane when he was still a young man The (self) direction has been changed the serpent its tail in its mouth “the river has returned to its beginnings” and backward (and forward) it tortures itself within me until time has been washed finally under: and “I knew all (or enough) it became me . ” — the times are not heroic since then but they are cleaner and freer of disease the mind rotted within them . we’ll say the serpent has its tail in its mouth AGAIN! the all-wise serpent Now I come to the small flowers that cluster about the feet of my beloved — the hunt of the Unicorn and the god of love of virgin birth The mind is the demon drives us . well, would you prefer it to turn vegetable and wear no beard? — shall we speak of love seen only in a mirror —no replica? reflecting only her impalpable spirit? which is she whom I see and not touch her flesh? The Unicorn roams the forest of all true lovers’ minds. They hunt it down. Bow wow! sing hey the green holly! — every married man carries in his head the beloved and sacred image of a virgin whom he has whored . but the living fiction a tapestry silk and wool shot with silver threads a milk white one horned beast I, Paterson, the King- self . saw the lady through the rough woods outside the palace walls among the stench of sweating horses and gored hounds yelping with pain the heavy breathing pack to see the dead beast brought in at last across the saddle bow among the oak trees. Paterson, keep your pecker up whatever the detail! Anywhere is everywhere: You can learn from poems that an empty head tapped on sounds hollow in any language! The figures are of heroic size. The woods are cold though it is summer the lady’s gown is heavy and reaches to the grass. All about, small flowers fill the scene. A second beast is brought in wounded. And a third, survivor of the chase, lies down to rest a while, his regal neck fast in a jeweled collar. A hound lies on his back eviscerated by the beast’s single horn. Take it or leave it, if the hat fits — put it on. Small flowers seem crowding to be in on the act: the white sweet rocket, on its branching stem, four petals one near the other to fill in the detail from frame to frame without perspective touching each other on the canvas make up the picture: the cranky violet like a knight in chess, the cinque-foil, yellow faced — this is a French or Flemish tapestry— the sweetsmelling primrose growing close to the ground, that poets have made famous in England, I cannot tell it all: slippered flowers crimson and white, balanced to hang on slender bracts, cups evenly arranged upon a stem, foxglove, the eglantine or wild rose, pink as a lady’s ear lobe when it shows beneath the hair, campanella, blue and purple tufts small as forget-me-not among the leaves. Yellow centers, crimson petals and the reverse, dandelion, love-in-a-mist, cornflowers, thistle and others the names and perfumes I do not know. The woods are filled with holly (I have told you, this is a fiction, pay attention), the yellow flag of the French fields is here and a congeries of other flowers as well: daffodils and gentian, the daisy, columbine petals myrtle, dark and light and calendulas The locust tree in the morning breeze outside her window where one branch moves quietly undulating upward and about and back and forth does not remind me more than of an old woman’s smile — a fragment of the tapestry preserved on an end wall presents a young woman with rounded brow lost in the woods (or hiding) announced . . (that is, the presentation) by the blowing of a hunter’s horn where he stands all but completely hid in the leaves. She interests me by her singularity, her courtly dress among the leaves, listening The expression of her face, where she stands removed from the others — the virgin and the whore, an identity, both for sale to the highest bidder! and who bids higher than a lover? Come out of it if you call yourself a woman. I give you instead, a young man sharing the female world in Hell’s despight, graciously — once on a time . on a time: Caw! Caw! Caw! the crows cry! In February! in February they begin it. She did not want to live to be an old woman to wear a china door-knob in her vagina to hold her womb up — but she came to that, resourceful, what? He was the first to turn her up and never left her till he left her with child, as any soldier would until the camp broke up. She maybe was “tagged” as Osamu Dazai and his saintly sister would have it She was old when she saw her grandson: You young people think you know everything. She spoke in her Cockney accent and paused looking at me hard: The past is for those that lived in the past. Cessa! — learning with age to sleep my life away: saying . The measure intervenes, to measure is all we know, a choice among the measures . . the measured dance “unless the scent of a rose startle us anew” Equally laughable is to assume to know nothing, a chess game massively, “materially,” compounded! Yo ho! ta ho! We know nothing and can know nothing but the dance, to dance to a measure contrapuntally, Satyrically, the tragic foot. Appendix A BOOK VI (c.1961) Jan.4/61 Paterson 6 The intimate name you were known as to your intimates in that reaks was The Genius, before your enimies got hold of you you knew the Falls and read Greek fluently It did not stop the bullet that killed you - close after dawn at Weehawken that September dawn - you waned to or daninize the country so that we should all stick together and make a little money a rich man John Jay, James Madison . let’s read about it! Words are the burden of poems, poems are made of wods 1/8/61 the dandelion - tions-tooth - ineffegee of flence old Hudson Rver work, might as well have been of Paterson a crude cheap cheap Jar{???} made to contain pickeled peaches or eder berries casually with all the art of domestic husbandry or the kitchen shelf a royal bluecurving on itself to make a simple flour design to decorate my bedroom wall come out of itself to be an abstract desigs withou design to be anything but itself for than a chinese poem who drowned embracing the reflection of the moon in the river - or the image of a frosty{???} elm outlined in {???} gayest of of all pantomimes Dance, dance! loosen your limbs rom that art which holds you faster than the drugs which hold you fater - dandelion on my bedroom wall. 1/1/61 As Weehawken is to Hamilton {???} to Provence we’ll say, he hated it of which he knew nothing and cared less and used it inhis scheems - so founding the country which was to increase to be the wonder of the world in its day which was to exceed his London on which he patterened it (A key figure in the development) If any one is important more important than the - point of a dagger - or a poem is: or an irrelevance {???} in the life of a people: see Da Da or the murders of a Staline or a Li Po or an obscre Montezuma or a forgotten Socrates or Aristotle before the destruction of the library of Alexandria ( as note derisively by Berad Shaw ) by fire in which the poes or Sappho were lost and brings us ( Alex was born out of wedlock ) illegitimately perversion {???} righed though that alone does not a make a poet or a statesman - Wahington was a six foot four man with a w{???}k voice and a slow mind which made it Inconvenient for him to move fast - and so he stayed. He had a will bred In the slow woods so that when he moved the world moved out of has way. Paterson 6 Book 6 Lucy had a womb like every other woman her father sold her so she told me to Charlie for 3 hundred dollars she couldn’t read or write fresh out of the old country she hadn’t had her changes yet I delivered her of 13 children before she came around she was vulgar but fiercely loyal to me she had a friend Mrs. Blackinger an ##### Irish woman who could telll a story when she’d a bit taken Appendix B A Note on the Text Paterson has a textual history that is a suitable parallel to the colorful past of the city that is its focus. But this is also a textual history that immensely complicates the preparation of a new edition. These complications include the serial composition and publication of the poem over twenty years, its author’s declining health over that time, its text being reset serially for a popular edition that its author gave progressively less attention to, and a number of posthumous changes to the text of the poem’s later books. Until the present edition, the reset text of the popular edition, as repaginated in 1969, has been the only collected text of the poem in print, but this 1969 text is very problematic. From the beginning of the 1950s, even before his first serious stroke, Williams evidently became impatient with checking the entirely reset, collected printings of Paterson that New Directions issued as the limited first edition printings of each book became sold out. Mrs. Williams wrote to David McDowell of New Directions on April 5, 1950, that the printers handling the “reprint of Paterson III are pretty much at sea about the whole thing. The spacing — the paging — etc- etc,” and that Williams, “no proof reader ... threw it aside saying—‘To hell with it—let it wait until Jim [Laughlin] gets back.’” Mrs. Williams requests that when McDowell next meets with Williams “if the subject comes up— set him straight—if my suspicions are correct—that he should not be concerned with reprints” (Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas). Unfortunately, the reset text was no mere reprint, and the spacing and other visual elements of Book III suffered a good deal of corruption in the popular edition. By the time of Book V in 1958, Williams’ capacity to check his work and that of his typists was quite limited, especially by vision problems. He also experienced increasing difficulty with the act of typing itself. His condition had deteriorated even further when he was forced to abandon work on the projected Book VI in early 1961. In 1963, the first edition text of Book V was subjected to more than sixty posthumous revisions when reset for the first complete collected Paterson. Subsequently the spacing of many passages throughout the 1963 text suffered corruption when in 1969 it was cut and pasted for a reprinting that reduced the pagination by forty pages. These complications are compounded by the selective degree of attention Williams gave to different parts of individual books. When checking the retyped drafts of Paterson, and the stages of its printing, Williams always gave the prose sections of his poem less attention than he did the poetry. The manuscripts show this tendency increasing with the later books. Thus not only does the serial nature of the poem’s composition and publication produce different degrees of authorial attention to the different books in their different printings over time, but during composition the author looked at some parts of his poem more carefully than at others. In fact, most of the textual problems I have faced in preparing this new edition occur in the areas of the poem’s prose, and in the spacing corruptions introduced by the reset printings. In view of Williams’ limited attention to the reset printings of his poem, for this edition I have taken the first editions of each book as copy text. The design and pagination of this new text are also based on the first editions. At the same time, I have incorporated such revisions of the first edition texts as Williams appears to have authorized, and have made individual decisions on the very small number of changes that occur between the late typescripts and the first printed version. I have also tried to be sensitive to the way that Williams’ compositional process has left its mark on the text of all six books, and have weighed this aspect of the poem in making decisions that also involve considering the more limited degree of authorial involvement in the prose, in the reset texts, and in the first edition of Book V. My editorial decisions were further complicated by not all the necessary evidence being available, although fortunately the gaps are mostly from material associated with the earlier books. In looking at the wealth of material that is available, I have consulted the manuscripts of the various parts of the poem held by Kent State University, the University of Virginia, the Houghton Library of Harvard University, SUNY Buffalo, and the Beinecke Library at Yale. I have also consulted a number of private archives, including the New Directions files in New York and Norfolk, and the papers of figures in some way connected to the poem, where I was able to track down the family or literary executor. Through these materials much of the history of the poem’s composition can be traced. Kent State holds a version of the Book I typescript that went to the printer, and that is dated by Williams March 1, 1945. The library holds the galleys that were set up from this version, and upon which Williams made many excisions, cutting about a tenth of his text. The library also holds a set of page proofs set up from these edited galleys. These materials came through a private donor, and originally through the New York dealer House of Books. (Vivienne Koch notes in the preface to her 1950 study William Carlos Williams that she possesses “the emended galley proofs of Book I given to her by James Laughlin.”) In addition, Kent State holds a late typescript of Book III, dated May 18, 1949, by Williams, and inscribed by him to David Ignatow. The University of Virginia received the material sold in 1964 by Kathleen Hoagland, Williams’ friend, novelist, and local historian, who typed some of the late drafts of Books I-IV. The library holds the carbons of these drafts, with valuable annotations added by Ms. Hoagland, probably at the time of the sale. The Hoagland material also includes some of the poem’s source materials—letters and historical summaries—with which she was involved. The New Directions materials at The Houghton Library include the printer’s typescript of Book IV, for Book V the printer’s typescript and a typescript for magazine excerpts, page proofs of the first edition of Book V, and the galleys of Book V’s reset text for the 1963 collected Paterson. Most of the poem’s manuscripts are with the major repositories of the poet’s material, at Buffalo and Yale. In general, Buffalo holds most of the material associated with the first three books (including another set of page proofs for Book I), and Yale the material for the last two, although Yale holds some early drafts of the first three books, and Buffalo early drafts of Book IV. In the Neil Baldwin and Steven Meyers catalogue of the Buffalo collection, the Paterson material covers El to E30. At Yale the Paterson manuscripts are numbered Za186 to Za190, although a few early drafts of Book V material are filed with some currently uncatalogued papers donated by John Thirlwall in the late 1960s. The major gaps in the material for preparing an edition are the lack of a late draft, galleys or page proofs for Book II, the lack of galleys or page proofs for Book III, or galleys for Book IV. Some of this material could be in private hands, although my study of sale catalogues and queries to booksellers produced no leads. Fortunately, I was able to consult one copy of the page proofs of Book IV at Dartmouth College Library, where Richard Eberhart had donated the set he received for a New York Times book review. Also unavailable to me were some of the source materials for the poem’s prose, and while this complicated a few editorial decisions, the main effect of these gaps was to limit the record I hoped to provide of the differences between the source materials and the poem’s version of them. The letters from Alva N. Turner and Edward Dahlberg excerpted in Book I are not with the collections of their correspondence to Williams at Buffalo and Yale, and the originals of the letters from Marcia Nardi used in Book II are not filed with her other letters to Williams in the two collections. I was also unable to find the sources of a few of the prose passages. But generally I was able to record the source, thanks to the excellent pioneer work of such scholars as Benjamin Sankey, Mike Weaver, John Thirlwall and Ralph Nash. In addition, Williams sometimes provided clues himself in his notes on the manuscripts, and I was further helped by being able to consult the copies of the poem owned and annotated by Thirlwall and Norman Holmes Pearson, both close friends of the poet, and by the annotations of Kathleen Hoagland on her carbons at Virginia. With the help of the manuscripts and these sources, I was also able to clarify and correct some attributions that have appeared in earlier scholarship. Two additional sources for the poem’s prose that might have been very helpful for the edition are also missing. John Thirlwall told both Norman Holmes Pearson (in a letter of October 27, 1953, private collection) and Benjamin Sankey (see p. 228 of his Companion to Paterson) that Williams owned a bound file of The Prospector. Within the pages of this newspaper, which reprinted articles on local history, Williams and Kathleen Hoagland found some of the historical sources used in the poem. Sankey, citing Thirlwall, records Williams’ holdings as “for 1935–1936,” whereas Thirlwall told Pearson “Bill has bound together the issues from Friday, July 3, 1936 to Thursday, November 12, 1936.” The more exact description covers exactly the run of The Prospector during which its contents were devoted almost entirely to local history, rather than contemporary local news. But whatever the particular issues, I have been unable to track down Williams’ copy. Equally fruitless has been my attempt to find Kathleen Hoagland’s copy of the paper (which could be the same item that Thirlwall refers to). When she offered her Williams material for sale in 1964, she also offered a run of The Prospector. Unfortunately, Clifton Waller Barrett, who purchased the Hoagland material for the University of Virginia, chose not to purchase what might have seemed at the time a publication only tangential to Paterson, and my attempts to trace the fate of the item through dealers’ records have been to no avail. While I have been able to study other copies of the newspaper, Williams’ and Ms. Hoagland’s own copies may well have had a particular value for tracing and recording the sources of the poem. The missing Marcia Nardi letters in Book II brought their own textual and annotation problems. At the Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas, among the papers purchased from Ms. Nardi in 1966 is a version of the long letter that, in a revised form, is the source of the prose ending Book II. The question here is, who did the revising? Although some scholars have argued that Williams revised Nardi’s prose, citing what appears to have been a copy of this Texas version, supplied by Nardi herself, Williams’ practice generally in Paterson is to cut and edit letters, but very rarely to make verbal changes, and even then of only a word or two. My full reasons for treating the Texas material as an earlier draft by Nardi and not as a copy of a source document subsequently revised by Williams, are spelled out in the textual notes. In the absence of the original letter, and of the other Nardi letter excerpted in Book II, I treat the earliest Buffalo transcription of them as a source from which to record subsequent changes (chiefly excisions). This is also the route I take with other missing source documents—turning to what appears to be the earliest version available, although of course that version may well already have been shaped by Williams. A further complication in my attempt to record the relationship of the prose sources to the final text concerns the missing papers of the late Bloomfield historian and artist Herbert Fisher. Mr. Fisher’s involvement with the poem was uncovered by Mike Weaver in preparing his 1971 study William Carlos Williams: The American Background. Fisher wrote to Weaver that c. 1938–1940 Williams “stopped by our house ... with a friend, said he had heard of me and wanted to make my acquaintance.” At that time Williams borrowed some notes, not a manuscript, of mine which he used in his Paterson. He was making an outline for his poem. When his book came out I was surprised (not angry) to find he had copied word for word. However, the material was not original with me! I had obtained the material from William Nelson, William Scott, Mr. Longwell, and other historians. Kitty Hoagland typed the manuscript for Mr. Williams. She had borrowed my notes and recognized them as mine and mentioned the fact to Mr. Williams. Later, a rumor got around that Mr. Williams had stolen the material for his book from me. He did not. The material he used he could have obtained from the original sources and I never considered it as stolen material. I freely loaned it to him. I hope this will put the record straight on that score. Mr. Fisher’s manuscripts had disappeared by the time he was writing to Weaver, evidently the result of his 1963 move to Hot Springs, S.D. My enquiries to Mr. Fisher’s friends in Hot Springs, and my visits to the Bloomfield Public Library and the Bloomfield Historical Society failed to turn them up. But the role of Mr. Fisher’s notes in even the earliest existent drafts of the poem is unclear. Mr. Fisher’s account, and the commentary he provided to Weaver over a number of letters, led Weaver to speculate in some of his own annotations to the poem that the verbal differences between the poem and some of its sources were the result of Mr. Fisher’s mistranscription or Williams misreading his handwriting (see Weaver 118–119). But Williams, to my knowledge, never mentions Mr. Fisher in his accounts of the poem’s development, and although Kathleen Hoagland annotates Mr. Fisher three times in her notes on the Virginia typescripts, the references are all to the opening pages of Book I. Mr. Fisher’s letters to Weaver are replete with a deep knowledge of local history and lore, and in the early 1960s Mr. Fisher published a long series of newspaper articles on the subject. But my study of the Paterson typescripts has led me to conclude that the connection here is looser than he recalled writing to Weaver twenty-five years later. While many of the historical narratives that appear in the poem are repeated almost verbatim in various histories of Paterson and New Jersey, including the sources cited by Mr. Fisher in his letters, a close study of Williams’ earliest available transcription usually reveals which particular source he used, and this is not always the version Mr. Fisher cites to Weaver. Sometimes Mr. Fisher recalls prose passages as his particular synthesis from a variety of sources, but Williams’ typescripts and revisions clearly reveal a different source and development. Williams’ changes from his sources can be traced through the various retypings, as noted above. It appears that Mr. Fisher, along with Kathleen Hoagland and probably others, provided Williams with direction and what amounted to a bibliography of historical sources, that he then, for the most part, went on to study himself. This part of his thinking on the poem thus took its place alongside the collage-like letters of David Lyle, a correspondent from Paterson, Ms. Hoagland’s historical writing, and his own trials and experiments, to bring about his growing conception of the poem’s final form. Within the limitations imposed by what I was able to find, I record the differences between the prose sources and the Paterson version in the notes, and record any evidence of authorial revision behind the changes. Most of the small verbal differences that are introduced into the various retypings are probably transcription slips by Williams or the typists who helped him. On the whole in the first four books I have let them stand, since their presence reflects Williams’s compositional methods. The typescripts also provide ample evidence that if a retyped sentence contained an obvious error, Williams revised for sense rather than going back to the source or even to the previous typescript (see, for example, the prose from the first Marcia Nardi letter in Book I, or the first Allen Ginsberg letter in Book IV). I have, however, corrected a handful of proper names and dates, where Williams’ own transcription accurately followed his source and the error crept in in subsequent retypings (for example, I have corrected the name of the Rev. Hooper Cumming, the date in the first line of Book I’s eel harvest, and the date of Sam Patch’s fatal dive—the last example discovered by Weaver and corrected for the 1968 printing). I concluded, however, that the prose of Book V had to be treated as a special case. This was also the conclusion of the New Directions staff, guided by a number of well-intentioned readers, when Book V was reset for the collected Paterson in 1963. Williams’ own typed first transcription drafts are usually close to his source, although as was his practice, some sentences or paragraphs are omitted. But more than any other book, the prose of Book V goes through verbal changes in subsequent retypings that display all the characteristics of mistranscription. (Mrs. Williams commented to James Laughlin in a 1963 letter suggesting changes to Book V’s extract from Mezz Mezzrow, “the typist... I remember did that part under pressure” [New Directions archives].) As noted above, Williams’ capacity to check the work of his typists was severely diminished by 1957, and correspondence at the Ransom Center reveals that among those who helped him review the typescripts was Louis Zukofsky. The main attention of both poets clearly went into checking the accuracy of the poetry. I felt that I had to reject the solution arrived at for Book V’s prose in the 1963 and subsequent printings, which amounted to a rather piecemeal and inconsistent restoration of the language of the original sources in Book V (and in some of Book IV). These changes were made possible by the source letters from Allen Ginsberg, Josephine Herbst, and Ezra Pound having turned up among the Williams papers at Yale. In addition, Gilbert Sorrentino forwarded a few revisions for the prose sketch of his included in Book V, to make sense of some garbled sentences. But all these changes went unrecorded, sometimes added new printing errors, and were evidently made without consulting the typescripts. The hope, reasonably, was to try to rescue Williams’ intentions in those parts of the poem prepared when his physical handicaps impaired him, but the result was that identified prose sources and letters from well-known writers were thus altered, largely in Books III, IV, and V, whereas the prose in the other books remained untouched—although it, too, differs from its sources. And little notice was taken of possible spacing errors in Book V or in the reset versions of the earlier books. A few additional posthumous changes to Book V occurred through suggestions by John Thirlwall, who was solicited for his comments. Some further revisions, such as the Sam Patch date noted above, occurred in 1968 as a result of a note from Mike Weaver to James Laughlin following his study of the manuscripts. These changes were mostly in the nature of correcting dates and proper names, changes which I have retained, for the reasons noted above. Guided by my attempt to try to remain sensitive to the way the poem’s compositional history, its author’s own history, and his concerns and attitudes, arc built into the fabric of the text, I have sought a compromise for the prose of Book V that I hope comes closer to these aims than the 1963 solution, and I have included that compromise within my larger general treatment of the poem’s typescripts and printed versions. If Book V’s prose were to be returned to the language of its sources, then the same treatment would need to be applied to the other four books, and this would clearly be far too much editorial intrusion. James Laughlin voiced a similar concern as coming from Mrs. Williams, when writing to Mike Weaver in January 1967: “Correcting Bill’s texts is a rather tricky business. I always consult with Mrs. Williams when a correction is suggested, and generally speaking, unless it is an obvious ‘typo,’ she prefers that things should remain as Bill wrote them. She feels, as I understand it, that his idiosyncrasies were very much part of his style, and I can see her point” (carbon in New Directions archives). Of course, with a poem like Paterson, the question of what parts of the poem “Bill wrote” is itself an issue, both editorial and critical. For Book V’s prose I concluded to use as copy text the version as first transcribed and typed by Williams, while accepting later changes that carry evidence of his having authorized them. The result is to bring the prose of Book V in the present edition much closer to the sources than in the first edition, but not as close as in the collected edition printed in 1963 and subsequently. For verbal and spacing issues in the poetry of Book V I have been guided much more by the late typescripts and the first edition. I have given more authority to the reset editions of Books I and II than to the reset editions of Books III and IV, and as indicated above, still less to the posthumous reset printing of Book V. In a small number of examples in the later books I restore the reading of the printer’s typescript where no evidence exists that Williams directed a change in the printed version (for example “the tame sea” for “the time sea” of all editions, Book IV, iii, and Phyllis’s missed “to” in one of her Book IV letters). I have not interfered, as the posthumous printings did, with such features of the poem as Williams’ reproducing an error that appears in his source (the “Jonatan” of Book IV, iii). I have allowed all Williams’ typescript revisions to stand, even where they are based erroneously on the assumption of a typing error in the retyped script, for example his changing Allen Ginsberg’s “seldom dig exactly what you are doing” to “seldom did exactly what you are doing,” no doubt because he was unfamiliar with the usage. A further example is Williams’ cutting in the prose of Book V a repetition of Gilbert Sorrentino’s included for stylistic purposes. In cases where the retyping of the prose produces a substitute word, either directly or through Williams’ response to a typing error, I leave the word, but I correct typographical errors that are not words. Mike Weaver drew New Directions’ attention to the “castor hat” of Cornelius Doremus in Book I that became a “Kastor hot,” but the text was not changed. This transformation happened a letter at a time in the typescripts, and could serve as a good example of the changes the prose undergoes. I have given Cornelius back his hat. But I have let “throsh” stand in Alva N. Turner’s letter in Book I, even though the earlier drafts, and probably the missing letter itself, read “thrash.” The general principles governing the selection of textual and background annotations can be found at the head of Appendix C. Limitations of space and the complexity of recording non-verbal variants have made it impossible to record all differences between printings or all non-verbal corrections to the text. I have generally not recorded the following kinds of variants, unless they appear to have important critical significance: 1) changes in punctuation. I let Williams’ punctuation stand as printed, being guided by the late typescripts, even when—as in some instances from Book I, following the revised galleys—the usage appears to be an unintended result of revision. A common punctuation problem is the dropping in later printings of some of the poem’s periods within or at the end of a line where they occur in Williams’ idiosyncratic usage following or surrounded by a space. A similar fate had met this usage in the reprintings of the shorter poems from the 1940s and 1950s (and continues to plague this editor with the reprintings of Volume II of the Collected Poems!). 2) changes of spacing between stanzas, and changes in the positioning of a line or a stanza. The spacing of Book III, as Mrs. Williams noticed, was corrupted the most by the resetting for the collected texts, although the repagination of 1969 added many more examples throughout the poem. 3) changes in hyphenation and spelling variants. I have usually retained the usage of the first edition. 4) corrections to foreign languages made in Williams’ lifetime. Because of the irregular stanza form that is a central characteristic of Williams’ poetics in Paterson it can be difficult to tell whether the end of a page marks the close of a stanza. In this edition the following pages end with a space: 3 10 11 13 18 19 20 21 23 25 26 27 29 30 31 33 36 37 43 44 45 46 47 50 51 52 54 55 56 57 60 62 63 64 65 67 68 70 71 72 77 78 70 80 81 82 83 86 95 96 99100101103104106109110113115 116117120121122123125129131133136140 141142149150151153154155156158159160 161162165166167168170174175176178179 181184190191192195198199201207218228 230234235 Appendix C Annotations and Textual Notes These notes record the verbal variants between the printed versions of Paterson, including the extracts from the poem published in journals, and they also present—usually in more general terms—the verbal differences between Williams’ prose sources and the Paterson version of the material. I have identified the probable sources where these are known. The annotations are not intended to be “complete,” or to record all of WCW’s comments on the poem or parts of it. Extensive comments by WCW on Paterson can be found in John Thirlwall’s “William Carlos Williams’ “Paterson’: The Search for the Redeeming Language—A Personal Epic in Five Parts,” New Directions 17 (1961): 252–310, and in numerous published interviews with WCW conducted in the 1950s. The pioneer studies by Sankey and Weaver listed below also contain additional comments by WCW, and amplify some of the annotations recorded here. I have reprinted in the “Preface” to this edition WCW’s statement in a 1951 press release on the poem, and also his comments to New Directions on his intentions for the fifth book. I do note the comments by WCW that appeared with the first editions of each book, and provide such additional comments or notes on context as might be particularly helpful to a reader, or that have not hitherto appeared in print. In keeping with the principles governing the annotations to the two volumes of WCW’s Collected Poems, I have usually excluded matters of general cultural knowledge that can be found in standard dictionaries, or the Encyclopedia Britannica. I have not repeated full bibliographical information that can be found in Emily Wallace’s A Bibliography of William Carlos Williams, and I have kept the bibliographic citations as concise as possible. Annotations are keyed to page numbers throughout. The following abbreviations are used in the annotations: A The Autobiography of William Carlos Williams (1951) BH John Barber and Henry Howe, Historical Collections of the State of New Jersey (1844) BUFFALO Neil Baldwin and Steven L. Meyers, The Manuscripts and Letters of William Carlos Williams in the Poetry Collection of the Lockwood Memorial Library, State University of New York at Buffalo: A Descriptive Catalogue (1978) CP1 The Collected Poems of William Carlos Williams, Volume I: 1909–1939 (1986) CP2 The Collected Poems of William Carlos Williams, Volume II: 1939–1962 (1988) IST The first, limited printing of Paterson, in individual books HARVARD The Williams archive at the Houghton Library, Harvard University HRC The Williams archive at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin KH Kathleen Hoagland, friend, historian, and typist of the Paterson drafts now at University of Virginia KS The Williams archive at Kent State University MARIANI Paul Mariani, William Carlos Williams: A New World Naked (1981) NC The New Classics reset text of Paterson that followed the first editions ND ARCHIVES Files of New Directions Publishing Corporation, New York and Norfolk, CT. NELSON William Nelson, History of the City of Paterson and the County of Passaic New Jersey (1901) 1963 The first, 1963, printing of all five books of Paterson in a single volume NS William Nelson and Charles A. Shriner, History of Paterson and its Environs: The Silk City, 3 vols. (1920) SANKEY Benjamin Sankey, A Companion to William Carlos Williams’s Paterson (1971) SL The Selected Letters of William Carlos Williams, ed. John C. Thirlwall (1957) UVA The Williams archive at the University of Virginia WCW/JL William Carlos Williams and James Laughlin, Selected Letters, ed. Hugh Witemeyer (1989) WEAVER Mike Weaver, William Carlos Williams: The American Background (1971) YALE The Williams archive at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University YALE UNCAT The uncatalogued correspondence to WCW in the collection of the Beinecke Library BOOK I (1946) The first edition carried an “Author’s Note” following the title page: “This is the first part of a long poem in four parts—that a man in himself is a city, beginning, seeking, achieving and concluding his life in ways which the various aspects of a city may embody—if imaginatively conceived—any city, all the details of which may be made to voice his most intimate convictions. Part One introduces the elemental character of the place. The Second Part will comprise the modern replicas. Three will seek a language to make them vocal, and Four, the river below the falls, will be reminiscent of episodes—all that any one man may achieve in a lifetime.” The note was reprinted, with minor changes for context, in the NC printing of Books I and II in 1949, and in all subsequent printings. WCW incorporated forty-four lines of his 1927 poem “Paterson” into Book I. In the present edition the material appears on pp. 6–7, 9–10, and 27. For the 1927 poem, which appeared in The Dial, see CP1 263–66. 3 Paterson: Book I/Paterson (5th printing of 1963 text, in 1969, and subsequent printings) 3 “Rigor of beauty ... remonstrance?” WCW’s own prose. On the 1945 KS galleys WCW cut two additional sentences that were also contained within the quotation marks: “It is not in the things nearest us unless transposed there by our employment? Make it free, then, by the art you have, to enter these starved and broken pieces.” 4 the slot of/hollow suns risen WCW told his friend Fred Miller in 1945 that the lines included a reference to the view from the back window at 9 Ridge Road, WCW’s home. See Weaver 201. The letter Weaver quotes from is at UVA. 4 and the craft The lower-case “a” is an example of the legacy of the slashed KS galleys (see “A Note on the Text”). WCW cut the first two and a half lines of this stanza—which had begun with a capital. 6 Paterson lies ... unroused “Information from Herb Fisher’s [manuscript] book on Paterson,” note by KH on the UVA typescripts. Herbert Fisher (1907–1977), a local historian and painter, was a prominent figure in nearby Bloomfield, New Jersey, whose interests included the history and legends of the Passaic. See his obituary in The Independent Press [Bloomfield, N.J.], January 20, 1977, p. i, and Weaver 118–119. Although Fisher’s manuscript histories are now lost, he published 149 articles on local history and lore in The Independent Press from June 1960 to April 1963, including articles on Paterson and on the Passaic. See also “A Note on the Text.” 7 A man like ... a city These lines served as an epigraph to “For the poem Patterson” [sic], a sequence of fifteen numbered poems WCW published in The Broken Span in 1941, when his concept of the poem was still close to the Detail & Parody for the poem Paterson typescript he prepared in 1939. See CP2 14 and the accompanying note. 7 In regard ... the like Adapted from a four-page handwritten letter from Marcia Nardi to WCW, April 9, [1942], (Yale uncat.). Marcia Nardi (1901–1990), then living in New York, had telephoned and subsequently visited WCW some days before, possibly at the suggestion of Harvey Breit, for advice concerning her son. During her visit she left some of her poems with WCW for his possible comments. WCW admired Nardi’s work, replying on the following day to the April 9 letter “these poems have in them definitely some of the best writing by a woman (or by anyone else) I have seen in years.... What I’d like to see you do is to copy them all out clean and let me have a copy of all of them” (HRC). WCW encouraged the publication of some of Nardi’s poems in New Directions Number Seven (1942), and wrote an introduction to the selection that appeared there. Their exchanges over the next ten months included more than thirty letters, but in February 1943 WCW terminated his side of the correspondence, which subsequently resumed from 1949 to 1956. For further details of the correspondence and of MN’s own writing career see Theodora R. Graham, “‘Her Heigh Compleynte’: The Cress Letters of William Carlos Williams’ Paterson” in Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams: The University of Pennsylvania Conference Papers (Philadelphia, 1983), ed. Daniel Hoffman, pp. 164–193, and Elizabeth O’Neil, “Marcia Nardi: Woman of Letters,” in Rossetti to Sexton: Six Women Poets at Texas (Austin, 1992), pp. 73–111, a special issue of The Library Chronicle of the University of Texas at Austin, Vol. 22, 1 & 2. WCW considered a number of ways of using Nardi’s letters in Paterson (see, for example, Buffalo E19, where they were intended at one stage as an “Interlude” ). Eventually he included in Book II parts of two additional letters, dating from 1943, see pp. 45, 48, 64, 76, 82, and 87–91. As he did with much of the prose in Book I, WCW cut this material considerably on the 1945 KS galleys, which had reproduced much more of the original letter. The paragraphs from which the material in the galleys and final version are taken read as follows in the original letter (with material omitted before the galley stage in square brackets): But I was, believe me, in a most desperate situation that Sunday. I didn’t know a soul except H.B. (at least no respectable person) outside the world where only standardized conceptions of parenthood prevail; and there I was faced with an investigation of my decidedly irregular private life which would have amounted, for me, to the most ghastly kind of inquisition [—especially since my son, by the way, is illegitimate.] [Fortunately I was able to stave all that off. I won’t burden you with the details (quite a long story). But that boy of mine is now out of that God forsaken psychopathic ward and up in the mountains with a nice simple wholesome family;] and my [own] doors are bolted forever (I hope forever) against all public welfare workers, professional do- gooders, and the like. [But thank you more than I can express for having let me come. I otherwise might have been completely robbed of my wits, and thus have been unable to straighten out the situation.] In regard to the poems I left with you: will you be so kind as to return them to me at my new [12th Street] address? And without bothering to comment upon them if you should find that embarrassing— for it was the human situation and not the literary one that motivated my phone call and visit. Besides I know myself to be more the woman than the poet; and to concern myself less with the problems of poetry than with [those of] living; and to have always been prevented [by the latter] from doing any really concentrated and thoughtful work ‘in what, under happier circumstances, would have been the field of my choice.’ [And] also I think [that with rare exceptions (such as Emily Dickinson and Marianne Moore) even] a talented woman writer depends, much more than a man, upon her social environment and her personal relationships, to gain definition for her personality and to develop her own minor creative potentialities. Andre Gide makes this true of most of his women; and the great disillusionment of the male characters in his books is when they find that those qualities of mind and soul which they love in some particular woman have been little more than a couch on which she could lay her thoughts next to theirs. That Gide’s male characters are homosexual enables them of course to understand this [easily—galley reads “desire”] about women, since they thus escape being hoodwinked by desire. The Paterson text’s “publishers of poetry” for MN’s “problems of poetry” runs through all the typescripts and probably stems from a misreading of MN’s difficult handwriting by WCW or his typist in the transcription, and is marked with a query on Buffalo E7.WCW subsequently deleted “those of” and added an ellipsis to make sense of the sentence (one example of many of his correcting the poem’s prose for sense after a retyping, but not against the source). “But they set up an investigation” is WCW’s own summary. 9 In February 1857 ... open the shell No source found. To judge by an article in the Bulletin of the Passaic County Historical Society of November 1956, pp. 38–39, 44, this prose conflates two stories. Jacob and John Quackenbush found and sold to Tiffany what became known as the “Queen Pearl.” The article cites The Paterson Guardian of May 1, 1857. The article goes on to tell the story of “a South Paterson citizen ... One account names him as a poor shoemaker ... one David Hower. Another source names him as Daniel Howell, carpenter.” Hower/Howell brought home mussels for dinner, found them tough and fried them, and while subsequently eating them bit into the 400-grain pearl—which had been ruined by “too much cooking. ... it was, by far, the largest pearl ever found in fresh water mussels.” K. H. cites Herbert Fisher (UVA). 10 A gentleman of ... on either side” From BH (1844), 407, with minor differences, noted below. (The passage is replaced by an illustration of Paterson in the 1865 printing.) BH (1844) is specifically cited in an early version of the poem on Buffalo E10, where two characters named “Doc and Willie” read this passage from the book. Differences from BH wording: gentleman of the/gentleman with the the community/this vicinity in human/in a human around the upper/round the upper his voice/and his voice is body is/body is only sit up/stand or sit up on pillows/on large pillows With two exceptions the BH wording appears in the early Buffalo typescripts E4 and E10, but all the differences appear in later retypings and in the UVA and Yale Za186 versions. None of the changes reflect revisions marked by WCW and are probably accidents of retyping. BH’s “on large pillows” becomes “on pillows” in UVA and Za186, and appears thus on the KS typescript and galleys—but the page proofs and all printings have “in.” I have restored “on.” A footnote in Nelson, 100, notes that the BH source material, an eighteenth-century military journal, actually records the size of the face as twenty inches. 10 From the ten houses ... 170 Swiss Weaver 202 records “from Herbert A. Fisher’s notes on Paterson census records.” The language of the passage is close to that of W. Clayton’s History of Bergen and Passaic Counties (Philadelphia, 1882), 406—in a section written by William Nelson. The numbers in Clayton record 1429 German, and 3347 English. The material is typed as if poetry on the KS typescript. 11 The twaalft ... “The Monster Taken” With a few minor verbal differences, including a revision by WCW (“one seven feet” for “a sturgeon seven feet”) the passage appears in Nelson, 387–388. 12–13 If there was not beauty ... region was called Probably WCW’s own prose. The Prospector of 3 July 1936 printed a special Ringwood issue, and the Buffalo El typescripts contain a promotional folder on Ringwood. Some of this passage is in verse in earlier typescripts, and the material is generally much reworked. 13 Cromwell ... Irish brogue As Sankey and Weaver note, from Seamus MacCall’s Thomas Moore (London, 1935), 94. WCW begins in mid-sentence, cutting the “who” that follows “Cromwell” and substituting “others” for Mac-Call’s “negro slaves” on a typescript filed with Yale Za186. The other differences from MacCall are present in early drafts: some thousands/thousands sold/sold there asserted to/asserted that to 13 a Geographic picture Between pp. 180 and 181 Weaver reproduces and cites the probable source, The National Geographic Magazine 49: 6 (June 1926), 716. However, the photograph is of six wives, and they are squatting, but not on a log. 14 Mrs. Sarah Cumming ... to Newark From BH 412–413 with slight changes and the omission of fifteen lines. BH, what is probably WCW’s transcription typescript filed with Yale Zai86, and the early Buffalo E4 typescript correctly spell Hooper, which I have restored. Later typescripts and all previous printings read Hopper. Following “district of Maine” BH has “she was a lady of an amiable disposition, a well-cultivated mind, distinguished intelligence, and most exemplorary piety; and she was much endeared to a large circle of respectable friends and connections.” No source material is omitted between “on the following day” and “On Monday morning” (on a Buffalo E14 typescript WCW added a second period, and this punctuation was reproduced as an ellipsis on the galleys in what is a consistent pattern for this book). Following “and his wife was gone!” the Paterson text omits these lines from the opening of the next paragraph: Mrs. Cumming had complained of a dizziness early in the morning; and, as her eyes had been some time fixed upon the uncommon objects before her, when she moved with the view to retrace her steps, it is probable she was seized with the same malady, tottered, and in a moment fell, a distance of 74 feet, into the frightful gulf! Following “caught him once more” the text omits from BH “and held him till reason had resumed her throne. He then left him, to call the neighboring people to the place.” The omitted final paragraph reads: On Wednesday, her funeral was attended by a numerous concourse of people. Her remains were carried into the church, where a pathetic and impressive discourse, happily adapted to the mournful occasion, was delivered by the Rev. James Richards. Solemn indeed was the scene. A profound silence pervaded the vast assembly. Every one seemed to hang upon the lips of the speaker. In every quarter, the sigh of sympathy and regret echoed to the tender and affecting address. Other differences: two months Original and typescripts read 2 months. Rev. Cumming rode/Mr. Cumming rode event to/event which was to flight/flights stairs (the Hundred Steps)/stairs view of/view of most of length of time/time The apparently early Yale Za186 typescript contains all the verbal differences and omissions in the final text except the sentences following “and his wife was gone!” which WCW cut on the 1945 galley. The Rev./Mr. difference occurs because the Yale and subsequent typescripts read “1812, rode,” and WCW added “Rev. Cumming” on Buffalo E14. 15 Some things can be done as well as others On the UVA typescripts KH notes the source for this, and for “There’s no mistake in Sam Patch” (p. 16), as the Dictionary of American Biography. Patch’s entry in Volume 14 (1934) records: “He was generally taciturn but when in his cups would parrot his two apothegems, There’s no mistake in Sam Patch’ and ‘Some things can be done as well as others’.” These details are not in the Longwell source, see below. 15 Noah ... Faitoute In 1938 WCW started corresponding with David Lyle, a resident of Paterson interested in communication systems. In going over some of Lyle’s letters for possible inclusion in Paterson, WCW changed Lyle’s opening salutation, “Dr. Williams,” and his closing signature, variously to “Noah” and “Faitoute” (Yale uncat.). See Mariani 468–71 and Weaver 122–27. 15–16 So far everything ... he jumped Adapted with omissions and some rearrangement from Charles P. Longwell’s A Little Story of Old Paterson as Told by an Old Man (Paterson, 1901), 37–41 (see Weaver 203– 204). As Weaver notes, in Longwell’s account the “robust” Tim Crane is compared to “the large, rugged stature of Sam Pope”—not Sam Patch. The omitted material amounts to about twenty-eight lines of the original, and no further excisions from Longwell are made on the KS galley. Following the fourth paragraph—“The shows exhibited on the Falls grounds from 1825, and continued from time to time until 1835. They also exhibited in the old trangle [sic] square called Passaic Garden, except in winter, when they used the old wigwam, after that famous structure of the war times was built.” The “to get to.... Crane” ellipsis omits “But any one wanting to go to Tim’s had to go over to Manchester and make a roundabout tour through the Red woods. So old Tim conceived the idea of putting a bridge across the chasm at his own expense. It was the first bridge put across the chasm, but it was a good investment, as every one who crossed the bridge paid a penny toll until Tim Crane was repaid for his trouble. This penny toll continued for some years before the residents of the town could get on the Falls ground free. The Crane tavern was a very old style house, and after he left it it stood vacant for many years until torn down.” Following the comparison of Crane to Patch/Pope, a new paragraph begins: “‘After leaving the tavern and grounds, which he sold to Peter Archdeacon, he built himself, about the year 1837, a log-cabin in the woods nearby. Now I have drifted away from my subject a little,’ he said, ‘but it is best that you should know this, so I told you. Now I will go back to my story of the first bridge.’” What follows in Longwell, from “So far everything ...” to “placed in position” WCW moves to the beginning of the account, and Longwell’s text then continues with “When the word....” Other differences: for old Paterson/in old Paterson so to give/so it gave resident in/resident of various times/different times in the basement under the bank Not in Longwell in the town/in town the “hundred steps” ... the river Not in Longwell over six/and over six other citizens/older citizens his manner/this manner were the words/are the words 16 After this start ... down stream Largely WCW’s own prose, adapted from details and language in the Dictionary of American Biography. 16 1829 /1826 (IST, NC) Corrected in the fourth printing of the 1963 text, 1968, as a result of Weaver’s correspondence with James Laughlin, January 1967 (ND Archives). The dating error stems from the earliest typescripts. 25–26 While at 10,000 feet... end of the street.) WCW’s first trip by air, traveling to Puerto Rico in 1941. See A 313–14, which also gives the story of “Uncle Carlos.” 26 I was over ... T. The postscript of a letter to WCW from Alva N. Turner (1878–1963). WCW originally intended to use the letter itself as well as the postscript, but cut the material on the 1945 galleys. The anthology Poetry Out of Wisconsin (New York, 1937), edited by August Derleth and Raymond Larsson, included a one-paragraph biographical note on Turner which he copied out and sent to WCW with a letter in 1937: “Alva Turner was born in Spring Garden township, Illinois, in 1878. He spent from 1921 to 1923 in Wisconsin. He has been a minister, a school teacher, a laborer. His celebrity, as a poet, is due chiefly to Harriet Monroe and William Carlos Williams. He has contributed to Poetry, The Editor, Judge, etc. etc. was represented in Others. He now lives in Illinois” (Buffalo F644). WCW had published Turner in Others in July 1919, and the two maintained a correspondence for almost forty years. The original letter is missing, and is not filed with Turner’s letters in the Buffalo or Beinecke collections. The version in Yale Za188 appears to be the earliest, although the addressee already reads “Dear Pat:” and it concludes, before the P.S., “Le votre T”—obviously WCW’s language. WCW marked the first paragraph of the letter for omission on the Za188 draft. The Za188 version of the material retained until cut on the galleys is printed below. Now about the purchase of my home. This home is at the edge of the village. There is a house across the road from me. There is one East—a quarter of a mile that is just inside of the village limits. There is no other house, on this side of the road—southside—from here to the rail-road, a quarter of a mile west. But there are houses on the north side of the road clear over the rail-road. The schoolhouse is one of them, and my mother’s home is near the schoolhouse, north, on the east side of Elm Street. For years, my mother, whom I have been caring for for years, has been saying I could not live there, when she is dead, because my absentmindedness might leave an oil stove on and burn the house down. My sister, whom I cared for for two years—until she obtained a job at the school, cooking and canning has been telling me she would not live with me. Moreover, my brother and sister in St. Louis, and my dead brother’s daughter, intend to deed their part to my eccentric sister, because she has no heir. This sister has been at me for years to get out—that’s why I went to East St. Louis last year. She didn’t want me to run my typewriter, or do anything but wash dishes three times a day, mow the lawn, tend the garden, sweep the porches and the house and mop, and clean yards, keep up the repairs and pay all the grocery bills, but ten dollars per month, which I did, until I became tired of it. So my mother told me to buy me a home while I had the money. I did. This three roomed house has been built five years. I have painted it, tarred the kitchen roof, which is not shingled like the other two rooms, and made a lot of improvements. I am not through yet. This house was built by an Ina father for his son, on ten acres of land. I bought two lots. This son was run over by the train, near Bonnie, just above Ina, last spring and was cut in two. I bought part of the furniture and curtains and blinds—a heavy library table and a heavy chair to match it. I also bought a kitchen table, cabinet and two rugs. But I have a new rug on the front room. I did not buy that from the widow. I tied the knot between this couple, several years ago. The editor of the Ina Observer has given me several write-ups in his paper about me and my new home. I am enclosing the poem I promised you. It is the first I have written since I have occupied the hermitage. Le votre T WCW makes some minor editorial changes on the Buffalo E13 typescript. The sentence on the schoolhouse becomes “The schoolhouse, north, on the east side of Elm Street,” probably because the typist skipped a line in retyping. The identifying references to Ina were cut on the early typescripts, and the postscript’s remaining references to St. Louis and East St. Louis and “Skip” changed to “Hartford” and “Billy” at the page proof stage. “Billy” was actually the name of Turner’s cat, about whom he sent WCW a poem that WCW in turn passed on to View, where it appeared in the Feb.-March 1942 issue, p. 5, with a note by WCW. Billy/Skip was Turner’s sister Eva Forest Getsbacher (1894–1948). Turner wrote to WCW of her death, enclosing an obituary he had written himself, on June 19, 1948 (Yale uncat.). Turner writes, “Skip is the sister I once wrote you about—the one that forced me to move out.... but in the last few years she had subdued the vixen that was in her and manifested the devotee. I will miss her very much.” throsh Turner probably wrote “thrash,” the reading on the earlier Buffalo typescripts. On the postscript that remains in the final text, the Buffalo E13 retyping skips a line following “helped wash”; the line reads “and even did it by myself, carried in coal, water, carried out slop,” on Za188. obsessed with fire As the April 1957 issue of Poetry reported, in printing Turner’s poem “Unmolested Beauty,” the Ina house “burned down to the ground last summer and he lost everything he owned, including his radio and his typewriter.” And see Weaver 204, who gives a 1954 date. 28 I positively feel ... E. D. From a letter [1943?] to WCW from Edward Dahlberg, the first of two letters from Dahlberg in Paterson (see 226–227). Not filed with Dahlberg’s letters to WCW at HRC or Yale, and not included in his volume of selected letters, Epitaphs of Our Times. As with the Nardi and Turner letters used in Book 1, WCW originally intended to use much more of the letter, but cut the material down on the 1945 KS galleys. A version of the letter filed with the Yale Za186 typescripts appears to be the original transcription typescript, although a page of the letter is missing, probably because WCW had never intended to use it. The first fourteen lines of this version are crossed through. The Za186 typescript continues with the paragraphs that are substantially unchanged until they appear on the 1945 galleys, where they are cut: I have always abhorred busy people, being too busy to talk, to be able to sit down a few minutes the way the Brahma or the Sacred Cow sits, to put together a letter, which is a way of arranging the pieces of one’s spirit, it is just a hoax, and you ought to know that, and if you don’t you ought to spend some time finding it out, even, if you have to damn me for pointing it out to you. Frankly, I don’t know what you are saying when you put the past into a frozen theorem, separate and apart from the present. I know of no such past or present; I only know of Nero, of Abraham sitting underneath the terebinth, or Modigliani painting glandular physiognomies, or Socrates prattling in the Symposium, or Sherwood Anderson walking through one of those blighted and noisesome downtown sections, and answering me, as I said to him, ‘Consider with what malice this city must have been conceived.’ ‘Oh, it just happened,’ as of one kind of human continuum. Time to me is an infant’s conception, which Heraclitus so detested. Time is something you mention when you have sick nerves and cannot stand still or sit in quiet either to paint, or smile or talk or listen to somebody else. It’s an occidental fraud, in the main, and there are no people in the world so concerned as the American, who positively has no time, with the clock. It always appeared to me that it was no accident that the glum little Swiss were clock-makers, and that the inhabitants of Königsberg set their watches soon as they saw the apriori Immanuel Kant. The hatred, by the way, of the past, all human lore and poetry, is best illustrated by the modern state which always commemorates and canonizes its own murder-uses by starting a year one for the people. But enough. The paragraphs finally included in the poem differ from the Za186 version only in minor punctuation changes and the spelling of some proper names—the latter changed through various reprintings. The first edition and NC printings read T.J for E.D., the change coming with the 1963 printing. Dahlberg wrote to John Thirlwall on Jan 21, 1955: “I knew nothing of the Paterson letter until Charles Olson, a friend of Williams and myself, told me Williams had printed something of mine in his poem. I was not troubled so much because he did this without my knowledge; what disturbed me were the initials T.J. I am not T.J., or am I? Yes, I am a Jew, and Williams’ grandmother was.... The worst antisemites are half-Jews, for they know not which of their origins are more truthful or savory” (uncatalogued correspondence to Thirlwall, Yale). While Dahlberg admired WCW’s In the American Grain, he was no fan of Paterson, writing to Robert McAlmon in 1953: “I think his Paterson ... is a fraud. The man is very spongy, and imagines by repeating the word rock about a hundred and thirty-five times that he can become hard or give the effect of having ophidian intellect,” Epitaphs of Our Times, 137. 32 He was more ... anxious parent Noted as WCW’s prose by Thirlwall in his own copy of Paterson. The early Buffalo manuscripts contain many revisions. 32–33 In time of ... who sleep KH notes on the UVA typescript, underlining the lines on the French maid and the pet Pomeranians: “references to the Gould heiress, ref through Musya [and Charles] Sheeler.” Weaver 205 notes that WCW mentions the Tarrytown estate of Princesse de Talleyrand, née Gould, in A 334, where the context is WCW’s close friends the Sheelers. 33 Cornelius Doremus....50 cents. Nelson 386 and NS 138–139 print this list identically, but the source is almost certainly Nelson. A second list that is cut on the KS typescript, and that is also in both sources, reproduces a raised footnote number when first transcribed on Za186 that is only in Nelson. The list suffered some unintended changes of small details in the original transcription and the Buffalo retypings. I have restored the correct spelling of Acquackanonk (Acquackonock in all printings), and corrected the “Kastor hot” of all printings to “castor hat”—both reflecting transcription errors in early typescripts. The source largely omits “cents” after the monetary figure, as does Za186. The change occurs on the Buffalo typescripts. Other significant differences from Nelson: and died/and who died Word omitted in Za186 transcription Following “comfort” WCW cuts “Here is the list of his wardrobe, etc.” on Za186. 4 pillow cases, $2.12 Nelson reads “4 pairs pillow cases, $2.121⁄2”: transcription error Buffalo E13 a handkerchief, $1.75 Nelson reads “2 handkerchiefs .75”: transcription errors in Yale 186 and Buff E14 1 pair andirons, $2.00/Buffalo E14 reads $.00, which is what appeared in IST. For NC and subsequent printings this was changed to $1.00. I have restored the Nelson and Zal86 amount. The Calendar of Wills in Documents Relating to the Colonial, Revolutionary, and. Post-Revolutionary History of the State of New Jersey, First Series, Vol. 39, 10 (Trenton, 1946) 134 records that in an 1801 will Doremus left his lands to his seven surviving children and the heirs of his eighth. 34–35 By nightfall ... work went on Taken from a longer article, “Draining the Lake at Lakeview,” that appeared in The Prospector, 28 August 1936, 4. In all printings of the poem the opening date is given as “nightfall of the 28th.” I have restored “the 29th,” the date in the source and in the apparent transcription typescript, Za186. The change occurs in the retypings. WCW reproduces about two-thirds of the article, and not all the omissions are marked by an ellipsis. He omits the opening twenty-two lines concerning the contract to drain the lake. A sentence summarizing the details is cut on the galleys. Other omissions: between drawn off—a black crowd: “Mr. Van Riper had prepared a wire screen and nets and endeavored to rescue the fish in the earlier part of the day and Mr. Regnor and others had nets ready; but they were only moderately successful. The fish did not run into their nets to any extent, although they got all they wanted before they left. But a crowd of men and hoodlums gathered.” bottom—some hundred: “It was an exciting scene after 4 o’clock, for the bottom for” dam—the whole: “had been drained so that men could wade in the mud, and the fight for the eels began.” still there—There seemed: “gleaning the remainder. One man passed the eight o’clock train from Paterson on his way up with a snapping turtle in one hand, three great eels in another and his boys with all they could carry.” the eels—Those who: “It was a funny circumstance at the lake on the night of the 29th, that” roadway—Little boys: “All Madison Park seemed to be out.” and eels—four wagon: “and the heaps everywhere comprised one of the queerest sights to be imagined. Mr. Mace who was present, and had with the others watched the affair, said.” carried away—At least: “The man who secured the larger ones gave the smaller ones to little boys to carry away” in the mud—Night: “Sometimes two men racing after one big eel and finally tumbling down upon him together causing great amusement to those on shore.” WCW also omits the final five lines. Other differences between Paterson and The Prospector: the water mostly had/the water had mostly into the nets/into their nets a black crowd/a black cloud strike at them/strike them Those who prepared the nets/those who had prepared nets he filled it/he filled it with eels the men/and the men All verbal differences and omissions are present in the Za186 typescript, although only the last is a revision marked by WCW. 35 Shortly before ... all that day Adapted from a much longer article in The Prospector, November 12 1936, 1, 4. WCW originally intended to include a longer adaptation from the article, but cut the following, which preceded the present two paragraphs, on the KS galleys: The bells ringing out the hour of worship on Sunday morning, August 15, 1875, had scarcely done tolling before the news of a drowning of three men had spread throughout the city; and at once and thenceforth throughout the day crowds wended their way to the grounds to learn the shocking particulars. About twenty minutes past ten, application was made to Mr. Oswald Bleackly, who kept a small grocery and spruce-beer store at No. 345 Totowa Avenue, by James Grogan—a man about forty years of age, well-known in social circles as a skilled cricketer and employed at the Phoenix Mill as a “loom fixer”—for the use of his boat to take two friends on a short row up the river. Mr. Bleackly, had but a few moments previous denied the same request from a neighbor because of the danger of such amusement when the stream was swollen about the Falls, and on this application from his fellow workmen offered similar objections, claiming it was unsafe in the present condition of the river to venture out especially at such a perilous location as that occupied by his boat. The only reply to the advice was a hearty laugh, as Grogan, confident of his own power and strength stretched out his brawny arm, exclaiming, “O, a fine fellow like me afraid to go on the water? I am young and not to be compared with you.” The attempt to prevail upon the three to give up their proposed enjoyment was useless, and disliking to refuse his intimate friends when they pressed him to allow them the privilege, he finally consented. So the three with oars, rudder and key started down Wayne Avenue to the river. The boat borrowed was a well- built, flat bottom craft, painted a light pink color, red striped, and amply capable of holding the party. The boat lay chained to the west bank of the river about thirty feet above the Society’s dam below the carriage bridge. (Spruce St.) They were all in exuberant spirits at the prospect of a splendid morning’s enjoyment, and loosing the chain that bound the boat to the shore pushed out into the stream before they had made any preparations whatever for guiding the boat in the strong current that was dashing down with its oily wave but a few feet distant. Quickly all hands went to work at manning the boat, perceiving the immediate danger in which they had placed themselves, and with the crowd of spectators on the bridge and along the opposite shore shouting warnings to beware of the current, they exerted themselves to the utmost to bring the oars into working order to “back water.” Not a man but Grogan, in the boat, was used to boating, nor had any knowledge of the use that might be made of rudder or oar in turning a craft, or the ensuing accident might possibly have been averted. They were soon impelled toward the rushing current through their own efforts to prevent getting farther from shore, and the bow of the boat turned down stream toward the dam. Here the three men jumped from the boat, sending it with a new momentum dashing on faster than ever. It overturned and a second afterward it had shot over the dam, at that place about six feet in height, and righting again below the rocks it passed toward the basin on the west shore and half filled with water remained safe out of the current. The men in the meantime struggled hard to reach the banks but they too one after the other followed the boat and were carried over the dam. The current there was rushing at tremendous speed and fully three feet in depth. (This dam of which the narrator is speaking, lies above the Falls proper not more than a hundred feet or so from its brink). The alarm and consternation among the many visitors on the grounds was now intense and all ran towards the falls to catch a glimpse of the helpless castaways as they passed over, but their curiosity was disappointed as the bodies, on authentic statements, were not seen after the three heads disappeared in the wild seething mass in the basin under the dam. The remaining Paterson text follows The Prospector to “the body being lodged,” but then omits and summarizes some material. WCW makes the changes on Buffalo E13. The Prospector reads: the body being lodged in a very curious manner between two logs, one a very large one that had been placed across the chasm by the workmen, and lodged across it in a very extraordinary manner. It was in the “crotch” of these logs that the body was wedged. From the position of the body it was thought impossible to remove the body without risk of life, but the river was rapidly falling which later made possible the recovery of the body. A coat of one of the men was also found lodged in Broomhead’s water wheel at the West Street bridge. The news of finding the body hanging on the edge of the Falls, attracted a very large number of visitors. The sight of the human body hanging over the precipice was indeed one which was as novel as it was awful in appearance. 37 Your interest ... product. In a notebook in which he began the notes for his Autobiography WCW records: “Pound’s story of my being interested in the loam whereas he wanted the finished product” (Buffalo D7). WCW instructed on the KS galleys that the nine lines from “What do I care” to “ruin” “must all appear on same page.” But both the NC and fifth and subsequent printings of the 1963 text (1969) split the material. 38 a tranquility/a still tranquility IST 38 “The 7th ... ensued.” From BH 50. WCW keeps the quotation marks that are in BH, but omits the source BH provides—“Smith’s History of New Jersey.” On the KS galley WCW cuts two further passages describing earthquakes; one another passage from BH, and the other a longer piece that KH annotates as “Mt. Pelee—eruption of Mount Pelee” (UVA). For the eruption of Mount Pelée, “which wiped out the last of my mother’s family,” see A 71. 40 “In order ... morality” WCW cites the 1880 New York, Harper edition. This passage was added to Book I very late and does not appear on the galleys or typescripts. On the KS page proof WCW noted: “center this note on a page of its own at end of book.” See WCW/JL 112–114, 116. The passage follows its source save for the spelling of “meter,” the addition of quotation marks, and “communicated” for “communicate.” The verbal and spelling differences are as in the version sent by WCW to James Laughlin on June 14, 1945. BOOK II (1948) The first edition carried an “Author’s Note”: “The present is the second of four books on a single theme, PATERSON; the first appeared in 1946, the others will follow shortly.” 43 the Park Garret Mountain Park, Paterson 44 the ugly legs ... beeves and WCW quotes from (and slightly alters) his early poem “The Wanderer,” first published in 1914. These lines appear in the section originally titled “Paterson—The Strike.” See CP1 31, 112. 45 The body is ... aided As Weaver 206 notes, from Beckett Howorth, “Dynamic Posture,” Journal of the American Medical Association 131, 17 (24 August 1946), 1402–03. Weaver reprints Fig. 6B. Page 1402 is pasted onto a sheet now filed with Buffalo E22. 45 Despite my ... condition Extract from a letter from Marcia Nardi, see note to p. 7. WCW and MN had continued to correspond since MN’s first letter, of April 9, 1942, extracts of which appear in Book I, and subjects had included MN’s writing and her search for employment. The two met for dinner in New York City in June. MN’s share of the correspondence became increasingly dominant, and on February 17, 1943 WCW sent a short note (HRC): Though I have tried to find work for you I have not succeeded, under present circumstances my best advice would be for you to apply to one of the Federal Employment Bureaus and let them instruct you. There’s nothing more that I can do or say. This brings our correspondence to a close as far as I am concerned. But MN continued to write to WCW. A handwritten draft, or copy, of a letter to WCW among MN’s papers at HRC, dated February 22, 1943, begins: “This is no continuation of the correspondence you wish ended. It is merely my own ‘last word’ in that correspondence.” A postcard on March 5 tells WCW that she has found employment, “a job that I like (and one connected with books)” and that she has used his name as a reference (Yale uncat.). The three paragraphs on p. 45 of Paterson are from a long letter transcribed in the Buffalo E5 and E19 typescripts. Further extracts from the letter appear on pp. 48, 64 and 76. The original letter (April 1943?) is not filed with any of WCW’s correspondence or typescripts, to my knowledge. The Buffalo E5 typescript has some characteristics of a transcription. A blank space is left, for example, the word added in manuscript, possibly where MN’s difficult handwriting could not be deciphered. In a section that WCW does not use, MN refers to the job and to using WCW’s name in applying for it, and so this letter certainly dates from after the March postcard. Extracts from another, later, letter appear on pp. 82 and 87–91. On the UVA typescript KH notes “letter used almost verbatim, made him change it somewhat,” and see Reed Whittemore, William Carlos Williams: Poet from Jersey (Boston, 1975) 291. 46 I asked.... occupation As Sankey 76 points out, noted as the “Temple incident” on early typescripts, e.g. Yale Za187. 46 No fairer day ... Dean and From The Prospector, November 12, 1936, 5, excerpted from a much longer article on Dean McNulty. The Buffalo E20 draft contains considerably more of the Prospector text, covering the Dean and Dalzell’s escape, and Dalzell’s trial and acquittal, material WCW marks there to omit. On E20 the cut-off point was to be at “bewildered.” The E21 draft matches the final version, incorporating this and other excisions. Most of the differences from The Prospector occur with the E21 version: than May/than on May garden/gardens cheek.... Some WCW cuts “which inflamed the already hostile mob. Coroner William S. Hurd tried to calm the mob by making a speech, and while he was talking,” [to] WCW adds the square brackets on Buff E21 after E20’s “out of the barn and he succeeded in reaching the house of” is revised to the final version. The Prospector reads “out of the house” for “out of the barn.” Following “half furlong away” WCW cuts: “Chief of Police Graul arriving with the aid of policemen could not quiet the raging mob.” “a great beast” WCW’s addition. join/join in The crowd then/The mob then While in Prospector has “While at,” change caused by typing error. “While it” on E20 that becomes “While in” on E21. This is one example of many in the typescripts of a change made on a subsequent typescript without consulting the original. Sergeant/police sergeant of Saint/of the St. Joseph’s/Joseph seating/seated Dean and In the Prospector and E20 the sentence concludes, “his display of Christian charity, for he was the highest prelate of the Catholic Church in Paterson and the man he was befriending had been prominent among the Orangemen.” 47 Chapultepec! grasshopper hill! See Sankey 77, who reproduces a photograph of a carved grasshopper from Chapultepec. The line is omitted in the selection from Book II published in Partisan Review (Feb. 1948). 48 by the mind’s/of the mind’s Partisan Review, which also adds a following line “Walking:—”. 48 If that situation ... for us A continuation of the same letter [April 1943? ] from Marcia Nardi quoted on p. 45. See note to that page. Z Reads “H” on E5, probably Harvey Breit. 49 Shortly after midnight ... fun From The Prospector, October 29, 1936, 4. The minor verbal differences from the source—table at/table of, too small/rather too small, the cellar/a cellar, a lightning/lightning—occur with the Buffalo retypings. 53–54 Dear B ... kill Although KH annotates as “Bill’s cousin in Green-point” [Brooklyn] on the UVA typescripts, Thirlwall’s copy of Paterson identifies “B” as Betty Stedman “a Post-Grad Hospital nurse.” Betty Stedman is the source of a later prose passage, see note to p. 144. Thirlwall’s identification is confirmed by Mr. Stanley Stedman, who writes in a letter to Christopher MacGowan, December 15, 1990: There was a letter about our dog Musti but it has long since disappeared. We were away from home and our neighbor Florence Plarey was taking care of our dog. Sometime after we returned we noticed that the dog was swelling and my wife suspected that [the] dog might be pregnant. She questioned Florence about it and received an evasive answer. Florence was a sweet girl without too much backbone so she went home and wrote the letter. This was in 1935 or 36. I don’t recall whether we knew Dr. Williams then or not. At any rate the letter was a gem and we saved it and eventually Elizabeth showed it to Dr. Williams. He said he would use it in Paterson and we waited eagerly for the book to come out. When it did we compared it to the original. There were minor differences and we felt that the original was superior to the published version. A longer version of the letter appears in the UVA and Buffalo E25 typescripts. WCW marks most of the excisions on one of the E25 drafts. In the longer version the second sentence begins, “Also I did not want to shove the blame onto George [Florence’s husband] but ...” Between “beat it” and “George” WCW cuts “and I was afraid he would bite me when he was in that mood. George was working so he wasn’t of any help. Gosh I’m nervous I can’t talk—I mean, write.” The words “had happened” are underlined in the earlier version, which then reads to its end: I’m so excited I even left a piece here that I must write in now. I’ve been watching her and would have soon told you if you hadn’t already asked. Please forgive my carelessness and don’t be angry although I know you’ll be cursing like a son-of-a-gun and probably won’t ever speak to me again for not having told you. But it just goes to show that I have no backbone and if I have it must be one of a jellyfish. Don’t think I haven’t been worrying about Musty. No doubt that’s why I’ve been losing weight. She’s occupied my mind every day since that awful event. You won’t think so highly of me now and feel like protecting me. Instead I’ll bet you could kill me. Well let’s get off on another subject unless I get a crying spell from sheer nervousness. These early typescripts read “plenty hell” for the printed version’s “plenty of hell.” (Readers might be relieved to hear that Mr. Stedman reports to the editor that Musti went on to complete a successful pregnancy, and give birth to five puppies.) 57 the lost/Eisenstein film Weaver 207 cites a version of Que Viva Mexico! shown in New York in late 1941 and titled Time in the Sun. 62 I see they ... undermine us? Thirlwall’s copy of Paterson annotates as [August] Walters (see p. 180), as does Norman Holmes Pearson’s copy—although Pearson received much of his information via Thirlwall. Weaver 207 offers the plausible suggestion that the passage is from a letter by WCW’s friend Fred Miller, who edited the left-wing magazine Blast (see Weaver 71). But the comments are not in the approximately one hundred letters from Miller to WCW filed at Yale and Buffalo. The passage may be WCW’s own prose, perhaps a record of a friend’s comment. On Buffalo E17, possibly the first appearance of this passage, the lines are handwritten, rather than typed in the manner of the transcribed letters, and the passage undergoes revision more radical than WCW’s usual treatment of letters. The E17 version reads: I see the Senate is trying to throw out Lillienthal and deliver the bomb to a few choice industrialists. I don’t think they will succeed but even those party leaders here who hope to be elected to power are among them. That’s what I mean when I refuse to the oppose the communists. Are they any worse than the shits who are trying to undermine us? It is terrifying to think how easily we can be destroyed. The Buffalo E23 version is also quite different from the printed version. For David E. Lilienthal’s comment to Weaver see Weaver 207. 64 an old man Thirlwall wrote to Sankey that the sermon was based on one “Williams heard at Lambert Tower ‘sometime before the war’” Sankey 92. 64 There are people ... upon me A further extract from the April 1943 [ ? ] Marcia Nardi letter, see note to p. 45. On Buffalo E5 the paragraph reads as in the printed version except that “few months” reads “past few months” and “maladjustments” reads “maladjustments, if necessary.” WCW omits the final sentence of the paragraph: “And my economic situation has been involved, of course.” On the Buffalo E25 draft the text is as the printed version. 66 The detectives ... detective said With the Buffalo E16 typescripts is an October 19, 1943, letter from WCW’s Paterson correspondent David Lyle (for Lyle see note to p. 15), which begins: “I remember your saying once you had thought of going around with detectives etc, on their duties, but abandoned it as being all the same thing. Here’s a going around, cut and indexed to be absorbed in ten minutes, of a going around in Paterson.” 67 Hamilton saw ... worse than any ... Especially ... Jefferson Possibly WCW’s own prose summary. In early Buffalo typescripts the language is included with prose material that is clearly WCW’s. 68 America the golden ... in hand See Weaver 207–208 for an extensive annotation on this parody, which is to the tune of “America the Beautiful,” and for background detail on John Peter Altgeld, governor of Illinois in the early 1890s. 69 As with some of the prose, the periods in the poetry mark WCW’s omissions from his own earlier drafts. 69–70 As a corollary ... manufactury Although Sankey 95 cites the Federal Writers’ Project’s Stories of New Jersey (New York, 1938), this passage is closer to the version in the four pages of the Federal Writers’ Project publication Stories of New Jersey, December 1936, School Bulletin #11—“prepared for use in public schools.” The first paragraph in the passage may be WCW’s version of the source’s “Though the Revolution had left America politically independent of Great Britain, leading minds soon realized that the fruits of liberty would be bitter if the new country could not secure her industrial independence as well.” The next two paragraphs follow the language of the 1936 text closely, with the exception of some minor changes in punctuation and definite and indefinite articles that occur through the retyping and rearrangement of these passages, and of the differences noted below. Between the two paragraphs in Stories of New Jersey appears a sentence on Washington’s coat at his inaugural that WCW revises and inserts as verse in a subsequent prose passage from this material, see p. 74. Other major differences: Hamilton/Alexander Hamilton WCW’s revision, on Buffalo E25 a great Federal City Added by WCW. The title of the Stories of New Jersey article is “Paterson, ‘The Federal City.’” a national manufactury Added by WCW, picked up from a later passage in the source that WCW inserts into Paterson, see p. 74. 72 that cold blooded ... get it The details fit the crime and hanging of John Johnson, see notes to pp. 197 and 202. 73 The Federal ... high taxes Extracts from a mimeographed sheet —addressed to “Dear Citizen”—put out by Alfredo and Clara Studer and dated January 1947, see Sankey 98–99 for more details. WCW includes further excerpts below, and excerpts from the pamphlet “Tom Edison on the Money Subject” which accompanied the sheet. The Studer sheet is filed with Buffalo E17 and marked by WCW at the top, “Following the preacher’s clownish talk.” Clara Studer wrote to WCW on April 18, 1946, telling him that she had written to Pound and received “back several little notes” which included a request “to write and tell you what he ‘actually did say’ ... [in] his [Italian] broadcasts.” Studer asks if WCW is interested in receiving some Social Credit materials (Yale uncat.). For Social Credit and WCW’s attitude and involvement see Weaver 103–114. WCW’s second paragraph reproduces the third paragraph of the sheet with two minor differences, which are present in the Buffalo typescripts. The source reads “over and over and over,” and “in war or peace.” The first paragraph reads in full: “The Federal Reserve System is a private enterprise. Ever since 1863 (1863 to 1913 it went under the name of National Banks) a private monopoly has had the power—given to it by a spineless Congress of that time—to issue and regulate all our money.” The paragraph WCW omits charges that “this was an act of treason” that “surrendered, to a handful of merchants, the most sacred right given to the people of the United States in Article I of the Constitution”; a “treason ... committed as a result of pressure by ... [the] Bank of England.” 73 Witnessing the Falls ... they called it Probably WCW’s own prose, see note to p. 67. 74 The newspapers ... his place Apart from one verbal difference (“all the cotton”), verbatim from Stories of New Jersey, see note to pp. 69– 70. 74 The prominent ... goods From BH 408, the only remaining sentence from the earlier drafts of what was originally a longer extract from their entry for Paterson. BH reads “cotton cloths,” as do the drafts up to Buffalo E25. 74 In other ... work The fourth paragraph of the Studer mimeographed sheet, which reads “the Government of ours” for “our Government” (as Studer on Buffalo E23, but as printed on E18). 74 In all ... up Sentences taken and rearranged from the pamphlet that accompanied the Studer sheet, “Tom Edison on the Money Subject.” The original pamphlet, about two thousand words, is filed with Buffalo E23. The pamphlet reads “If people ever” and capitalizes “per cent to the stated cost.” The differences are on the Buffalo typescripts. For fuller details of the pamphlet see Joel Conarroe, William Carlos Williams’ “Paterson” : Language and Landscape (Philadelphia, 1970) 156. 76 Whatever ... fashion From the same Marcia Nardi letter quoted elsewhere in Book II, see note to p. 45. WCW omits two paragraphs between this and the previous extract, on p. 64, paragraphs in which MN discusses her difficulties in obtaining employment. that note of yours WCW’s note of February 17, 1943, ending his side of the correspondence. part ... Nor WCW omits “For you to consent to see me as you might consent to see one of your patients outside of office hours, in that entirely impersonal way—no, thanks; not that for me.” WCW marks the excision on the Buffalo E19 typescript. The Buffalo E5 version has four other differences from the printed text. The differences occur through the E19 and E25 retypings: mechanical/the mechanical at your office/there at your office some of/some one of written you/written to you 78–79 The descent ... indestructible WCW printed as a separate poem in his 1954 volume The Desert Music. See CP2 245–246, and the accompanying note on page 486 in which WCW links these lines to his concept of “the variable foot.” are towards/are toward Partisan Review (1948), Pictures from Brueghel to waken/to awaken Desert Music, Pictures from Brueghel 80 Missing was ... age From Mary McCarthy, The Company She Keep (New York, 1942), 239. McCarthy’s prose continues: “Jim reread these masters and tried to reproduce the tone by ear, but he could not do it. He became frightened and went back to the public library; perhaps, as someone had suggested, the material was under-researched.” The remaining eleven words of the Paterson prose passage appear as verse in early drafts. 82 My feelings ... damned thing From the beginning of a letter by Marcia Nardi, [May?] 1943. See note to p. 45. The original letter is not filed with any of WCW’s correspondence or typescripts, to my knowledge, although the Buffalo E5 typescript contains a longer version, which may be a transcription, and the Buffalo E19 typescript also contains this particular passage. The long prose section that closes Book II is from this letter, see note to p. 87, which also discusses a version of this letter at HRC. In the three typed drafts of this paragraph on E5 and E19 “responsibility” reads “all responsibility.” 85 Seventy-five ... last week Possibly a reference to one of the international conferences held by Princeton University in 1946 to mark its bicentennial. 86 full octave/slow octave Partisan Review (1948) 87–91 My attitude ... pages A continuation of the letter from Marcia Nardi begun on p. 82, see note above. A blank page preceded this prose in IST. Although, as noted above, the original of this letter is not among WCW’s papers, the HRC holds a version in MN’s hand that she sometimes claimed many years later was a copy of what she sent WCW. The HRC document differs in a number of ways from the Buffalo E5 version and the printed version, and some of these differences have been discussed by Theodora R. Graham in “‘Her Heigh Compleynte’: The Cress Letters of William Carlos Williams’ Paterson” in Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams: The University of Pennsylvania Conference Papers (Philadelphia, 1983), ed. Daniel Hoffman, pp. 164–193. Professor Graham, working with what appears to have been a copy of the HRC document provided by MN, suggests that WCW rewrote parts of the letter to produce the printed version. However, my own conclusion is that the HRC document is probably a draft of the letter MN eventually sent to WCW, and that the Buffalo E5 typescript of the letter is, in the absence of the letter itself, the closest to the source document currently available, and the textual notes to this section of the poem are based upon this conclusion. Thus I note the verbal differences between the printed version and the E5 typescript below, but not the differences between the HRC document and the Paterson text. (Interested readers may consult Professor Graham’s article, in which all the examples quoted match the HRC document.) Since WCW’s treatment of this letter has been the subject of some critical debate, I record below the reasons for my own conclusion: 1) WCW’s practice elsewhere in Paterson with letters is to cut and condense, but not to add substantial material of his own. Changes he makes to letters can be traced in the various typescripts of the poem, but for this letter no changes beyond the cuts noted below can be documented in the Buffalo typescripts. 2) The HRC document itself contains a number of revisions of vocabulary and style that are consistent with the letter being composed and revised as it is being written. It does not have the character of a copy of a letter already written, and indicates an on-going involvement with the process of composition that also makes unlikely the subsequently sent letter being copied verbatim from the HRC draft. On the other hand, Buffalo E; has some characteristics of a transcription. The differences between the HRC document and E5 could be explained as amplification and clarification by MN of her points as she rewrites from a draft. 3) MN made contradictory statements concerning the relationship of the HRC material to the printed version in Paterson. In material held privately, she asserts in one letter that the HRC document is an “exact copy” of the printed version, but in another that WCW made only trivial changes to what she sent him. Both comments are in letters written forty years after the event. In addition, the 1966 letter from the HRC agreeing to purchase material from MN, including this document, describes the items purchased as letters from WCW, and drafts of letters to WCW. 4) A number of the passages present in the E5 version but not the HRC document concern details either that WCW could not be expected to know, or that he is unlikely to have added to the letter. In one example he is unlikely to have invented—the references to Miss Fleming, ST and SS—WCW has to disguise identities, including that of Harvey Breit, for the printed version (see note to pp. 87–88 below). In his correspondence with MN, WCW is very careful in his references to her aborted relationship with Breit, a mutual acquaintance, and WCW never mentions MN in his letters to Breit. In another passage that is part of a longer section WCW cut from E5, but which is not in the HRC document, MN discusses her relationship with her son and includes details that WCW would be unlikely to invent. A collation of the HRC document with E5 reveals a number of similar examples. 5) The HRC document does not contain the postscripts of the printed version, although its final page contains space for the first postscript to be started. The missing postscripts support the possibility that MN rewrote and revised the letter from the HRC draft, and—in her continuing concern to strike the right tone and convey what she wanted to communicate—she added the postscripts before sending off the letter. The postscripts also contain information, concerning the circumstances of the stolen money order, for example, that WCW would be unlikely to know or invent. 6) MN’s papers, privately held, indicate that on occasion she would write a preliminary draft before the sent version of a letter. This is the case with the letter of March 30, 1949, to WCW noted below. 87 the Introduction to your Paterson In the early 1940s WCW was calling the whole poem as then conceived an “Introduction.” woman’s need to/woman’s needing to “sail free in her own element” MN paraphrases WCW in his review of Anaïs Nin’s The Winter of Artifice. The review appeared in New Directions Seven (1942), 434. relationships with other women/friendships with other women awareness/awarenesses doctor/Dr. P. 88 almost in/in almost W/Woodstock [New York] so simple /as simple Miss Fleming HRC and E5 read Hawkins. WCW had written to Iris Barry, Film Library Director at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in December 1942 concerning a possible position for MN and the letter had been passed on to Frances Hawkins, who—as she wrote to WCW on March 9, 1943—handled personnel matters at the Museum, and she offered to talk to MN (Yale uncat.). In the fall of 1942 Marianne Moore also made some job inquiries on MN’s behalf at WCW’s request (Moore to WCW, October 1942 and October 11, 1942 (Yale uncat.). S.T. and S.S.... Clara ... Jeanne E5 reads H.B. for S.T. but the other initials are unchanged. Harvey Breit’s wife was named Clara, and S.S. may be Sydney Salt, who, as Elizabeth O’Neil has pointed out to me, dedicates two books of his poetry to “Jeanne.” Salt lived close to MN in Greenwich Village at this time. In other letters to WCW, MN refers to a “Sydney.” 89 I asked for/I asked you for and maybe/and then maybe And then All previous printings have a printer’s error “And the” Miss X/Miss Hawkins so badly On E5 the paragraph continues for twenty additional lines, discussing the poor employment prospects at the Office of War Information, and “at the Museum itself,” and MN’s relationship with her son. That I’m in the/I’m in the with the social/with social welfare All previous printings and E5 have “wellfare,” but MN spells correctly on HRC kind at all/sort at all 90 acceptably/acceptedly I was able/I was then able like measles/like the measles that introduction to my poems In New Directions Seven (1942), 413– 414. 91 the only thing/the only happy thing La votre C. WCW alludes to Criseyde’s signature in writing to Troilus in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde, see SL 233. 21 Pine Street The letter is written from 21 Grove Street, New York. Brown’s/[James] Laughlin’s is dead now/is now dead he took any/he who took any or antisocial/or any antisocial I’m reminded/I am reminded A.N./Anaïs Nin See note to p. 87 above. those pages/these pages On March 30, 1949, the correspondence between WCW and MN resumed when MN wrote of discovering her letters in Paterson II while browsing in a Woodstock bookstore (ND Archives). This resumption continued until 1956 when WCW was forced to curtail most of his correspondence following his strokes. WCW’s final letter, congratulating MN on having a book of her poems published by the Swallow Press, concludes: “You are one of the hardiest women and one of the most gifted and generous women I know. I am happy at your success” (October 5, 1956, HRC). BOOK III (1949) The dust jacket of the first edition carried “A Note on Paterson Book III” by WCW, dated September 28, 1949: Paterson is a man (since I am a man) who dives from cliffs and the edges of waterfalls, to his death—finally. But for all that he is a woman (since I am not a woman) who is the cliff and the waterfall. She spreads protecting fingers about him as he plummets to his conclusions to keep the winds from blowing him out of his path. But he escapes, in the end, as I have said. As he dies the rocks fission gradually into wild flowers the better to voice their sorrow, a language that would have liberated them both from their distresses had they but known it in time to prevent catastrophe. The brunt of the four books of Paterson (of which this is the third, ‘The Library’) is a search for the redeeming language by which a man’s premature death, like the death of Mrs. Cumming in Book I, and the woman’s (the man’s) failure to hold him (her) might have been prevented. Book IV will show the perverse confusions that come of a failure to untangle the language and make it our own as both man and woman are carried helplessly toward the sea (of blood) which, by their failure of speech, awaits them. The poet alone in this world holds the key to their final rescue. 94 Cities ... Santayana From George Santayana, The Last Puritan: A Memoir in the Form of a Novel (New York, 1936) 140. (The next two sentences in Santayana read: “No: for him cities were congested spots, ugly, troublesome and sad. Boston, when he first passed through it, seemed to him nothing but Great Falls multiplied.”) sets up her trophies Santayana’s text reads “sets up all her trophies” 95 Avery Samuel Putnam Avery (1822–1904), who made a fortune advising American buyers of European art, see Weaver 209. 97–98 Blow! ... from the reading In 12th Street (December 1949) WCW published material from various parts of Book III as a single piece under the title “Paterson Book III: Preface.” In addition to this passage the material included “The “Castle’ too ... So be it” p. 99, “Papers ... Unabashed. So be it” pp. 117–118, “Upon which ... So be it. So be it. So be it” p. 130. 97 So be it WCW told Pound “the ‘so be it’ I copied verbatim from a translation of a Plains Indian prayer. ... It meant what it says: if it so is then so let it be. In other words, to hell with it” (December 1949, Lilly Library, Indiana University). 97 Cyclone, fire/and flood On February 8, 1902, a devastating fire consumed much of central Paterson, destroying the Danforth Free Public Library (and most of its contents) among other buildings. Nelson and Shriner record “there was a strong gale blowing ... [which] acted like a huge bellows” (505). The following month the Passaic river “which flows through a large part of the city” flooded. “With the enormous volume of water that poured down the river bed and the territory adjacent, came huge floes of ice, carrying destruction wherever they went” (507). Later in the year a freak tornado struck the city. The library was rebuilt on a new site, and reopened in 1905. 98 no wind/no winds 12th Street (1949) doors ... hands In 12th Street reads “doors/that the wind holds; wrenches from our hands/—and arms.” 98 Old newspaper files ... Works As Weaver 209 notes, the various details are from 1936 issues of The Prospector: “two little girls, firmly locked in each other’s arms,” July 10, p. 6; a photograph of the Paterson Cricket Club in 1896, August 21, p. 6; the story of the “two local millionaires” appears in the issue of October 9; the “Indian rock shelter” is described in the October 2 issue; the August 28 issue carried an article on the Rogers Locomotive Works. no language In 12th Street “So be it” refrain follows here, and is omitted following “home” reels ... So be it In 12th Street reads reels—caught still in its wrappings, wind-held. So be it. Starts back amazed from the reading. 98–99 Gently! ... hat! These lines are part of a poem WCW published in 1937 titled “Patterson: Episode 17” [sic], seventy-eight lines of which are incorporated into Book III. Further material from the poem is on pp. 104–105 and 127–128. In “Patterson: Episode 17,” the concept of “Beautiful Thing” is first linked to a figure beating a carpet on a church lawn, but the two opening stanzas that describe the figure, and a concluding stanza, are omitted from the material incorporated into Paterson. An early draft of the 1937 poem now at Harvard is titled “To a Tall Young Colored Woman.” For the 1937 poem see CP1 439–43. 99 The “Castle” ... Lambert Catholina Lambert (1834–1923) was born in Yorkshire, England, and became one of Paterson’s richest mill owners. He built his Castle residence “Belle Vista” in 1892. It was sold to the city in 1925 and now houses the Passaic County Park Commission and the Passaic County Historical Society. In the winter of 1936 the art gallery wing, by then in disrepair, was demolished, despite the opposition of two fierce editorials in The Prosfector. For the story of Lambert and the Castle see the richly illustrated Silk and Sandstone: The Story of Catholina Lambert and His Castle, by Flavia Alaya (Passaic County Historical Society, 1984). 99 The “Castle” ... be it” 12th Street carries an additional line before this passage, “Come death! Come clean death!” and adds following the passage “Come wind! Come flood! Come cleansing/fire. So be it. Come end of the world:” 99 Rose and I ... now WCW told his friend Robert Carlton Brown (1886–1959) on September 10, 1948, “Paterson III is stalled for the moment. I’m going to use your letter about Gurlie Flynn and the others in it” (Southern Illinois Univ. Library). Rose was Brown’s second wife. The letter has not been found, but a Yale Za188 version of this passage is headed “Excerpt from letter” and begins with an additional sentence: “Your Paterson, Book II should sell because it hits the semi-documentary groove.” On February 25 [1950?] Brown wrote to WCW of his enthusiastic reading of Book III, adding “I called Rose to my side to look at the damned thing now” (Yale uncat.). The famous “Paterson Pageant” was staged in New York’s Madison Square Garden in 1913 for the benefit of the Paterson strikers. Za 188 reads “on the Pagent,” and “the Union Hall.” 102–103 The Indians ... among us” The story appears in “Extracts From a Work Called ‘Breeden Raedt’” in New York Documentary History IV, 67–68, although it is unclear if this is WCW’s source. WCW’s first paragraph summarizes the language of this account, and then follows it almost verbatim—although omitting some specific details of the torture. A much shorter account appears in both Nelson and NS, although only Nelson 38 gives the New York source. 103–104 From 1869 ... assembled ... A spectator ... adventures. WCW’s own prose, in verse in early drafts. KH and Thirlwall both note The Prospector as the source of the information in this passage. The August 7, 1936, issue carried a long article on the tightrope performances over the Falls of DeLave, Leslie, and Dobbs, including a photograph of one of Leslie’s performances. The article contains the central details of WCW’s passage. 110 the Englishman WCW’s father, William George Williams, who died in 1918 and who figures more extensively here in earlier drafts of the poem. New Barbadoes is an area in Bergen County, New Jersey. 114 to it ... mother? ) These lines are spaced differently on the Yale Za188 and KS typescripts and in the first edition. The change occurs with the first printing of NC: to it not by intellection but by sub-intellection (to want to be blind as a pretext for saying, We’re so proud of you! A wonderful gift! How do you find the time for it in your busy life? It must be a great thing to have such a pastime. But you were always a strange boy. How’s your mother? ) 114–115 With due ceremony ... distributed Adapted and rearranged from material in Nelson 35–38. The NS 51–54 version is almost the same, but Za188 follows Nelson where they differ. 115–116 It started ... night... When discovered ... doomed Source not found, but possibly WCW’s summary of information in NS 505 and elsewhere. The passages are extensively revised in Za188. 115 song/songs The Tiger’s Eye (1949) 118 An iron dog Weaver 210 cites an article on “The Brass Dog” (actually made of sheet-iron) that is probably WCW’s source, Passaic County Historical Society Bulletin (November 1944), 19–20. The dog hung outside a tin-shop. “At 12.30 a.m. December 9, 1846 the shop was completely burned out, together with several buildings along side, but the dog kept watch over the place never to move from the spot.” WCW’s copy of this issue of the Bulletin is with his papers at Yale (Za W677). 118 iron dog/bronze dog 12th Street (1949) laughter ... green 12th Street has an additional line: “an empurpled face choked blue with laughter” a multiformity/the multiformity The Tiger’s Eye (1949) 124–125 Hi Kid ... So long KH annotates on UVA typescript “letter to my maid Gladys [Enalls] from her girlfriend [Dolly],” and see Weaver 210. Gladys ran away in 1942, and the letter was among a number found in her room, some of which WCW transcribes in Za188 for possible inclusion in Paterson. The original of the letter he finally included, postmarked December 2, 1941, is at UVA. In the various retypings some changes crept into the idiosyncratic spelling and diction of the original letter. In two cases—“I was a feeling good” and “car slaped on brakes”—I have restored the original because the first edition reproduced it, and the editorial changes (“I was feeling good” and “slapped” ) were made posthumously with the 1963 printing. Other verbal differences from the original that occur through various retypings: only high browns/only of high browns stopped facing/stoped facing half filled/half fill ever since/every since supposed to be the father/suppose to be the father supposed to be going to have/suppose to be going to have to have kids/to have kid This change is marked by WCW, Za188. 3rd/3th 3 kids/3 kid reads “kid” on KS typescript your next/the next Well here/Will here WCW omits a one-sentence paragraph following “everywhere” and before “Bab” in all typescripts: “Well you said you was coming Thankgiven why didn’t you come?” The ellipsis covers one and a half pages in the original that appear on early typescripts but are later cut. The writer details more pregnancies, then names “Boy’s trying to go with me,” “Boy’s I go with,” “Boy’s I like almost mad about,” and “Boy’s I am trying to get.” 129 There is ... propellers WCW’s own copies of the Passaic County Historical Society Bulletin now at Yale include the December 1944 issue, which carried a piece on “the first successfully operated submarine” now resting “in Westside Park, Paterson, N.J.,” designed by John Philip Holland in Paterson in 1881. “His first boat for experimental purposes was tried on the river Passaic and this boat now is ... housed in the Museum of the City of Paterson.” 130 intervenes/supervenes 12th Street (1949) sullied/muddied 12th Street at the bridge, silent/silent at the bridge 12th Street . OParadiso!/to—the history 12th Street 132 The remains ... mourned KH researched and summarized this material for WCW, which he then revised and shortened. In a note to WCW accompanying her summary, now with Yale Za188, KH notes the titles of her sources. The details and some of the language come from: Lydia A. Jocelyn and Nathan J. Cuffee, Lords of the Soil (Boston, 1905) 1–17; Gabriel Furman, Antiquities of Long Island (Port Washington, L.I., n.d.) 60; Ralph Duvall, The History of Shelter Island (Shelter Island, N.Y., 1932) 14. An earlier version of KH’s notes is filed with the UVA typescripts. The two ellipses in the printed version mark WCW’s cuts of KH’s prose—by a total of thirty-five words. 133–134 About Merselis ... cattle In Nelson 269; the first four words of the passage are WCW’s summary. In Nelson “Merselis” is also spelled “Merseilles.” Three of the printed version’s verbal differences from Nelson originate with the apparent transcription, filed with Za188: confined/being confined that some/lest some to say/to say that The others occur through the various retypings: stare/stare in of the whole neighborhood/not only of herself and her family, but of the whole neighborhood everybody/everyone he was/he was commonly the witch/that witch would soon be/were soon to be exchange/interchange wife was/wife had been 135–136 It was ... bank WCW’s prose. “She” is KH, who annotates on the UVA typescripts “Lester Wadsworth told me of this, he was the orchestra leader c. 1930,” and see Weaver 211. In some of the Za188 typescripts the details are in verse. An earlier version identified Wadsworth as the son of Rutherford printer Charlie Wadsworth (see A 6). 137 A version of the first three lines appears in WCW’s short 1938 poem “At the Bar” (CP1 457), one of a number originally published as “from ‘Paterson,’” and part of his earlier concept of the poem. 138 The first two-thirds of a letter sent to WCW by Ezra Pound, October 13 [1948], from St. Elizabeths hospital (Yale uncat.). Through September and October WCW and Pound had corresponded on dramatists. The line “(re. C.O.E. Panda Panda )” is WCW’s addition. When Pound received Paterson III, Dorothy Pound wrote to WCW, in December 1949: “Ez says many fine things in Paterson iii.... E puzzled about a Panda?” (Yale uncat.). WCW replied, “The Panda Panda, I’m sorry to say, has no meaning—merely a nonsense value in order not to reveal anything that might identify the work in question. I don’t know what put Panda into my head” (December 1949, Lilly Library, Indiana University). In a note on the KS typescript WCW instructs “to occupy a full page, as it stands—facing the page following.” The instructions were not followed in NC. WCW incorporated Pound’s reaction to this juxtaposition into Book IV, see p. 182. With the posthumous 1963 printing the printed text was altered to bring it closer to the idiosyncratic spelling and spacing of Pound’s original, the original having been deposited at Yale. However the first edition arrangement is in the earliest typescripts, and they indicate that WCW was not concerned to check that the original’s lineation had been reproduced on the page exactly, or that all of Pound’s shorthand had been correctly deciphered. In any case, the spacing in both versions is only an approximation of the original. I have returned to the text as it appeared in the first edition and the NC editions, and record below the verbal differences between the first edition text, the source, and the post-1963 printings: got sake/gor Zake (source and 1963) exaggerate/egggzaggerate (source and 1963) in the source, written above “! !” is “(my xt)” Not in any printed version The spacing and punctuation of the following lines in 1963 more closely approximate the source: Loeb.—plus Frobenius, plus Gesell plus Brooks Adams ef you ain’t read him all.— Then Golding ‘Ovid’ is in Everyman lib. The 1963 version of the last two lines reads: just cause it is mentioned eng passang. is fraugs.... Below I give these two lines as they appear in the original, and also what follows in the letter and is omitted from Paterson, although included in the earliest drafts: just cause it is mentioned . eng then of course there passang . is fraugs. hv. yu read all the fraugs fr. Willy to M. Jean? (want “Crucifixion” on loan . ? ? (it aint a ch. service) prob. unobtainable here. (N.B. Nancy has fergave me & no longer thinks I orter be shot fer not assassinatin Franco). & so on yrz Ez 139 SUBSTRATUM ... found here The chart and summary are in Nelson II, although not the title “Substratum.” Four entries, some of them duplications, are in Nelson but omitted in the printed version. They are included in the earlier drafts, but missing by the KS typescript. 540 feet....Soft shale 565 feet....Soft shale 613 feet....Soft shale 1,180 feet....Fine quicksand, reddish The omitted material marked by the ellipsis reads: “and the character and amount of the saline impurities giving little hope of success by going deeper.” The Nelson account goes on to describe the analysis of the water’s minerals that was subsequently made. Two other verbal differences occur through the retypings: the tabular/a tabular of Europe/in Europe 2 x 1 x 1/16 in. I have restored the reading of the original, and of all the typescripts. 140 American poetry ... exist Weaver 211 notes the source, “From a review of a group of American poets by George Barker, ‘Fat Lady at the Circus,’ Poetry (London) 13 (June-July 1948), 39.” See Weaver for further background and a 1966 comment by Barker. 143–44 When an African ... know From Sophie Drinker, Music and Women: The Story of Women in Their Relation to Music (New York, 1948), 11. Drinker’s quoted material slightly misquotes from D. Amaury Talbot, Woman’ s Mysteries of a Primitive People (London, 1915), 208. The ellipsis is Drinker’s. Differences from the original, present by the KS typescript: slain/killed singing songs/singing sad songs bough/boughs the spirit/his spirit fertility/virility Until the 1968 fourth printing Ibibio was misspelled Ibidio, probably an error on the galleys, since the spelling is correct on the KS typescript. The error was one listed in Weaver’s 1967 note to James Laughlin (see “A Note on the Text”). 144 I was thinking ... him The speaker is annotated by Thirlwall in his copy of Paterson—Betty Stedman, the recipient of the Musty letter, see pp. 53–54. Her friend, Eleanor Musgrove Britton Mark, was shot by husband Noel Thomas Mark on June 24, 1946, in Metairie, Louisiana. The husband told police he mistook his wife for a prowler. Stanley Stedman writes: “Eleanor was my wife’s dearest friend ... My wife was certain that he murdered her and was upset and bitter for years. Eleanor was also a patient of Dr. Williams. I feel sure that the paragraph in question is a pretty good rendition of what Elizabeth said to Dr. Williams that day. The reference to Clifford occurred because my wife felt that none of this would have happened if Eleanor had married him. I do remember us sending him some off color jokes” (letter to Christopher MacGowan, December 15, 1990). Shortly afterwards WCW wrote his short story “The Farmers’ Daughters,” which centers upon the friendship of the two women, but did not publish it until 1957. See The Farmer? Daughters (1961), 345–374. BOOK IV (1951) Corydon & Phyllis The two pastoral figures are based, according to WCW’s correspondence and evidence in earlier typescripts, on “a distinguished woman, a prominent figure in the New York and international world, living on Sutton Place with a view such as I describe in the poem” (letter to Marianne Moore, June 23, 1951, Rosenbach Library, printed with omissions in SL 305), whose brother was a financier—Thirlwall annotates as “Ann[e] Morgan” in his copy of SL; and on a nurse originally from Paterson whom WCW had known in the late 1920s. The letters in this section are all WCW’s inventions. 157 than woman Harvard typescript reads “than a woman” 160 Via?/Chemistry Reads “Via/Chemistry?” in Wake (1950) 162 happens me/happens to me NC and all subsequent printings. But there is textual evidence that “to” is a deliberate omission. The word is omitted on early typescripts, on one Yale Za189 draft the word is typed in but then typed over as if to be omitted, and it is not on the Harvard typescript. It is on the Dartmouth page proofs, but is then omitted in the first edition. 163 Voi ch’entrate Dante, Inferno, Canto III, l. 9. 170 bog/a bog Quarterly Review of Literature (1951) 170 Norman Douglas ... die Weaver notes WCW’s amplification of this story in A 207. 171 the air ... the glow In Quarterly Review of Literature reads “the air above it through the glass room/having taken up the glow” 171 among/beside Quarterly Review of Literature their talk/the talk Quarterly Review of Literature 171 Curie (the movie queen) MGM’s Madame Curie, starring Greer Garson, was released in 1943. 171 Billy Sunday Weaver 213 notes the background to the preacher’s 1915 visit to Paterson, and his baseball career. 172–74 Dear Doctor ... A.G. From Allen Ginsberg, March 30, 1950 (Yale uncat.), the first of three Ginsberg letters included in Paterson, see also pp. 193 and 210–211. Like many of the prose passages in Paterson, the text of this letter picked up changes, mostly in small details, through the various retypings and editions of the poem. In the posthumous 1963 printing, with the original letter available at Yale, changes were made in the text in the direction of the original. But not all the differences were caught, some regularizing of Ginsberg’s punctuation and use of lower-case spelling departed even further from the original, and in the case of “dig” and “did” a change initiated by WCW was lost. On the grounds outlined in “A Note on the Text” I have returned the text to the version WCW submitted to the printer in the Harvard typescript (although incorporating the 1963 change in the identifying initials), and note below verbal printed variants and verbal differences from the original: Doctor Original reads “Doctor Williams,” change marked by WCW on Za189. once briefly All printings and typescripts Original reads “briefly once” As to my history WCW omits the five lines that follow in the original, marking the omission on Za189, and adds these four words to the original’s next paragraph. The original reads “—my father is Louis Ginsberg, of whom you know. He would send his regards, if he knew I was writing, and also an invitation to come to supper, as we have bought a house in Eastside and are able to entertain for the first time in years. He was remarried last week.” WCW’s uncatalogued correspondence at Yale indicates that he met Louis Ginsberg in 1931. schools/school 1963 and in the original do there All typescripts and printings, original reads “do here” or lyric/of lyric 1963 and in the original harking All printings and typescripts, original reads “barkening” did Original and 1963 read “dig,” but WCW marked the change on Za189, probably unfamiliar with the usage and thinking “dig” a typing error, cadences All printings and typescripts, original reads “cadence” an old IST printed “on old,” possible uncaught error on the galleys have real IST and NC printed “did have real,” possible uncaught error on the galleys bum of a paterson/bum of Paterson 1963, the original reads “bum of paterson” A.G. First edition and NC read “A.P.,” original reads “Allen Ginsberg.” Although this is a posthumous change, WCW used “A.G.” for the Ginsberg letter in Book V, pp. 210–211. The identification of Ginsberg’s letters in the first editions runs “A.P,” no identification, “A.G.” “WCW said ‘A.P.’ was for ‘A Poet,’” letter from Allen Ginsberg to Christopher MacGowan, July 29, 1992. 176 Levy Weaver 214 identifies as H. Levy, author of .4 Philosophy for a Modern Man (New York, 1938). 176 CASE ... reprisal From Joseph Felsen, Alfred J. Weil, and William Wolarsky, “Inapparent Salmonella Infections in Hospitals,” in Journal of the American Medical Association 143 (29 July 1950), 1136. The passage from the original is cut out and pasted onto a sheet now with Yale Za189. WCW changed the initials, age, and date at a late stage, for the Dartmouth page proofs still read as the original. The original also reads “pediatrics” for “pediatric.” 177 On Friday ... known From WCW’s chapter on Columbus in his 1925 In the American Grain, 25–26, which is in turn from Columbus’ Journals. IAG reads “On shore I sent” and “I had ever seen....” The differences are in the early typescripts. 178 brow/brows NC, but in no other printings, and not on any typescripts. 179 les idées Wilsoniennes nous/gâtent Weaver 214 suggests a reference to New Democracy, 1 February 1934, which cited Woodrow Wilson on the control of credit. In his own copy of Paterson Thirlwall annotates “Fed. Reserve.” 180 Weaver 215 gives the citation, Money 15,4 (June 1950), I. The original page is pasted in full onto a sheet among the Za189 typescripts, but WCW omits parts of the source in the drafts. The original carries the headline “DO YOU FAVOR LENIN OR UNCLE SAM?” with a sub-headline “Our Treasury Officials Support A Legally Protected, Dishonest Finance Plan Which Will Accomplish Lenin’s Wish to Bankrupt America. There’s Still Time to Wreck Lenin’s Wish.” WCW omits an introductory paragraph in the original, which reads: Would you continue to support a strictly dishonest, legally protected finance system if you were convinced the writer has the solution to our financial and economic chaos? Would you continue to oppose a finance system based on the Constitution? Do you know that the Treasury officials are actually assisting the Russians by supporting a finance system which will eventually bankrupt us? Following “more airplanes” the original adds: “They propose to foist Communism upon the people by force and nothing else.” Between the Paterson version’s last sentence and “Enforce the Constitution on Money” (which is pasted in separately in Za189) the original has an additional 19 lines, including the assertion that following the present dishonest, legally protected finance method ... 1. The airplane would cost 1 million dollars. 2. The National debt would be increased 1 million dollars. 3. Federal taxes would raise to higher levels, so would prices. WCW moves August Walters’ name from a by-line position following the subhead to the bottom of the page, and omits the full address the advertisement gives. Other differences from the original, all present in the Za189 typescripts: stronger than they/stronger than they are Pay the manufacturer/Pay the manufacturers deposits the/deposits this his credit/this credit Bankers make/Banker makes only cost/actual cost 181 short of/out of Poetry New York (1950) Trade winds ... drive/In Poetry New York reads “the/trade wind ... drives” sequestered/misspent Poetry New York 182 Release the Gamma/let out the Beta Poetry New York out . out/out of . out Poetry New York credit, stalled ... pen/ Poetry New York reads: Stalled in money (concealing the generative) that kills art . or buys it out of poverty of wit, to win vicariously the blue ribbon . for courage . Stalled in money —the Congressional Medal for bravery beyond the call of duty and end as a bridge-tender on government dole Defeat may steel us in knowledge; money : joke to be wiped out at a stroke of thought 182 just ... NOWHERE Ezra Pound wrote to WCW on 13 December 1949, concerning the juxtaposition in Book III of the Artesian Well chart against his 13 October 1948 letter (pp. 138–139): “2100 ft. = thaz v. interestin’ page . but don’t prove there aint no water no where” (Yale uncat.). An early Za189 draft paraphrases the letter differently again. Following further comments from WCW, on 30 June 1950 Pound suggested “when artesian at 2055 000 in depth is undrinkable—aqueduct useful” (Yale uncat.). These exchanges on the virtues of aqueducts, and of their effect upon impurities in the water, continued into July. WCW’s side of the correspondence is at the Lilly Library, Indiana University. 182 Tolson and ... Tate Weaver 215 identifies and annotates the issue of Poetry (July 1950) that contains Melvin B. Tolson’s “From Libretto for the Republic of Liberia” and Allen Tate’s commentary. 183 Reuther United Auto Workers’ leader Walter Reuther was wounded in his home April 20, 1948. 184–85 IN ... cities From a note sent by Ezra Pound [1950?]. Pound noted in a letter to WCW May 22, 1950, that he had not seen Book II of Paterson, and WCW forwarded a copy. Section I of Book II contains a passage on “invention” that resembles the style of Pound’s Canto XLV (see p. 50). In the original “Will you” reads “Will yu” and “cities” reads “italian cities.” I have restored Pound’s spelling of “splendour,” which WCW retained on the typescripts but which was not reproduced on the galleys. WCW omitted a final line in Pound’s note: “there is ALso the motto to my Gaudier book/wunner ef yu evr seen that?” The two letters are at Yale. 185 cities/italian cities Quarterly Review of Literature 186 “The past ... past,” In a letter to his editor David McDowell, August 22, 1950, WCW writes: “To the Past and those that lived in the Past —which is a direct quotation from my paternal grandmother [Emily Dickenson Wellcome]—or rather a paraphrase of something she once told me, with a dirty look in her eye, in reply to an inquiry I once made of her” (HRC). 186 all but ... river “After Newark, the river enters Newark Bay, and merges with salt water,” George Zabriskie, “The Geography of Paterson,” Perspective, 6: 215. Zabriskie’s article, pp. 201–16, provides a useful summary of the path of the river and the history and geography of Paterson. 186–87 Jonatan ... prominence WCW’s notes in Yale Za188 identify the source as Nelson 345. The first edition’s “Jonatan,” which I have restored, reproduces a printing error in Nelson, and is present in all typescripts. NC and all subsequent printings read “Jonathan.” The account appears as part of Nelson’s genealogy of the Doremus family. Verbal differences from Nelson: the first occurs on what appears to be the transcription typescript, the other two with subsequent retypings, all filed with Za189: someone is/somebody is bayonetted/repeatedly bayoneted attained/attained to Gritie (all typescripts and printings) reads “Grietie” in Nelson. 187 an old friend ... refreshed An early Za189 typescript reads “When Pep West” which WCW revises to the printed version. WCW and Nathanael West edited the short-lived magazine Contact together in 1932. West worked at the Kenmore Hotel from 1927 to 1930, and the Sutton from 1930 to 1933, both in New York City. The prose is WCW’s. 188 Kill ... us? Probably WCW’s own prose. The passage undergoes revision in a number of the typescripts. 190 The greyhaired ... secretary A detail of WCW’s first air trip in 1941, see A 313–14. 192 The whereabouts ... buried WCW adapted a note apparently prepared for him by KH (a reference to this passage filed with Za189 reads “see Kitty’s note”). An early draft identifies “Peter the Dwarf” as “Peter Van Winkle,” although WCW marked the change to “Peter the Dwarf” on a Za189 typescript. Pieter Van Winkle is the figure visited by General Washington (see p. 10) and a relative of the murdered John S. Van Winkle (see p. 197). The genealogy is in NS Volume II 7–8. 192–93 In a deep-set ... river Adapted, largely verbatim, from prose in scattered pages of Charles P. Longwell, A Little Story of Old Paterson as Told by an Old Man (Paterson, 1901). Here from pages 10, 9, 32, 10, 9, 10– 11, 12 and 29. 193. A print Weaver reproduces the print opposite page 189. 193 Dear Doc ... A.G. From Allen Ginsberg, the letter is now at Yale (Yale uncat.). The letter is mistakenly dated by Ginsberg June 6, 1949, but is postmarked 7 June 1950. The second of three letters by Ginsberg in Paterson, see pp. 172–174 and 210–211. As with the other Ginsberg letters, the printed version of this prose was amended in the 1963 and subsequent printings in the direction of reproducing the original more accurately, although the changes are incomplete and inconsistent. Most of the first edition’s differences from the original have as their source a retyping of what appears to be a transcription draft, the transcription draft being much closer to the original letter. There is no manuscript evidence that WCW initiated these changes, but in a subsequent draft he cut and pasted a version that contains the differences. He accepted the changes in all subsequent drafts and in both printings that appeared in his lifetime. For the reasons outlined in the “Note on the Text” I have returned to the version WCW submitted to the printer for the first edition, and note below the differences from the original and post-1963 printings. Doc. Original reads “Dr. Williams.” which is in/which in Original and 1963 neighborhood and/neighborhood Original and 1963 the City/City Original and 1963 the people All printings, original has “people.” see in/see it Original and 1963 really/really at Original and 1963 seen/known Original and 1963 day—the look All printings, original and earliest typescript read “day —that is really my main interest in anything—the look.” A.G. Added in 1963, see note to pp. 172–174. WCW omits the final nine paragraphs of the letter, including AG’s request for his thoughts on Paterson declaring “a WCW week.” “We had Lou Costello week, we had Larry Doby week, why don’t we do something princely for a change?” 194 There were ... days Adapted, largely verbatim, from the prose in scattered pages of Charles P. Longwell, A Little Story of Old Paterson as Told by an Old Man (Paterson, 1901), pp. 29, 23, 11, and 15. 194–95 Paterson ... skull From the New York Herald Tribune, September 18, 1950, p. 16. September 17 was WCW’s birthday. WCW omits four final paragraphs on the Harvard typescript. The three remaining differences from the printed version are present in the Za189 typescripts: months/month told the police/told police Following “county physician” WCW omits “who examined Nancy.” The spelling “Garrett” is in the original and all typescripts and printings. 195–97 There was ... Falls Adapted, largely verbatim, from the prose in scattered pages of Charles P. Longwell, A Little Story of Old Paterson as Told by an Old Man (Paterson, 1901), pp. 24–25, 32–33, 66– 67, 21, 21–22, 47, 51, 52, 53, 59, 49, 33 and 32. 197 Paterson ... butchery Taken from a much longer account in The Prospector, September 25, 1936, I and 4, where it is described as “the first crime of murder, in the County of Passaic.” The version in Paterson quotes from about a tenth of the source, selecting sentences from throughout the article. The verbal differences from The Prospector appear in Za189 with one exception: this county/the county to find and arrest their man/to track him, who soon succeeded in finding and arresting him WCW marks the revision on the Harvard typescript. knowledge of /knowledge or 198 Trip ... was The Dutch rhyme appears in Nelson 395 and NS 156. All printings have “kocien” for “koeien”—an error on the typescripts. 199 the tame sea/the time sea In all printings and on page proof, a possible uncaught error on the galleys. I have restored the reading in all typescripts. 202 John Johnson ... spectacle WCW adapted a note researched and prepared for him by KH, now filed with Za189, which reads: “John Johnson from Liverpool was convicted after 20 minutes conference by the Jury. He was hung on April 30th, 1850 in the Jail Yard in full view of thousands who gathered on Garrett Mountain and on the house tops to witness the spectacle.” The spelling “Garrett” is in all typescripts and printings. BOOK V (1958) WCW originally conceived Paterson as having four books, but even while completing Book IV he noted possible themes for a continuation. Subsequently, he published a twenty-four-line poem “Paterson, Book V: The River of Heaven” in 1952, but this poem developed into the long poem “Asphodel, that Greeny Flower.” See CP2 238–39, 310–337, and accompanying notes. For a comment by WCW on Paterson V that appeared on the dust jacket of the 1958 text see the “Preface” of this edition. 206 at the end ... was one Probably WCW’s prose. The material appears as verse in early typescripts filed with an uncatalogued box at Yale. 206 The Unicorn Within sections I and III of Book V WCW makes a number of references to details in the 15th—16th-century Hunt of the Unicorn tapestries in the collection of the Cloisters Museum, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. The six tapestries, and the fragments of another, all have rich floral backgrounds. The first tapestry depicts the hunters and dogs setting out, the second the surrounded unicorn at a fountain, and the third its attempted escape. In the fourth the unicorn gores a greyhound, in the fifth, the fragment, the virgin/maiden fondles the neck of the unicorn while the huntsmen gather, and in the sixth the slain unicorn is brought before the castle. In the seventh tapestry the gored but alive unicorn is alone within a low, circular wooden enclosure, and the image has been discussed as a symbol of the risen Christ, of the Blessed Virgin and the Incarnation, and as the consummation of marriage. 207 the Dadaist novel WCW’s translation of Soupault’s novel was published in 1929. 208 Dear Bill ... Josie From a letter to WCW from Josephine Herbst, Monday May 14 [1956] (Yale uncat.). As with the prose based on some other letters that are now at Yale, this passage was amended with the posthumous 1963 printing to bring it closer to the original, but inconsistently and—in this case—with the introduction of two new printing errors. In keeping with the principles for Book V laid out in “A Note on the Text,” I have generally followed WCW’s probable transcription typescript, filed with Za190, and note below the verbal differences from the original, the first edition and the post-1963 printings. Most of the changes from the original are introduced in one of the later Za190 drafts. For this particular passage, however, WCW or his typist apparently went back to the original after a number of retypings and picked up some dropped material. I have incorporated these changes from the transcription typescript into the text. F. Original reads Florence [Mrs. Williams] The farm ... saw them. I have restored this sentence, which appears on the transcription typescript, but is dropped on the retyped draft that introduces most of the differences from the original. The next sentence begins directly under this sentence’s opening “The” on the transcription, and with the same word, and thus the omission is quite possibly a typing error. The 1963 text added an ellipsis. See A 269– 271, where WCW describes the farm at Erwinna, Pa. D.E. Dick Eberhart one D.E. envied when he saw it and/and D.E. envied it when he saw it IST writing Omitted in IST barn/farm IST who Omitted in transcription, but appears in later drafts in space/for space IST E’s/ E. in IST, “Eberharts” in original E’s will/E’ll IST and 1963, “Eberharts will” on original. I follow the transcription typescript. H./Hanover Sentence omitted in transcription, but appears in later drafts J.G./Jean Garrigue of memories/of them IST Hepatica/Hepaticas IST trees/the trees IST warblers ... warbler/warbler ... warblers IST and 1963. I follow the transcription, which is as on the original, confused 1963 and original have confounded lined with sheepskin/lines with shipskin 1963 Error originates with 1963 printing. Best/Warmest IST everyone/everybody IST Josie Original and Yale typescripts read Jo; change occurs on Harvard printer’s typescript. 209 wounded wounded Treated as an error and amended to “wounded” in the 1963 printing. As 1963 on one of the Za190 typescripts and as first edition on a number of others and the Harvard typescripts. When consulted during preparations for the 1963 printing, Thirlwall listed this among a number of suggested changes in a note to James Laughlin, adding “sounds a bit mushy for WCW” (ND Archives). Since WCW let the repetition pass on a number of the late typescripts and in the first edition I have restored it. 210–211 Dear Dr.... A.G. The third letter from Allen Ginsberg included in Paterson, see also pp. 172–174 and 193. (May 20, 1956, Yale uncat.). The text was amended with the posthumous 1963 printing to bring it closer to the original, but inconsistently. In keeping with the principles for Book V laid out in “A Note on the Text,” I have generally followed WCW’s probable transcription typescript, filed with Za190, and note below the verbal differences with the original, the first edition and the post-1963 printings. Most of the changes from the original are introduced on one of the later Za190 drafts. your introduction WCW’s introduction “Howl for Carl Solomon” to Ginsberg’s Howl and Other Poems (1956). the point/to the point IST though/thought IST on a ship/in a ship IST family on my/family on way to a Original and 1963. I follow the transcription and IST. have a whitmanesque/do have a whitmanic Original and 1963. I follow the transcription and IST. &/and IST image/images Original and 1963. I follow the transcription and IST. poppa/papa IST any case/my case IST struggle/trouble IST the stones/stones IST to the mind All printings and transcription, original has “of the mind” mind/mind too Original, transcription and 1963, change occurs when original cut later. magazine will be put out/magazeen will be out IST ANY TIME All printings and transcription, original has TIME SUNFLOWER SUTRA Omitted in IST. The poem appears in Howl and Other Poems WCW omits following “contain”: 3 shorter poems too, written subsequent to howl: Supermarket in California—a homage to whitman Sunflower sutra—declaration of the experience of happy real mercy America—make of it what you can. WCW omits eleven lines of the letter following “times” that discuss the literary and travel activities of Jack Kerouac, William Burroughs, Robert Creeley, and Richard Eberhart. Following “weeks” WCW omits “if the FBI doesn’t get me first. Shipping out for Govt Military Sea Transport to refurbish the DEW (defense radar arctic paranoia installactions).” compassion The two dots are in AG’s original. Following “find” WCW omits “not that hard. I mean to indicate next move, next step ahead, jump of the imagination, Whitman had enormous sense of humor and Freedom”; and following “shut up” WCW omits “here’s some more poems which will be going in the book.” etc etc In all printings, but not in the original, which has a period following “too,” the only word omitted here from the original. out ... etc. WCW omits the final fourteen lines of the letter, which concern details of the magazine, Moby, and of possible contributors. A.G. Original reads Allen Ginsberg, is signed Allen, and adds a c/o address. 212 ... The whores ... G.S. Taken from a four-page typescript titled “Bordertown” now with Yale Za190, sent to WCW by Gilbert Sorrentino. An accompanying letter, dated 9 January, 1956 (Yale uncat.), begins: I have just finished reading your book The Desert Music, and I’d like to tell you that I haven’t read poems of such beauty in months or even years. What interested me especially was the last (title) poem, ‘The Desert Music,’ since, about four years ago, when I was in the Army, I wrote a narration in prose, I suppose you could call it, called Bordertown, which deals with a town like the Juarez of your poem ... this being Nuevo Laredo. I’m taking the liberty of sending you the writing, even though it needs revision.... WCW replied on January 12, “Your story is a knockout and one of the best written accounts of the sort that I remember ever to have read.” And a week later: “The story is a rough one but exceptionally well written and must not be lost sight of—and I don’t intend to lose sight of it as you’ll see when the occasion shall arrive. ... an unusual success in a young writer. More power to you” (Univ. of Delaware). And see Weaver 217. The sketch has not been published elsewhere. On 6 April 1962 Sorrentino wrote to WCW: “When you praised that short sketch of mine (the one that you later used pieces of in Paterson 5) it was one of the great things to ever happen to me, both as a writer, Perse, and as a man. At the time, I was broke, miserable, had a huge body of poems and prose that no one had any interest in, and worst of all, I didn’t know a single writer to whom I could show any of the work, for ‘professional’ criticism. You gave me the confidence and the strength to feel my own slowly-ebbing confidence and strength fully. ... I am deeply and permanently grateful to you” (Yale uncat.). A number of changes were made to the passage in the 1964 second printing of the 1963 text (referred to below as 1964), in part through a note to James Laughlin from Hugh Kenner reporting “indirectly” on nine suggested corrections by Gilbert Sorrentino (Sept. 1, 1963, ND Archives), and also by the original typescript’s arrival at Yale. Nine of the ten changes are those communicated by Professor Kenner. While some of the changes return to the original, others create a further version. In keeping with the principles for Book V laid out in “A Note on the Text,” I have generally followed WCW’s probable transcription typescript, filed with ZA190 (which in this case returns the text closer to the original than either previous printing), and note below the verbal differences with the original, the first edition and the 1964 text. Most of the changes from the original were introduced on one of the later Za190 drafts. pleading/bleeding IST A real house, a real house I follow the transcription and IST; original reads “A real house, a reel house,” 1964 reads “A reel house, a real house,” following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. vulgar assailing/vulgarassailing IST and on transcription against the dancers/against the door In all printings. I follow the original and the transcription. your ear/your ear dances IST, your ear dancers 1964 following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. I follow the original and the transcription. you argue/argue IST, and you argue 1964, following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. I follow the original and the transcription. laughs noise/laughs nose All printings, I follow the original and the transcription. four cuatro ... cuatro dolares/four quarto ... quatro dollars IST/four quatro ... quatro dolares 1964, following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. I follow the original and the transcription (although the latter reads “dolars”). friend’s voice/friends IST, friends’ voices 1964 following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. I follow the original, the transcription reads “friend’s” but omits “voice.” his face/the face 1964 following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. I follow the original, the transcription and IST. her fingers fragile touches/fingers fragile touch 1963, original has “fingers fragile touches”; 1 follow transcription and IST. of whorehouses/of the whorehouses 1964, following the Kenner/Sorrentino correction. I follow IST and transcription, original has “of the whorehouse.” G.S. not in the original—which also ends here. WCW omits all but two lines of the first two pages. Other differences between the original and the Paterson text of this edition (almost all with their source in the transcription): dolla, two dolla/dollah, two dollah shit/sh— fills ... the ... guitar soaked night air/fills the dust of air and corners, fills the dust and guitar-soaked air of night. WCW marks the omissions and changes. He also omits the next, two-line, paragraph, and following “the house” omits fourteen lines in which the narrator takes in “the wild incredulous scene,” and sits down with a beer. against a door/against the door all white/all in white white ... bride ... Both ellipses are in Sorrentino’s original and find her/and you find her and smile/and smilesmile Revised by WCW, Za190. a buttock/buttock please and/please Between “twice” and “I go twice” WCW omits “... you go twice? And smile yes yes twice” 213 the birds... also Possibly WCW’s prose. The description is of the second of the unicorn tapestries, see note to p. 206. 214 One warm ... away Probably WCW’s prose. In earlier typescripts “Willow Point” reads “Santiago Grove” and “San Diego Grove” (in Rutherford), while the initials G.B. and L.M. are late substitutions for the initials of the actual persons. A staff memorandum in the New Directions files dated 3/3/58 reads “Wittenberg thought long about the short passage in PAT V ... and suggested that I talk again with W.C.W. about the presumed death of the lady. He also suggested that we change some of the details, but we both thought that ‘Sandy Bottom’ should not be molested. I called W.C.W. this morning.... and Bill said to change the initials ... and we agreed to change ‘San Diego Grove’ to ‘Willow Point.’ We also changed the initials of the young sailor. Bill said, by the way, that the lady and all her family had been dead for 30 years.” 214 “Loose your love to flow” From WCW’s poem “The Wind Increases” (CP1 339). 215 “I am ... A.P. A.P. is Levi Arnold Post (1889–1971), then Emeritus Professor of Greek at Haverford College. WCW told his friend Charles Abbott, the librarian at the University of Buffalo, on November 3, 1956, that he had received the letter Post had written to Abbott, and “his opinion of the writings of Sappho, that which makes her verse distinctive in quality, fascinates me, it is just what I wanted to find out” (Buff F 985). WCW and Post exchanged correspondence in 1957 and 1958, and WCW told Abbott on Jan 1, 1958, that in Paterson he was quoting from Post’s “letter to me which I can no longer find” (Buffalo F989). But these lines are not in the two Post letters to WCW filed among WCW’s uncatalogued correspondence at Yale, and may be from Post’s letter to Abbott. WCW and Post met briefly at the wedding of Abbott’s son David, and when WCW read at Haverford. Post was editor of the Loeb Classical Library. See also Weaver 217–18. 215 Peer of ... dying A translation of Sappho’s Fragment 31. In 1957 WCW published a slightly different version as a separate poem, see CP2 348 and accompanying note. 215–216 13 Nv ...?????? A 1956 letter from Ezra Pound to WCW (Yale uncat.). In a letter to New Directions on 25 February 1958 Pound expressed concern about the letter’s planned inclusion in Paterson in the light of efforts to have him released from St. Elizabeths (which happened in May 1958): “it may be o.k. or it may be MOST untimely to release it/no need to protrude my blasted nekk any FURTHER at this time.... Bill dun’t mean no harm, but I am gittin tired of incarceration, gap cd/be left for later edition/soz not to afflict his artistik cawnscience” (ND Archives). And Pound wrote to WCW on 27 February 1958, “I dunno that I can afford to be quoted at this time. especially as yu indicate the expressed emotion has not been Wordsworth’d in tranquility” (Yale uncat.). Somewhat irritated, WCW was ready to cut the entire letter out, but Pound subsequently made some cuts and revisions—noted below—and WCW accepted the emendations for the first edition. And see Mariani 713–14. The cuts were restored in the 1963 printing, when some further changes were made to bring the text closer to the original letter, although some differences remained. In keeping with the principles for Book V laid out in “A Note on the Text,” I have generally followed WCW’s probable transcription typescript, filed with Za190, and note below the verbal differences with the original, the first edition and the post-1963 printings. Where the transcription reflects a probable misreading of EP’s handwriting, I have followed the original. Most of the changes are introduced through the various retypings, including the copy prepared for Pound that carries his revisions. my BilBill/by BilBil IST, change occurs in draft for EP vide/Vid IST and transcription—misreading of EP’s script, I follow the original makes/make IST, change occurs in draft for EP they offered/was offered IST and transcription, misreading of EP’s script, I follow the original economics/econ 1963 and original, I follow the transcription dunghill FDR Omitted IST, one of EP’s deletions. In the 1963 printing although the material was restored, the ellipsis periods were retained in error. and the stink that elevated him Omitted IST, not on draft sent to EP to Rapallo Omitted IST, one of EP’s deletions still want/want 1963 and original, I follow the transcription the book/his book 1963 and original, I follow the transcription educ/educate IST, I follow the original and the transcription buzzards/old buzzards IST, added in draft for EP, I follow the original and transcription shittahd aaabull I follow the original and transcription. IST has shitta daaabull, an EP revision, 1963 has shittad aaabull Some additional verbal differences from the original remain: for SIX/or SIX Transcription has “(f)or”; EP amends don’t/dont Difference is on transcription re Beum/re ... All printings. EP removes the name. Robert Lawrence Beum was editor of the magazine The Golden Goose. I found/I have found Difference is on transcription 217 us of/of Spectrum (1958) 219 Knocking around ... eat From Milton “Mezz” Mezzrow and Bernard Wolfe, Really the Blues (New York, 1946), p. 53. The text was changed with the 1963 printing to read as the source, although two minor punctuation differences remained. In keeping with the principles for Book V laid out in “A Note on the Text,” I have generally followed WCW’s probable transcription typescript, filed with Za190, and note below the verbal differences with the original, the first edition and the post-1963 printings. Most of the changes from the original are introduced in one of the later Za190 drafts. WCW’s transcription accurately recorded the two minor punctuation differences not restored in 1963. Rapp/the Rapp IST be/begin IST know that/know why IST mournful/moanful Original and 1963, I follow the transcription, patterns/patters IST even/not even Original and 1963,I follow the transcription. 219–221 Satyrs dance ... beasts These lines appear as part of WCW’s 1955 poem “Tribute to the Painters,” see CP2 296–98 and accompanying note. 220 abstraction/abstractions New World Writing (1955) was aware WCW’s typescripts read “was ware,” as do all non- Paterson printed versions of these lines. The change is made by an editor on the Harvard printer’s typescript, possibly with WCW’s approval. prey on/prey upon New World Writing A letter/the letter New World Writing 221 a Minotaur/the Minotaur New World Writing Fifth/9th New World Writing. WCW realized he had the wrong symphony, see note on CP2 494. tail/back New World Writing had not/has not New World Writing The New World Writing version omits “comforting/his companions.” 221–222 (Q. Mr.... difficulty The first two-thirds of an interview with Mike Wallace as printed in “Mike Wallace asks William Carlos Williams Is Poetry a Dead Duck?” in the New York Post, October 18, 1957, p. 4.6. Thirlwall’s note on a typescript at Yale identifies this as an interview carried on the television program Night Beat, and the annotation has misled some commentators. But a recording of the program now at the Rutherford Public Library does not include these exchanges, and WCW is not interviewed there by Wallace. Mike Wallace confirms, letter to Christopher MacGowan, April 30, 1991, “The New York Post piece with William Carlos Williams was done only for print, and only for the New York Post and the syndicated papers that carried it.” “2 partridges ... Denmark ...” From WCW’s poem “Two Pendants: For the Ears” see CP2 208. Robert MacGregor, vice-president of New Directions, in telling WCW on March 13, 1958, that E.E. Cummings wanted $25 for use of his poem in Paterson, also reported a visit to Cummings to check the manuscript’s version with him. “He said it was not right at all and took it upstairs and then came back with it retyped somewhat differently.... He ... evidently had seen the interview as reported in the New York Post. He said that what you should have replied was that this was not a poem at all, ‘and it isn’t.’ I told him that this is all very well for the author to say, but that you, as a defender of modern poetry, had to defend it, no matter if you didn’t see much sense in it. He wants to see proof, too.” This letter, and Cummings’ typescript, are in the New Directions files. Cummings adds an “I” to the Post’s “FalleA” and adds the stanza breaks. In Cummings’ Collected Poems (1968) the poem has another six lines. Verbal differences from the New York Post, all present on early typescripts: here’s part/here’s a part that it is/that it’s of poetry and the sense/between the essence of poetry and the sense ignore sense/ignore the sense I have retained the Paterson punctuation. All ellipses are in the source except the final one. 223 a Nativity/ The Adoration of the Kings, 1564, in the National Gallery, London. 223 got to/get to The Nation (1958) 225 we have come/have come All printings. A possible uncaught error on the galleys, I have restored the reading of all typescripts, including the Harvard printer’s typescript. 226 The Gospel ... heart With the 1963 printing the passage was changed to bring it closer to the King James version, although “Miriam” and two other differences (“to him” for “unto him” and “just man” for “just man”) were allowed to remain. A footnote added in the 1963 printing and keyed to “Miriam” reads: “The King James version, of course, reads “Mary,’ but it is recalled that Dr. Williams often referred to the mother of Jesus as Miriam. Cf. the Hebrew Miryām as root for both names.—ED.” In keeping with the principles for Book V laid out in “A Note on the Text,” I have followed WCW’s probable transcription typescript, filed with Yale Za190, and note below the verbal differences with the first edition and the post-1963 printings. found/found to be IST public/publick 1963 privately/privily 1963 And Mary/But Mary 1963 sayings, pondering/things, and pondered 1963. The transcription typescript has no comma, added later. Luke From St. Luke 2:19 226–227 Dear Bill ... Edward From a letter to WCW from Edward Dahlberg, September 20, 1957 (Yale uncat.), the second of two letters from Dahlberg in Paterson, see note to p. 28. WCW omits the first page and the final page and a half of the letter. This first page, which asks whether any of WCW’s letters to Dahlberg were included in WCW’s Selected. Letters (1957)—none were—is also omitted by Dahlberg in his Epitaphs of Our Times: the Letters of Edward Dahl-berg (New York, 1967) 182–85, although he does include most of the final page and a half omitted in Paterson. The text of this prose was checked against the original letter by the New Directions staff in February 1958, anticipating possible concerns of Dahlberg’s, and with WCW’s approval; however, some differences remain between the quoted text and its source, as noted below. The origin of the differences is WCW’s apparent transcription typescript filed with Z A 190, unless otherwise noted. There are no verbal differences between the first edition and the 1963 printing. G.D./ Georges Duthuit had returned/had to return enclose/inclose influenced/could influence Following “is cheap” WCW added “(in Majorka)” but this is cut on the Harvard printer’s typescript. Dahlberg continued to be no fan of Paterson, telling Josephine Herbst of Book V that he “could not refrain from feeling that the only good thing in Williams’ last poem is your letter, and all those winged and almost bird-like delights in the honey of flowers,” Epitaphs of Our Times 158. 227 “. the unicorn ... background,.” The seventh tapestry of the Unicorn series, see note to p. 206. 227 There’s ... to talk to Recorded as WCW’s prose by an editorial note on a Harvard typescript. gets courage/get courage IST, Poetry (1958) Typing error in later typescripts 228 “That slepen ... yë” Line 10 of the “General Prologue” of The Canterbury Tales. 228 beside the purple ... threads besides/besides the purple ... threads besides 1ST, Poetry/beside the purple ... threads beside 1963. Possible error on the galleys. I follow the Harvard and earlier typescripts. 229 Godwin WCW’s uncle Godwin Wellcome, see A 7. 229 “the river ... me” WCW paraphrases and directly quotes from his early poem “The Wanderer,” see CP1 35, 116. 232 a French/French Art News (1958) 234–235 She did ... past WCW’s paternal grandmother Emily Dickenson Wellcome, see note to p. 186, and A167–168. 235 Osamu/Dazai and his saintly sister As Weaver 218 notes, a reference to the last chapter of Osamu Dazai, The Setting Sun (Norfolk CT, 1947). 235 “unless ... anew” The end of WCW’s 1955 poem “Shadows” (CP2 310) reads: unless—unless things the imagination feeds upon, the scent of the rose, startle us anew. BOOK VI (c. 1961) WCW told James Laughlin on September 23, 1958, that there might be a Paterson VI (WCW/JL 226), but these four preliminary typescripts were all that he completed of the project, and they were found among his papers at his death. A corrected version of the four pages was published with the 1963 and subsequent printings of the poem as an appendix. The typescripts themselves are reproduced here to illustrate the extreme difficulties WCW labored under in these last years in trying to compose. As a result of a series of strokes, his vision was poor, and problems of physical coordination frustrated his efforts to hit the intended typewriter keys. The first typescript is reproduced from a private collection, the next two from copies in the ND Archives, and the fourth—which Mariani (847) suggests dates from July 1961—from a copy filed with Yale Za 191. Lucy “The ‘Lucy’ poem, what memories that brings up! What a gal—a heart of gold—common as dirt she was—but Bill and I were very fond of her,” Florence Williams to James Laughlin, August 6, 1963 (ND Archives). Mrs. Blackinger The name was changed to “Mrs. Carmody” for the printed version at the request of Mrs. Williams. Acknowledgments In preparing this new edition of Paterson, I have been helped by the generosity of many individuals and institutions. At New Directions, Peggy Fox continued the sensitive, invaluable editorial advice that she contributed to the two volumes of Williams’ Collected Poems. James Laughlin very kindly allowed me to study the New Directions Archive in Norfolk, and his warm hospitality, and that of Mrs. Laughlin, will be a pleasure always remembered. I also thank Norman MacAfee for his careful and informed reading of the proofs and Hermann Strohbach, who is responsible for the elegant look of the Collected Poems, for so carefully adapting the design of the original volumes of Paterson to the present edition. I continued to draw on the experience and wisdom of my co-editor on Volume I of the Collected Poems, A. Walton Litz, and am deeply appreciative of his contributions. My resources for preparing the edition were greatly increased by the kindness of individuals who allowed me to study and quote from material in private hands. William Eric and Paul Williams provided helpful information on their father, and were very generous in allowing me access to material. Priscilla and John Costello allowed me to study the papers of Kathleen Hoagland, and Elizabeth O’Neil the papers of Marcia Nardi. Thomas Thirlwall again allowed me access to his father’s records of his friendship with Williams, including a very helpful annotated copy of Paterson. Mike Weaver went to considerable trouble to send me his correspondence with Herbert Fisher. Gilbert Sorrentino and Stanley Stedman were kind enough to write informative letters in answer to my queries, as were Professor John Dollar, Mike Wallace, Allen Ginsberg, Patricia Willis, Miriam Sawyer, Robert Bertholf, Richard Swigg, Terry Halladay, J. Howard Woolmer, Andreas Brown, John Sitnik, Terry Thibodeaux, Paul Mariani, Deborah Morse, Barry Magid, W. Scott Peterson, Theodora Graham, Howard A. Levin, Pamela McCorduck, Linda Wagner-Martin, Jim Lowell, Albert J. Monack, Mrs. L. A. Post, and Thomas Sweetin. I would like to thank all of these correspondents for their time, their information, and for allowing me to quote from their letters, as needed, in the notes. The notes to this edition demonstrate something of my indebtedness to scholars who have worked on Williams, and particularly on Paterson. Every Williams scholar knows the importance of Emily Wallace’s A Bibliography of William Carlos Williams. The catalogue of the SUNY Buffalo Williams collection compiled by Neil Baldwin and Stephen L. Meyers was very helpful, as was Paul Mariani’s biography of the poet. I came to appreciate anew the ground-breaking work of Mike Weaver, Benjamin Sankey, Joel Connaroe, Ralph Nash, George Zabriskie, Margaret Lloyd, and W. Scott Peterson. I owe a debt of gratitude to the staffs of many libraries, including: the Yale Collection of American Poetry, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University; the Poetry/Rare Books Collection, SUNY Buffalo; the Houghton Library, Harvard University; the Harry Ransom Research Center, University of Texas at Austin; Kent State University Library; the Lilly Library, Indiana University; the Alderman Library, University of Virginia; the Rosenbach Museum and Library; Special Collections, the Morris Library, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale; Special Collections, University of Delaware Library; I am also grateful to these libraries for granting permission to quote from materials in their possession. I am also indebted to the resources and staffs of the New York Public Library; the Rutherford Free Public Library; the New Jersey Historical Society Library, Newark; The Bloomfield Public Library; the Paterson Free Public Library, with special thanks to Linda Brown; and the Passaic County Historical Society Library at Lambert Casde. My preparation of the edition was also helped by the following libraries: the Starr Library of Middlebury College; the John Hay Library, Brown University; the Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Columbia University; Fairleigh Dickinson University Library; the Dartmouth College Library; Special Collections, Van Pelt Library, University of Pennsylvania. At the Swem Library, College of William and Mary, Carol Linton of inter-library loan services continued to be a tremendous help, as was my graduate assistant Susan Becker-Welts. Grateful acknowledgment is made for the following quotations: from Really The Blues by Mezz Mezzrow and Bernard Wolfe; copyright 1946 by Milton Mezzrow and Bernard Wolfe; reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc.; and from Poems 1923–1954 by E. E. Cummings, copyright © 1950 by E. E. Cummings, published by Harcourt, Brace and Co. An award from the National Endowment for the Humanities allowed me time to prepare this edition, and I am very grateful for their interest and support and for the additional research funds provided by the College of William and Mary. Additional acknowledgments with the paper edition, 1995: I would like to thank Professor Louis Martz, and Professor Hugh Witemeyer, for drawing my attention to errors of detail in the notes to pages 15 and 184 of the poem, which this printing has given me the opportunity to correct. I have also added a bibliographical detail to the note for pages 87–91, and a version of Williams’ “Author’s Note” to the prefatory matter on p. xiv, both at the suggestion of Professor Martz. BY WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS Asphodel and Other Love Poems The Autobiography of William Carlos Williams The Build-up The Collected Poems, Volume I The Collected Poems, Volume II The Collected Stories of William Carlos Williams The Doctor Stories The Embodiment of Knowledge Imaginations In the American Grain In the Money I Wanted to Write a Poem Many Loves and Other Plays Paterson Pictures from Brueghel and Other Poems Selected Essays Selected Letters Selected Poems Something to Say: WCW on Younger Poets A Voyage to Pagany White Mule The William Carlos Williams Reader Yes, Mrs. Williams Copyright © 1946, 1948, 1949, 1951, 1958 by W. C. Williams Copyright © 1963 by Florence Williams Copyright © 1992 by William Eric Williams and Paul H. Williams Copyright © 1992 by Christopher MacGowan Unpublished material by Marcia Nardi copyright © 1992 by Elizabeth O’Neil All rights reserved. Except for brief passages quoted in a newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or website review, no part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher. This revised edition first published clothbound in 1992; published as New Directions Paperbook 806 in 1995 Acknowledgments can be found beginning p. 309. See additional acknowledgments, p. 311, for changes made with paperbook printing, 1995. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Williams, William Carlos, 1883–1963. Paterson / William Carlos Williams.—Rev. ed. / prepared by Christopher MacGowan. p. cm. ISBN 978-0-811-22341-6 (e-book) 1. Paterson (N.J.)—Poetry. I. MacGowan, Christopher J. (Christopher John) II. Title. PS3545.I544P3 1992 811’.52—dc20 92-22956 CIP New Directions Books are published for James Laughlin by New Directions Publishing Corporation, 80 Eighth Avenue, New York 10011 How to Be Perfect BY R O N PA D G E T T Everything is perfect, dear friend. —KEROUAC Get some sleep. Don't give advice. Take care of your teeth and gums. Don't be afraid of anything beyond your control. Don't be afraid, for instance, that the building will collapse as you sleep, or that someone you love will suddenly drop dead. Eat an orange every morning. Be friendly. It will help make you happy. Raise your pulse rate to 120 beats per minute for 20 straight minutes four or five times a week doing anything you enjoy. Hope for everything. Expect nothing. Take care of things close to home first. Straighten up your room before you save the world. Then save the world. Know that the desire to be perfect is probably the veiled expression of another desire—to be loved, perhaps, or not to die. Make eye contact with a tree. Be skeptical about all opinions, but try to see some value in each of How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 1 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 them. Dress in a way that pleases both you and those around you. Do not speak quickly. Learn something every day. (Dzien dobre!) Be nice to people before they have a chance to behave badly. Don't stay angry about anything for more than a week, but don't forget what made you angry. Hold your anger out at arm's length and look at it, as if it were a glass ball. Then add it to your glass ball collection. Be loyal. Wear comfortable shoes. Design your activities so that they show a pleasing balance and variety. Be kind to old people, even when they are obnoxious. When you become old, be kind to young people. Do not throw your cane at them when they call you Grandpa. They are your grandchildren! Live with an animal. Do not spend too much time with large groups of people. If you need help, ask for it. Cultivate good posture until it becomes natural. If someone murders your child, get a shotgun and blow his head off. Plan your day so you never have to rush. Show your appreciation to people who do things for you, even if you have paid them, even if they do favors you don't want. How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 2 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 Do not waste money you could be giving to those who need it. Expect society to be defective. Then weep when you find that it is far more defective than you imagined. When you borrow something, return it in an even better condition. As much as possible, use wooden objects instead of plastic or metal ones. Look at that bird over there. After dinner, wash the dishes. Calm down. Visit foreign countries, except those whose inhabitants have expressed a desire to kill you. Don't expect your children to love you, so they can, if they want to. Meditate on the spiritual. Then go a little further, if you feel like it. What is out (in) there? Sing, every once in a while. Be on time, but if you are late do not give a detailed and lengthy excuse. Don't be too self-critical or too self-congratulatory. Don't think that progress exists. It doesn't. Walk upstairs. Do not practice cannibalism. Imagine what you would like to see happen, and then don't do anything to make it impossible. Take your phone off the hook at least twice a week. How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 3 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 Keep your windows clean. Extirpate all traces of personal ambitiousness. Don't use the word extirpate too often. Forgive your country every once in a while. If that is not possible, go to another one. If you feel tired, rest. Grow something. Do not wander through train stations muttering, "We're all going to die!" Count among your true friends people of various stations of life. Appreciate simple pleasures, such as the pleasure of chewing, the pleasure of warm water running down your back, the pleasure of a cool breeze, the pleasure of falling asleep. Do not exclaim, "Isn't technology wonderful!" Learn how to stretch your muscles. Stretch them every day. Don't be depressed about growing older. It will make you feel even older. Which is depressing. Do one thing at a time. If you burn your finger, put it in cold water immediately. If you bang your finger with a hammer, hold your hand in the air for twenty minutes. You will be surprised by the curative powers of coldness and gravity. Learn how to whistle at earsplitting volume. Be calm in a crisis. The more critical the situation, the calmer you should be. How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 4 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 Enjoy sex, but don't become obsessed with it. Except for brief periods in your adolescence, youth, middle age, and old age. Contemplate everything's opposite. If you're struck with the fear that you've swum out too far in the ocean, turn around and go back to the lifeboat. Keep your childish self alive. Answer letters promptly. Use attractive stamps, like the one with a tornado on it. Cry every once in a while, but only when alone. Then appreciate how much better you feel. Don't be embarrassed about feeling better. Do not inhale smoke. Take a deep breath. Do not smart off to a policeman. Do not step off the curb until you can walk all the way across the street. From the curb you can study the pedestrians who are trapped in the middle of the crazed and roaring traffic. Be good. Walk down different streets. Backwards. Remember beauty, which exists, and truth, which does not. Notice that the idea of truth is just as powerful as the idea of beauty. Stay out of jail. In later life, become a mystic. Use Colgate toothpaste in the new Tartar Control formula. How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 5 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 Visit friends and acquaintances in the hospital. When you feel it is time to leave, do so. Be honest with yourself, diplomatic with others. Do not go crazy a lot. It's a waste of time. Read and reread great books. Dig a hole with a shovel. In winter, before you go to bed, humidify your bedroom. Know that the only perfect things are a 300 game in bowling and a 27-batter, 27-out game in baseball. Drink plenty of water. When asked what you would like to drink, say, "Water, please." Ask "Where is the loo?" but not "Where can I urinate?" Be kind to physical objects. Beginning at age forty, get a complete "physical" every few years from a doctor you trust and feel comfortable with. Don't read the newspaper more than once a year. Learn how to say "hello," "thank you," and "chopsticks" in Mandarin. Belch and fart, but quietly. Be especially cordial to foreigners. See shadow puppet plays and imagine that you are one of the characters. Or all of them. Take out the trash. How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 6 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 Ron Padgett, "How to Be Perfect" from Collected Poems. Copyright © 2013 by Ron Padgett. Reprinted by permission of Coffee House Press. www.coffeehousepress.org Source: Collected Poems (Coffee House Press, 2013) Love life. Use exact change. When there's shooting in the street, don't go near the window. CONTACT US NEWSLETTERS PRESS PRIVACY POLICY POLICIES TERMS OF USE POETRY MOBILE APP 61 West Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60654 Hours: Monday-Friday 11am - 4pm © 2021 Poetry Foundation How to Be Perfect by Ron Padgett | Poetry Foundation https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57243/how-to-be-perfect 7 de 7 16/07/2021 13:38 MEMORIA M U N D I ATALANTA 8i i" . M A TSU O BASHO SENDAS DE OKU P R Ó L O G O OCTAVIO PAZ T R A D U C C IÓ N OCTAVIO PAZ Y EIKIC H I HAYASHIYA ATALANTA 2 0 16 En cubierta y guardas: pinturas de Yosua Buson (1716-1783). Cortesía M useo Itsuo. Dirección y diseño: Jacobo Siruela Segunda edición Cualquier forma de reproducción, distribución, comxmicación pública o transformación de esta obra sólo puede ser realizada con la autorización de sus titulares, salvo excepción prevista por la ley. Diríjase a CEDRO (Centro Español de Derechos Reprográficos, www.cedro.org) si necesita fotocopiar o escanear algún fragmento de esta obra. Todos los derechos reservados. Título original: Oku-No-Hosomichi © D e la traducción: O ctavio Paz y E ikichi H ayashiya © D el prólogo: O ctavio Paz © EDICIONES ATALANTA, S. L. Mas Pou. Vilaür 17483. Girona. España Teléfono: 972 79 58 05 Fax: 972 79 58 34 atalantaw eb .com ISBN: 978-84-940941-8-7 Depósito Legal: GI-3-2014 ÍNDICE N ota introductoria 9 La tradición del haikú ii Advertencia a la primera edición Vida de Matsuo Basho 35 La poesía de Matsuo Basho Sobre Yosa Buson 55 Sendas de Oku 6i N otas V 4 índice de los nombres de personas y lugares 191 Plano de los principales lugares visitados !95 Nota introductoria La primera edición de Sendas de Oku^ traducción al castellano de «OKU-NO-HOSOMICHI» de Matsúo Basho, joya de la literatura japonesa del siglo XVII, fue publicada en 1957 por la Universidad Autónoma de Mexico. Siguie­ ron las ediciones en España de Barral Editores (1970) 7 Editorial Seix Barral, S.A. (1981), y ahora presentamos una nueva, acompañada de su texto japonés caligrafiado e ilus­ trado^ por Yosa Buson, poeta y pintor del siglo XVIII, re­ alizando así, gracias a la colaboración de La Fundación del Japón y del Museo Itsuo, nuestro deseo, desde la primera edición, de ilustrar la traducción con la pintura japonesa de la época. Además, para una mayor fidelidad al original, prescindimos ahora de la division en capítulos y de los subtítulos puestos en las ediciones anteriores con el fin de facilitar la lectura, usando, en cambio, un índice de nombres geográficos y de personas, y un plano de los principales lugares visitados por Basho en este viaje. A las introducciones pasadas añadimos una nueva sobre Buson y algunas notas. O . P . ^ La presente edición ha prescindido de las ilustraciones en color de la edición de 1992, pero conserva las caligrafías de Buson. 9 La tradición del haiku Octavio Paz En 1955 un amigo japonés, Eikichi Hayashiya, ante mi admiración por alguno de los poetas de su lengua, me pro­ puso que, a pesar de mi ignorancia del idioma, empren­ diésemos juntos la traducción de Oku no Hosomichu A principios de 1956 entregamos nuestra versión a la sección editorial de la Universidad Nacional de México y en abril del año siguiente apareció nuestro pequeño libro. Fue re­ cibido con la acostumbrada indiferencia, a despecho de que, para avivar un poco la curiosidad de los críticos, ha­ bíamos subrayado en la Advertencia que nuestra traduc­ ción del famoso diario era la primera que se hacía a una lengua de Occidente. Ahora, trece años después, repeti­ mos el gesto: la apuesta; ño para ganar comentarios, Basho no los necesita, sino lectores. Aclaro: son los lectores, somos nosotros -atareados, excitados, descoyuntados- los que ganamos con su lectura; su poesía es un verdadero cal- mante9 aunque la suya sea una calma que no se parece ni al letargo de la droga ni a la modorra de la digestión. Calma alerta y que nos aligera: no Hosomichi es un diario de ii viaje que es asimismo una lección de desprendimiento. El proverbio europeo es falso; viajar no es «morir un poco» sino ejercitarse en el arte de despedirse para así, ya lige­ ros, aprender a recibir. Desprendimientos: aprendizajes. Entre 1957 y 1970 han aparecido muchas traducciones de la obrita de Basho. Cuatro han llegado a mis ojos, tres en inglés y una en francés. Por cierto, cada una de ellas ofrece una versión diferente del título: The Narrow Road to the Deep North;1 Back Roads to Far Towns;2 - La sente étroite du bout-du-monde^ y The Narrow Road through the Provinces.^ Tal diversidad de versiones me pone en la obligación de justificar la nuestra: Sendas de Oku. En tres de las traducciones que he citado aparece el adjetivo «es­ trecho»; nosotros lo suprimimos por antipatía a la redun­ dancia: todos los senderos son estrechos. Las versiones al inglés dan una idea más bien realista del viaje de Basho y de su punto de destino: norte remoto, pueblos lejanos, provincias; la traducción francesa, aunque más literal, se inclina hacia lo simbólico: fin del mundo. Nosotros pre­ ferimos la vía intermedia y pensamos que la palabra Okuy por ser extraña para el lector de nuestra lengua, podría quizá reflejar un poco la indeterminación del original. Oku quiere decir «fondo» o «interior»; en éste caso de­ signa a la distante región del norte, en el fondo del Japón, llamada Oou y escrita con dos caracteres, el primero de los cuales se lee Oku. El título evoca no sólo la excursión a los confines del país, por caminos difíciles y poco fre­ cuentados, sino también una peregrinación espiritual. Desde las primeras líneas Basho se presenta como un poeta anacoreta y medio monje; tanto él como su compañero de viaje, Sora, recorren los caminos vestidos con los hábitos de los peregrinos budistas; su viaje es casi una iniciación y Sora, antes de ponerse en marcha, se afeita el cráneo como 12 los bonzos. Peregrinación religiosa y viaje a los lugares cé­ lebres -paisajes, templos, castillos, ruinas, curiosidades históricas y naturales-, la expedición de Basho y de Sora es asimismo un ejercicio poético: cada uno de ellos escribe un diario sembrado de poemas y, en muchos de los luga­ res que visitan, los poetas locales los reciben y componen con ellos esos poemas colectivos llamados haikai no renga. El número de traducciones de Oku no Hosomichi es un ejemplo más de la afición de los occidentales por el Oriente. En la historia de las pasiones de Occidente por las otras civilizaciones, hay dos momentos de rascinación ante el Japón, si olvidamos el engouement de los jesuítas en el siglo xvil y el de los filósofos en el X V III: uno se inicia en Francia hacia fines del siglo pasado y, después de fe­ cundar a varios pintores extraordinarios, culmina con el imagism de los poetas angloamericanos; otro comienza en los Estados Unidos unos años después de la Segunda Gue­ rra Mundial y aún no termina. El primer período fue ante todo estético; el encuentro entre la sensibilidad occidental y el arte japonés produjo varias obras notables, lo mismo en la esfera de la pintura -el ejemplo mayor es el impre­ sionismo- que en la del lenguaje: Pound, Yeats, Claudel, Éluard. En el segundo período la tonalidad ha sido menos estética y más espiritual o moral; quiero decir: no sólo nos apasionan las formas artísticas japonesas sino las corrien­ tes religiosas, filosóficas o intelectuales de que son expre­ sión, en especial el budismo. La estética japonesa -mejor dicho: el abanico de visiones y estilos que nos ofrece esa tradición artística y poética- no ha cesado de intrigarnos y seducirnos pero nuestra perspectiva es distinta a la de las generaciones anteriores. Aunque todas las artes, de la poe­ sía a la música y de la pintura a la arquitectura, se han be­ neficiado con esta nueva manera de acercarse a la cultura 1 3 japonesa, creo que lo que todos buscamos en ella es otro estilo de vida, otra visión del mundo y, también, del tras­ mundo. La diversidad y aun oposición entre el punto de vista contemporáneo y el del primer cuarto de siglo no impide que un puente una estos dos momentos: ni antes ni ahora el Japón ha sido para nosotros una escuela de doctrinas, sistemas o filosofías sino una sensibilidad. Lo contrario de • la India: no nos ha enseñado a pensar sino a sentir. Cierto, en este caso no debemos reducir la palabra sentir al senti­ miento o a la sensación; tampoco la segunda acepción del vocablo (dictamen, parecer) conviene enteramente a lo que quiero expresan Es algo que está entre el pensamiento y la sensitcion, el sentimiento y la idea. Los japoneses usan la palabra ^o^oro: «corazón». Pero ya en su tiempo José Juan Tablada advertía que era una traducción engañosa: «kokoro es más, es el corazón y la mente, la sensación y el pensamiento y las mismas entrañas, como si a los japo­ neses no 1m.bastase sentir con sólo el corazón».s Las vaci­ laciones que experimentamos al intentar traducir ese término, la forma en que los dos sentidos, el afectivo y el intelectual, se funden en él sin fundirse completamen­ te, como si estuviese en perpetuo vaivén entre uno y otro, constituyen precisamente el sentido (los sentidos) de sentir. En un ensayo reciente Donald Keene señala que esta indeterminación es un rasgo constante del arte japonés e ilustra su afirmación con el conocido haikú de Basho: La rama seca Un cuervo Otoño-anochecer. 1 4 El original no dice si sobre la rama se ha posado un cuervo o varios; por otra parte, la palabra anochecer puede referirse al fin de un día de otoño o a un anochecer a fines de otoño. Al lector le toca escoger entre las diversas posi­ bilidades que le ofrece el texto pero, y esto es esencial, su decisión no puede ser arbitraria. La Capilla Sixtina, dice Keene, se presenta como algo acabado y perfecto: al re­ clamar nuestra admiración, nos mantiene a distancia; el jardín de Ryoan-ji, hecho de piedras irregulares sobre un espacio monocromo, nos invita a rehacerlo y nos abre las puertas de la participación. Poemas, cuadros: objetos verbales o visuales que simultáneamente se ofrecen a la contemplación y a la acción imaginativa del lector o del espectador. Se ha dicho que en el arte japonés hay una suerte de exageración de los valores estéticos que, con fre­ cuencia, degenera en esa enfermedad de la imaginación y de los sentidos llamada «buen gusto», un implacable gusto que colinda en un extremo con un rigor monótono y en el otro con un alambicamiento no menos aburrido. Lo con­ trario también es cierto y los poetas y pintores japoneses podrían decir con Yves Bonnefoy: «la imperfección es la cima». Esa imperfección, como se ha visto, no es realmente imperfecta: es voluntario inacabamiento. Su verdadero nombre es conciencia de la fragilidad y precariedad ae la existencia, conciencia de aquel que se sabe suspendido entre un abismo y otro. El arte japonés5 en sus momentos más tensos y transparentes, nos revela esos instantes -por­ que no sólo un instante- de equilibrio entre la vida y la muerte. Vivacidad: mortalic^ad. El poema clásico japonés {tanka o waka) está com­ puesto de cinco versos divididos en dos estrofas, una de tres líneas y otra de dos: 3/2. La estructura dual del tanka 1 5 dio origen al rengay sucesión de tankas escrita general­ mente no por un poeta sino por varios.372/3/2/3/2/3/2,.. A su vez el renga adoptó, a partir del siglo XVI, una mo­ dalidad ingeniosa, satírica y coloquial. Este género se lla­ mó haikai no renga. El primer poema de la secuencia se llamaba hokku y cuando el renga haikai se dividió en uni­ dades sueltas -siguiendo así la ley de separación, reunión y separación que parece regir la poesía japonesa- la nueva unidad poética se llamó haikú, compuesto de haikai y de hokku. El cambio del renga tradicional, regido por una es­ tética severa y aristocrática, al renga haikai, popular y hu­ morístico, se debe ante todo a los poetas Arakida Moritake (1473-1549) y Yamazaki Sokán (1465-1553). Un ejemplo del estilo rápido y hecho de contrastes de Moritake: Noche de estío: el sol alto despierto, cierro los párpados. Otro ejemplo de la vivacidad ingeniosa pero no exenta de afectación del nuevo estilo es este poemita de Sokán: Luna de estío: si le pones un mango, ¡un abanico!6 El haikai de ^okan y Moritake opuso a la tradición cor­ tesana y exquisita del renga un saludable horror a lo su­ blime y una peligrosa inclinación por la imagen ingeniosa y el retruécano. Además, y sobre todo significó la apari­ ción en la poesía japonesa de un elemento nuevo: el len­ guaje de la ciudad. N o el llamado «lenguaje popular» -vaga expresión con la que se pretende designar al lenguaje 16 del campo, arcaico y tradicionalTM sino sencillamente el habla de la calle: el lenguaje de la burguesía urbana. Una revolución poética semejante, en este sentido a las ocurri­ das en Occidente, primero en el período romántico y des­ pués en nuestros días. El habla del siglo, dina yo, para distinguirla de las hablas sin tiempo del campesino, el clé­ rigo y el aristócrata. Irrupción del elemento histórico y3 por tanto: crítico^ en el lenguaje poético. Matsunaga Teitoku (1571-1653) es otro eslabón de la cadena que lleva a Basho. Teitoku intentó regresar al len­ guaje más convencionalmente poético 7 atemporal del an­ tiguo renga pero sin abandonar la inclinación de sus antecesores por lo brillante. Más bien la exageró hasta una insolencia briosa: Año del tigre: niebla de primavera ¡también rayada! Esta manera crispada puede producir poemas menos ingeniosos y más verdaderos, como este de Nishiyama Soin (1605-1682), fundador de la escuela Danrin: Lluvia de mayo: es hoja de papel el mundo entero. Sin duda Basho tenía en la mente este poema cuando dijo: «si no hubiese sido por Soin todavía estaríamos la­ miéndole los pies al viejo Teitoku». A Basho le tocó con­ vertir estos ejercicios de estética ingeniosa en experiencias espirituales. Al leer a Teitoku, sonreímos ante la sorpren­ dente invención verbal; al leer a Basho, nuestra sonrisa es 17 dé comprensión y, no hay que tenerle miedo a la palabra, piedad. N o la piedad cristiana sino ese sentimiento de uni­ versal simpatía con todo lo que existe, esa fraternidad en la impermanencia con hombres, animales y plantas, que es lo mejor que nos ha dado el budismo. Para Basho la poe­ sía es un camino hacia una suerte de beatitud instantánea y que no excluye la ironía ni significa cerrar los ojos ante el mundo y sus horrores. En su manera indirecta y casi oblicua, Basho nos enfrenta a visiones terribles; muchas veces la existencia, la humana y k animal, se revela simul­ táneamente como m u pena y una terca vohmtad de perse- verar en esa pena: Carranca acerba: su gaznate hidrópico la rata engaña. Al expresionismo de este cuadro de la rata con la gar­ ganta reseca bebiendo el agua helada del albañal, suceden otras visiones -no contradictorias sino en oposición com­ plementaria- en las que la contemplación estética se re­ suelve en visión de la unidad de los contrarios. Una experiencia que es percepción simultánea de la identidad de la pluralidad y de su final vacuidad: Narciso y biombo: uno al otro ilumina, blanco en lo blanco. ノ . El poeta traza en tres líneas la figura de la iluminación y, como si fuese un copo de algodón, sopla sobre ella y la disipa. La verdadera iluminación, parece decirnos, es la no-iluminacion. 1 8 Una réplica en negro, tanto en el sentido físico de la palabra como en el moral, del poema de Basho es este de Oshima Ryata (1718-1787): Noche anochecida, oigo al carbón cayendo, polvo, en el carbón. Recursos de Ryata: contra lo negro, lo verde; contra la cólera, el árbol: Vuelvo irritado -mas luego, en el jardín: el joven sauce. Rivaliza con el poema que acabo de citar un haikú de Enamoto Kikaku (1 661-1707),, uno de los mejores y más personales discípulos de Basho. En el poema de Kikaku hay una valiente y casi gozosa afirmación de la pobreza como una forma de comunión con el mundo natural: ¡Ah, el mendigo! El verano lo viste de tierra y cielo. En un haikú de otro discípulo de Basho, también exce­ lente poeta, Hattori Ransetsu (1654-1707), hasta la sombra adquiere una diafanidad cristalina: Contra la noche la luna azules pinos pinta de luna. 19 La noche y la luna, luz y sombra que se interpenetran, victoria cíclica de lo oscuro seguida por el triunfo del día: El Año Nuevo: clarea y los gorriones cuentan sus cuentos. (La otra madrugada me despertaron, más temprano que de costumbre, el alba y los pájaros. Cogí un lápiz y sobre un pedazo de papel escribí lo siguiente: Clarea: cuentan sus cuentos los gorriones; ¿es Año Nuevo?) Entre los sucesores de Basho hay uno, Kobayashi Issa (1763-1827), que rompe la reticencia japonesa pero no para caer en la confesión a la occidental sino para descu­ brir y subrayar una relación punzante, dolorosa, entre la existencia humana y la suerte de animales y plantas; her­ mandad cósmica en la pena, comunidad en la condena uni- versal, seamos hombres o insectos: Para el mosquito también la noche es larga, larga y sola. El regreso al pueblo natal^ como siempre, es una nueva herida: へ Mi pueblo: todo lo que me sale al paso se vuelve zarza. lo ¿Quién no ha recordado, ante ciertas caras, al animal inmundo? Pero pocos con la intensidad y naturalidad de Issa: En esa cara hay algo, hay algo... ¿qué? Ah, sí, la víbora. Si el horror forma parte del sentimiento del mundo de Issa, en su visión hay también humor, simpatía y una suerte de resignación jubilosa: Al Fuji subes despacio — pero subes, caracolito. Miro en tus ojos, caballito del diablo, montes lejanos. Maravilloso: ver entre las rendijas la Vía Láctea. N o me refenre a la influencia de la poesía japonesa en las de lengua inglesa y francesa: es una historia muy sabida y ha sido contada varias veces. La historia de esa influen­ cia en la poesía de nuestro idioma, lo mismo en América que en España, es muchísimo menos conocida y todavía no existe un buen estudio sobre el tema. Una deficiencia, otra más, de nuestra crítica. Aquí me limitaré a recordar que entre los primeros en ocuparse de arte y literatura ja­ poneses se encuentran, a principios de siglo, dos poetas 21 mexicanos: Efrén Rebolledo y José Juan Tablada. Ambos vivieron en Japón, el primero varios años y el segundo, en 1900, unos cuantos meses. Su afición nació sin duda por contagio francés: el libro que Tablada consagró a Hiroshi- gué -quizá el primer estudio en nuestra lengua sobre ese pintor- está dedicado a la «venerada memoria de Ed­ mundo de Goncourt». A pesar de que Rebolledo conoció más íntimamente el Japón que Tablada, su poesía nunca fue más allá de la retórica «modernista»; entre k cultura ja_ ponesa y su mirada se interpuso siempre la imagen este­ reotipada de los poetas franceses de fin de siglo y su Japón fue un exotismo parisino más que un descubrimiento his­ panoamericano. Tablada empezó como Rebolledo pero pronto descubrió en la poesía japonesa ciertos elementos -economía verbal, humor, lenguaje coloquial, amor por la imagen exacta e insólita- que lo impulsaron a abandonar el modernismo y a buscar una nueva manera. En 1918 Tablada publicó Al sol y bajo la lunaj un libro de poemas con un prólogo en verso por Leopoldo Lugo- nes. En aquellos años el escritor argentino era considerado, con razón, como el único poeta de la lengua comparable a Darío; su poesía (ahora lo sabemos) anunciaba y preparaba a la de vanguardia. El libro del mexicano era todavía mo­ dernista y su relativa novedad residía en la aparición de esos elementos irónicos y coloquiales que los historiadores de nuestra literatura han visto como constitutivos de esa tendencia que llaman, con notoria inexactitud, postmo­ dernismo. Esa tendencia es una invención de los manuales: e\ postmodernismo no es sino la crítica que, dentro del mo­ dernismo y sin rebasar su horizonte estético, hacen al modernismo algunos poetas modernistas. Es la descenden­ cia, vía Lugones, del simbolista antisimbolista Laforgue. Además de esta nota crítica, había otro elemento en el libro 22 de Tablada que anunciaba su futuro, inminente cambio: el crecido número de poemas con asunto japonés, ent^e ellos uno, muy celebrado en su tiempo, dedicado a Hokusai. Al año siguiente, en 1919, Tablada publicó en Caracas un delgado libro: Un día,.. Era casi un cuaderno y estaba compuesto exclusivamente por haikús, los primeros que se hayan escrito en nuestra lengua. Un año después aparece Li-POj un volumen de poemas ideográficos en los que Tablada sigue de cerca al Apollinaire de Calligrammes (aunque también figuran en esa colección poemas más per­ sonales, entre ellos el inolvidable y perfecto Nocturno al­ terno). En 1922, en Nueva York: El jarro de flores^ otro volumen de haikus. En esos años Vicente Huidobro publi­ ca Ecuatorial, Poemas Árticos y otros muchos textos poé­ ticos, en español y en francés, que inician el gran cambio que experimentaría unos pocos años después la poesía de lengua castellana. En la misma dirección de exploración y descubrimiento se sitúa la poesía de Tablada. El mexicano fue lo que se llama un «poeta menor», sobre todo si se le compara con Huidobro, pero su obra, en su estricta y querida limitación, fue una de las que extendieron las fron­ teras de nuestra poesía. Y la extendieron en dos sentidos: en el espacio, hacia otros mundos y civilizaciones; en el tiem- po, hacia el futurö: la vanguardia. Doble injusticia: el nom­ bre de Tablada no figura en casi ninguno de los estudios sobre la vanguardia hispanoamericana ni su obra aparece en las antologías hispanoamericanas. Es lamentable. Sus pe­ queñas y concentradas composiciones poéticas, además de ser el primer trasplante al español del haikú, fueron real­ mente algo nuevo en su tiempo. Lo fueron a tal punto y con tal intensidad que, todavía hoy, muchas entre ellas con­ servan intactos sus poderes de sorpresa y su frescura. ¿De cuántas obras más presuntuosas puede decirse lo mismo? 2 3 Tablada llamó siempre a sus poemas haikai y no, como es ahora costumbre, baikús. En el fondo, según se verá, no le falta razón. Sus breves composiciones, aunque dispues­ tas generalmente en secuencias temáticas, pueden consi­ derarse como poemas sueltos y en este sentido son haikús; al mismo tiempo, por su construcción ingeniosa, su ironía y su amor por la imagen brillante, son haikai: Pavo real, largo fulgor: por el gallinero demócrata pasas como una procesión. Tablada casi siempre está más cerca de Teitoku que de Basho: Insomnio: en su pizarra negra suma cifras de fósforo. Por nada los gansos tocan alarm a en sus trompetas de barro. El poeta mexicano conserva la estructura tripartita del haikú aunque poquísimas veces se ajusta a su esquema mé­ trico (17 sílabas: 5/7/5). Pero hay un ejemplo de perfecta adaptación métrica y de real poesía: Trozos de barro: por la senda en penumbra saltan los sapos. Una objetividad casi fotográfica que, por su precision misma, libera ese sentimiento indefinible que nos produce el recordar una caminata al atardecer por un sendero mo­ jado. En sus momentos más afortunados la objetividad de Tablada confiere a todo lo que sus ojos descubren un ca­ rácter religioso de aparición: Tierno sauz: casi oro, casi ám bar, casi luz. A la imagen visual yuxtapone con exquisita maestría la fricción de las sílabas y los fonemas: Peces voladores: al golpe del oro solar estalla en astillas el vidrio del m ar. Tablada concibe el haikú como la unión de dos realida- des emanas cuantas pakbr马s, poética tan cerca de Heverdy como de sus maestros japoneses. Citaré ahora dos poemas que son dos visiones absolutamente modernas, el primero por la alianza de lo cotidiano y lo insólito, el segundo por el humor y las asociaciones verbales y visuales entre la luna y los gatos: Juntos en la tarde tranquila vuelan notas de Ángelus, murciélagos y golondrinas. Bajo mi ventana la luna en los tejados y las sombras chinescas y la música china de los gatos. 25 Casi nunca sentimental ni decorativo, el poeta mexi­ cano alcanza en unos cuantos de sus haikús una difícil sim­ plicidad que tal vez habría merecido la aprobación de Basho. En ellos el humor se vuelve complicidad, comuni­ dad de destino con el mundo animal, es decir, con el mundo: Hormigas sobre un grillo inerte. Recuerdo de Gulliver en Liliput. Mientras lo cargan sueña el burrito axnosquilado en paraísos de esmeralda. El pequeño mono me mira ¡quisiera decirme algo que se le olvida! La obra de Tablada es breve y desigual: vivió del perio­ dismo y el periodismo acabó por devorarlo. Murió en 1945 y todavía no ha sido posible que en México se publi­ que un volumen con sus poemas y aquellos pocos textos catar. Su último libro de poemas, La Feriay apareció en 1928. Debe haber poemas no recogidos en volumen. A mí me tocó descubrir uno, en francés: La croix de Sud; es la segunda parte de Offrandesy una cantata que compuso Ed- gard Várese en 1^22; para la primera parte Varésse se sir­ vió de un poema de Huidobro, también en francés..."' Hasta hace poco, a más de juzgar su poesía insignificante, se tenía a Tablada por un semiletrado ingenuo y víctima de un orientalismo descabellado. La acostumbrada, inape- 16 lable condenación en nombre de la cultura clásica y del humanismo grecorromano y cristiano. Una cultura en des­ composición y un humanismo que ignora que el hombre es los hombres y la cultura las culturas. Cierto, las ideas fi­ losóficas y religiosas de Tablada eran una curiosa mixtura de budismo real y de ocultismo irreal pero ¿qué decir en­ tonces de Yeats y de Pessoa? N o es posible dudar de su fa­ miliaridad con la cultura japonesa aunque, claro, la suya no haya sido la familiaridad del erudito o del scholar. Su conocimiento de la escritura japonesa debe haber sido ru­ dimentario, pero sus libros y artículos revelaron un trato directo con la gente, el arterias costumbres, las ideas y las tradiciones de ese país. Si es excepcional haber escrito, en 1914 y en México, un libro sobre Hiroshigué, más lo es que en ese libro Tablada nablase también, con discreción y gusto, del teatro N o y de Basho, de Chikamatsu y de Ta- kizawa Bakin. Otro dato de interés: gran aficionado a las artes plásticas, logró reunir en su casa de Coyoacán más de mil estampas de artistas japoneses, una colección que dispersó al abandonar el país, hacia 1315. Dicho todo esto, repito: Tablada no es memorable por su erudición sino por su poesía. ¿Cuáles fueron los modelos que inspiraron su adapta­ ción del haikú al español? Si hemos de creerle, su tenta­ tiva fue independiente de las que por esos años se hacían en Francia y en lengua inglesa. Como su testimonio puede ser tachado de parcial, vale más atenerse a los datos de la cronología: los experimentos franceses fueron anteriores a los de los «imaginistas» angloamericanos y a los de Ta­ blada; así pues es posible que Tablada haya seguido el ejemplo de Francia aunque, hay que decirlo, los haikús del mexicano me parecen más frescos y originales que los de los poetas franceses. O sea: hubo estímulo, no influencia ni 2 7 imitación. Por lo que toca al imagism de Pound, Hume y sus amigos ingleses y norteamericanos: Tablada conocía bien el inglés pero no creo que en esos años le interesase mucho la poesía inglesa. En cambio, por su correspon­ dencia con López Velarde sabemos que seguía muy de cerca lo que ocurría en París. Fue uno de los primeros his­ panoamericanos que habló de Apollinaire y sus caligramas lo entusiasmaron; nada más natural: veía en ellos lo que él mismo se proponía hacer, la unión de la vanguardia con la poesía y la caligrafía del Oriente. En suma, Tablada recoge y expresa las tendencias de la época pero sería falso hablar de imitación y aun de influencia. Las fuentes de su haiku no fueron los escritos por poetas franceses y angloameri­ canos sino los mismos textos japoneses. En primer tér­ mino, las traducciones al inglés y al francés; enseguida, la lectura más o menos directa de los originales con la ajoida de amigos y consejeros japoneses. La influencia de Tablada fue instantánea y se extendió a toda la lengua. Se le imitó muchísimo y, como siempre ocurre, la mayoría de esas imitaciones han ido a parar a los inmensos basureros de la literatura no leída. Pero hubo algo más y mejor que las imitaciones descoloridas y las exageraciones caricaturescas: los poetas jóvenes descu­ brieron en el haikú de Tablada el humor y la imagen, dos elementos centrales de la poesía moderna. Descubrieron asimismo algo que habían olvidado los poetas de nuestro idioma: la economía verbal y la objetmaad. La corres­ pondencia entre lo que dicen las palabras y lo que miran los ojos. La práctica del haikú fue (es) una escuela de con- centración. En k obra juvenil de muchos poetas hispano­ americanos de esa época, entre 1920 y 1925, es visible el ejemplo de Tablada. En México la lección fue recogida por los mejores: Pellicer, Villaurrutia, Gorostiza. Años des- 28 pues el poeta ecuatoriano Jorge Carrera Andrade redes­ cubrió por su cuenta el haikú y publicó un precioso li- brito: Microgramas (Tokio, 1940)- En España el fenómeno es un poco más tardío que en América: hay un momento japonés en Juan Ramón Jiménez y otro en Antonio Ma­ chado; ambos han sido poco estudiados. Lo mismo sucede con la poesía juvenil de García Lorca. En los tres poetas hay una curiosa alianza de dos elementos dispares: el haikú y la copla popular. Dispares por el espíritu, no por la mé­ trica: tanto la seguidilla como el tanka y el haikú están compuestos por versos de cinco y siete sílabas. La dife­ rencia es que el tanka es uri poema de cinco líneas, el haikú de tres y la seguidilla de cuatro (7/5/7/5). N o obstante, en la segunda estrofa de una combinación menos frecuente, la seguidilla compuesta, aparece una duplicación del haikú: 7/5/7/5:577/5. La analogía métrica no hace, por lo demás, sino subrayar las diferencias profundas entre estas dos for­ mas: en la seguidilla la poesía se alía a la danza, es canto y baile, en tanto que en el haikú la palabra se resuelve en si­ lenciosa contemplación, sea pictórica como en Buson o es­ piritual como en Basho. Ninguno de los tres poetas españoles -Jiménez, Machado y García Lorca- se inspira­ ron en el haikú por su parecido métrico con la seguidilla, aunque esta semejanza sin duda debe haberles impre­ sionado, sino porque vieron en esa forma japonesa un modelo de concentración verbal, una construcción de extmordiiiaria simplicidad hecha de unas cuantas líneas y una pluralidad de reflejos y alusiones. ¿Habían leído los poemas de Tablada? Parece imposible que los ignorasen. Un indicio: Enrique Díez-Canedo, el primero en señalar la influencia del haikú en las Nuevas canciones de Antonio Machado, conocía y admiraba la poesía de Tablada. Es re­ velador, por otra parte, que el haikú haya sido para Ta- 29 blada, a la inversa de los poetas españoles, una ruptura de la tradición y no una ocasión para regresar a ella. Actitu­ des contradictorias (complementarias) de la poesía espa­ ñola y de la hispanoamericana. Después de la Segunda Guerra Mundial los hispano­ americanos vuelven a interesarse en ía literatura japonesa. Citaré, entre otros muchos ejemplos, nuestra traducción de Oku no Hosomichi^ el número consagrado por la re­ vista Sur a las letras modernas del Japón y, sobre todo, las admirables traducciones de un traductor solitario pero que vale por cien: Kazuya Sakai. Ya señalé que la actitud con­ temporánea difiere de la de hace cincuenta años: no sólo es menos estética sino que también es menos etnocéntrica. El Japón ha dejado de ser una curiosidad artística y cultural: es (¿fue?) otra visión del mundo, distinta a la nuestra pero no mejor ni peor; no un espejo sino una ventana que nos muestra otra imagen del hombre, otra posibilidad de ser. Dentro de esta perspectiva lo realmente significativo no es quizá la traducción de textos clásicos y modernos sino la reunión, en abril de 1969, en París, de cuatro poetas con el objeto de componer un renga, el primero en Occidente. Los cuatro poetas fueron el italiano Edoardo Sanguineti, el francés Jacques Roubaud, el inglés Charles Tomlinson y el mexicano Octavio Paz. Un poema colectivo escrito en cuatro lenguas pero fundado en una tradición poética común. Nuestra tentativa fue, a su manera, una verdadera traducción: no de un texto sino de un método para com­ poner textos. N o son difíciles de adivinar las razones que 1 nos movieron a emprender esa experiencia: la practica del 1 renga coincide con las preocupaciones mayores de muchos poetas contemporáneos, tales como la aspiración hacia una ¡ poesía colectiva, la decadencia de la noción de autor y la ;j correlativa preeminencia del lenguaje frente al escritor (las : | 3〇 lenguas son más inteligentes que los hombres que las ha­ blan), la introducción deliberada del azar concebido como un homólogo de la antigua inspiración, la indistinción entre traducción y obra original.. . El haikú fue una crítica de la explicación y la reiteración,, esas enfermedades de la poesía; el renga es una crítica del autor y la propiedad pri­ vada intelectual, esas enfermedades de la sociedad. Sendas de Oku aparece ahora en una versión revisada. Comparamos nuestra traducción con las otras al inglés y al francés pero además Eikichi Hayashiya tuvo oportuni­ dad de consultar las nuevas ediciones críticas de Oku no Hosomichi publicadas en Japón durante los últimos años. Al corregir las versiones de los poemas he procurado ajus­ tarme a la métrica de los originales. En todos los casos prescindo de la rima: la poesía japonesa no la usa, a pesar de que abunda en paronomasias, aliteraciones 7 otros jue­ gos verbales. También son nuevas las versiones de los poe­ mas que cito en La poesía de Basho. Por último: hemos añadido muchas notas a las setenta de Eikichi Hayashiya que contenía la primera edición. En verdad, esta edición es otro libro... Después de estas aclaraciones debería cor­ tar este prólogo sinuoso y prolijo, pero me parecía trai­ cionar a Basho si no añado algo más: su sencillez es enga- ñosa, leerlo es una operación que consiste en ver a través de sus palabras. El poeta Mukai Kyorai (1651-17 04), uno de sus discípulos, explica mejor que yo el significado de la transparencia verbal de Basho. Un día Kyorai le mostró este haikú a su maestro: Cima de la peña: allí también hay otrö huésped de la luna. 31 «¿En qué pensaba cuando lo escribió?», le preguntó Ba- sho. Contestó Kyorai: «Una noche, mientras caminaba en la colina bajo la luna de verano, tratando de componer un poema, descubrí en lo alto de una roca a otro poeta, pro­ bablemente también pensando en un poema». Basho mo­ vió la cabeza: Hubiera sido mucho más interesante si las líneas: c c allí también hay otro/huésped de la lunaw se refi­ riesen no a otro sino a usted mismo». El tema de ese poe­ ma debería ser usted, lector. Cambridge,iz de marzo de 1970 1. Introducción, traducción y notas de Yuasa Nobuyuki. Contiene traducciones de otros cuatro relatos de viaje de Basho. Londres, 196^. z. Traducción y notas de Cid Corman y Kamaike Susumu, Nueva York, 1968. 3. Traducción 7 notas de René Sieffert, núm. 6 de VÉphémérey París, 1968. - 4. Introducción, traducción y notas de Earl Miner. Es parte del libro Japanese Poetic Diaries^ California University Press, Berkeley, ip66. 5. José Juan Tablada: Hiroshiguéy México, 1914. 6. Antonio Machado glosó este poema en Nuevas canciones (1925): A una japonesa le dijo Sokán: con la luna blanca te abanicarás, con la luna blanca a orillas del mar. A pesar de que una de sus virtudes era la reticencia, en este caso Machado no resistió a la muy hispánica e hispanoamericana tendencia a la explicación y la reiteración. En su paráfrasis ha desaparecido la sugestión, esa parte no dicha del poema y en la que está realmente la poesía. ^ En 1971 se publicaron las poesías completas de Tablada (Univer­ sidad Nacional de México) pero aún falta la prosa. 32 Advertencia a la primera edición (1957) A pesar de que los poemas de Basho han sido traduci­ dos a casi todos los idiomas europeos y han influido en varios movimientos poéticos modernos y en algunos poe­ tas ingleses, norteamericanos y franceses (para no hablar del mexicano José Juan Tablada, introductor del haikú en América y España), la traducción que ahora publicamos es la primera que da a conocer, en una lengua occidental, el texto completo del célebre diario de viaje Oku no Ho- somichi. Los traductores se han acercado con respeto y amor al original, aunque sin hacerse excesivas ilusiones sobre la posibilidad de trasplantar al español un texto que es elusivo aun en japonés. Esperan, de todos modos, que su versión dé una idea de la sencillez y movilidad de Basho, que procede por alusiones y cuyo lenguaje, poseí­ do por un infinito respeto al objeto^ no se detiene nun­ ca sobre las cosas sino que se contenta con rozarlas. La traducción de los poemas -sacrificando la música a la com­ prensión- no se ajusta a la métrica tradicional del haikú pero en muchos casos se ha procurado encontrar equiva- 33 lentes en español de la concentración poética del verso ja­ ponés y de sus medidas silábicas. Acompañan al texto setenta notas, que lo aclaran y dan más de una noticia interesante o curiosa. Todas ellas son fruto del paciente trabajo del señor Eikichi Hayashiya. El profesor Eiji Matsuda, de la Universidad Nacional de Mé­ xico, amablemente identificó y tradujo los nombres de las plantas y flores japonesas que se citan en el libro. El invierno pasado,1 en Nueva York, Donald Keene leyó nuestra traducción y me hizo algunas sugerencias que mejoraron nuestro texto. Doy aquí las más cumplidas gra­ bas a tan generoso amigo. O.P. 1.1 9 91. 34 Vida de Matsúo Basho Matsúo Basho (o a la occidental: Basho Matsúo) nació en 1644, en Ueno. Basho fue su último nombre literario; Kinsaku fue su nombre de nacimiento. Su padre era un sa- murái de escasos recursos al servicio de la poderosa fami­ lia Todo. A los nueve años Basho fue enviado a casa de sus señores, como paje de Yoshitada, el heredero de los Todo; el joven Yoshitada era apenas dos años mayor que Basho, de modo que pronto los unió una estrecha amistad, origi­ nada y fortalecida por su común ancion a la poesía. Los dos muchachos estudiaron el arte de la poesía con Kita- mura Kigin (1624-1703), discípulo de Teitoku y él mismo poeta de distinción. Se conservan poemas de esa época fir­ mados por Sengin y Sobo, nombres literarios del joven señor y de su paje y amigo, Sengin muere en 1666 y Basho, apenado por esta muerte prematura, pide separarse del ser­ vicio de la familia; rechazan su petición y el poeta huye a Kioto. Nuevos estudios de poesía y caligrafía; lectura de los clásicos chinos y japoneses; amores con Juteini, aunque poco se sabe de este episodio y casi nada sobre ella. En 35 1672 Basho se instala en Edo (Tokio). En 1675 conoce al poeta Soin y durante algún tiempo es miembro de su es- : cuela poética (Danrin). Cambia su nombre literario por el j de Tosei y su lenguaje poético por uno más fluido y menos literario. Publica varias antologías. Ya libre de influencias, ! crea poco a poco una nueva poesía y pronto lo rodean dis- | cípulos y admiradores. Pero la literatura es también y sobre todo experiencia interior; intensa búsqueda, años de meditación y aprendizaje bajo la dirección del maestro de zen, el monje Buccho (1643-1715). Uno de sus admira­ dores, Sampu, hombre acomodado, le regala una pequeña casa cerca del río Sumida, en 1680. Ese mismo año otro de § sus discípulos le ofrece, como presente, una planta de ba- - : ¡ nano (Basho). La planta da nombre a la ermita y luego al | poeta mismo. Período de meditación y de lenta conquista, - | contra angustia psíquica y males del cuerpo, de una siem- | pre precaria serenidad. Su influencia crece, lo mismo que ] el renombre de sus libros 7 de las antologías que publica con sus discípulos: Kikaku, Sora, Sampu, Boncho, Kyori, | Joso, Ransetsu... Viajes, solo o acompañado; viajes a pie ; ] como un monje pero asimismo como un extraño «sem- 2 brador de poesía». En 1683 publica su primer diario de 5 viaje; en 1687 escribe un relato de su excursión al santua- | rio de Kashima y un poco después emprende una nueva 7 larga excursión de once meses, origen del tercer y cuarto | diario. En 1689 se inicia la peregrinación que relata Oku | no Hosomichi. Basho tenía cuarenta y cinco años y el viaje | duró dos años y medio, aunque el texto tiene por materia ミ sólo los seis primeros meses. Para darse cuenta de lo que significó esa expedición debe señalarse que para los japo- neses del siglo XX esa región es considerada todavía como un país remoto y abrupto. En 1691 Basho regresa a Edo. Nuevas ermitas: Choza de la Vision^ Cabaña de laAnoni- midad... En 1 694, otra excursión, ahora a Nara y Osaka. En esta última ciudad cae enfermo, en el curso de una co­ mida en casa de Ono, su discípula; sus amigos lo trans­ portan a casa de un florista, donde muere, el 12 4e octubre. Está enterrado en Otsu, a la orilla del lago Biwa. 〇 • R 37 La poesía de M atsúo Basho Tras una larga serie de guerras intestinas, durante las cuales la antigua capital,Kioto, es casi destruida, Japón co­ noce un largó período de paz. Al iniciarse el siglo XVII la familia Tokugawa asume la dirección del Estado, que no dejará hasta la restauración del poder imperial,a media- bernantes supremos, frente al poder puramente simbólico de los emperadores) se traslada a Edo (la actual Tokio). El Japón cierra sus puertas al mundo exterior y vive dentro de las normas de una rígida disciplina política, social y económica que a veces hace pensar en las modernas socie­ dades totalitarias o en el Estado que fundaron los jesuítas en Paraguay. Pero desde mediados del siglo XVII una nueva clase urbana empieza a surgir en Edo, Osaka y Kioto. Son los mercaderes, los chonin u hombres del común, que si no destruyen la supremacía feudal de los militares, sí mo­ difican profundamente la atmósfera de las grandes ciuda­ des. Esta clase se convierte en patrona de las artes y la vida social. Un nuevo estilo de vida, más libre y espontáneo, menos formal y aristocrático, llega a imponerse. Por opo- sicion a la cultura tradicional japonesa -siempre de corte y cerrado círculo, aristocrática o religiosa- la nueva socie­ dad es abierta. Se vive en la calle y se multiplican los tea­ tros, los restaurantes, las casas de placer, los baños públicos atendidos por muchachas, los espectáculos de lu­ chadores. Una burguesía próspera y refinada protege y fo­ menta los placeres del cuerpo y del espíritu. El barrio alegre de Edo no sólo es un lugar de libertinaje elegante en donde reinan las cortesanas y los actores sino que, a diferencia de lo que pasa en nuestras abyectas ciudades modernas, también es un centro de creación artística. Gen- roku -tal es el nombre del período- se distingue por una vitalidad y un desenfado ausentes en el arte de épocas an­ teriores. Este mundo brillante y popular, compuesto por nuevos ricos y mujeres hermosas, por grandes actores y juglares, se llama Ukiyo^ es decir, el «Mundo que flota» y que pasa como las nubes de un día de verano. El grabado en madera -Ukiyoe: imágenes del mundo fugitivo- se ini­ cia en esta época. Arte gemelo del Ukiyoe, nace la novela picaresca y pornográfica: Ukiyo-SoshL Las obras licencio­ sas -llamadas con elíptico ingenio Libros de Primavera- se vuelven tan populares como la literatura libertina de fines del siglo XVIII europeo. El teatro Kabuki^ que com­ bina el drama con el ballet, alcanza su mediodía y el gran poeta Chikamatsu escribe para el teatro de muñecos obras que maravillaron a sus contemporáneos y que hirieron la imaginación de hombres como Yeats y Claudel. La poesía japonesa, gracias sobre todo a Matsúo Basho, alcanza una libertad y una frescura ignoradas hasta entonces. Y, asi­ mismo, se convierte en una réplica al tumulto mundano. Ante ese mundo vertiginoso y lleno de colorido, el haikú de Basho es un círculo de silencio y recogimiento: ma­ nantial, pozo de agua oscura y secreta. 39 Basho no rompe con la tradición sino que la continúa de una manera inesperada; o como él mismo dice: «No sigo el camino de los antiguos: busco lo que ellos buscaron». Basho aspira a expresar, con medios nuevos, el mismo sen­ timiento concentrado de la gran poesía clásica. Así, trans­ forma las formas populares de su época (el haikai no renga) en vehículos de la más alta poesía. Esto requiere una breve explicación. La poesía japonesa no conoce la rima ni la ver­ sificación acentual y su recurso principal, como en la fran­ cesa, es la medida silábica. Esta limitación no es pobreza, pues es rica en onomatopeyas, aliteraciones y juegos de pa- labras que son también combiimciones insólitas de sonido y sentido. Todo poema japonés está compuesto por versos de siete y cinco sílabas; la forma clásica consiste en un poema corto -waka o tanka- de treinta y una sílabas, di­ vidido en dos estrofas: la primera de tres versos (cinco, siete y cinco sílabas) y la segunda de dos (ambos siete sílabas). La estructura misma del poema permitió, desde el princi­ pio, que dos poetas participasen en la creación de un poe­ ma: uno escribía las tres primeras líneas y el otro las dos últimas. Escribir poesía se convirtió en un juego poético parecido al «cadáver exquisito» de los surrealistas; pronto, en lugar de un solo poema, se empezaron a escribir series enteras, ligadas tenuemente por el tema de la estación. Estas series de poemas en cadena se llamaron renga. El género ligero, cómico o epigramático, se llamó renga haikai y el poema inicial hokku. Basho practicó con sus discípulos y amigos -dándole nuevo sentido- el arte del renga haikai o cadena de poemas, adelantándose así a la profecía de Lau- tréamont y a una de las tentativas del surrealismo: la crea­ ción poética colectiva. Cualquiera que haya practicado el juego del «cadáver exquisito», el de las «cartas rusas» o algún otro que exija 40 la participación de un grupo de personas en la elaboración de una frase o de un poema podrá darse cuenta de los ries­ gos: las fronteras entre la comunión poética y el simple pa­ satiempo mundano son muy frágiles. Pero si, gracias a la intervención de ese magnetismo o poesía objetiva que obliga a rimar una cosa con otra, se logra realmente la co­ municación poética y se establece una corriente de simpa­ tía creadora entre los participantes, los resultados son sorprendentes: lo inesperado brota como un pez o un cho­ rro de agua. Lo más extraño es que esta súbita irrupción parece natural y, más que nada, fatal, necesaria, Libertad y necesidad coinciden en un punto de intersección incan­ descente. Los poemas escritos por Basho y sus amigos son memorables y la complicación de las reglas a que debían someterse no hace sino subrayar la naturalidad y la felici­ dad de los hallazgos. Cito, en pobre traducción, un frag­ mento de uno de esos poemas colectivos: El aguacero invernal, incapaz de esconder la luna, la deja escaparse de su puño. Tokoku Mientras camino sobre el hielo piso relámpagos: la luz de mi linterna. Jugo Al alba los cazadores atan a sus flechas blancas hojas de heléchos. Yasui ° 41 Abriendo de par en par la puerta norte del Palacio: ¡la Primavera! Basho Entre los rastrillos y el estiércol de los caballos humea, cálido, el aire. Kakei1 El poema se inicia con la lluvia, el invierno y la noche. Lä imagen de la caminata nocturna sobre el hielo convoca a la del alba fría. Luego, como en la realidad, hay un salto e irrumpe, sin previo aviso, la primavera- El realismo de la última estrofa modera el excesivo lirismo de líi anterior. El poema suelto, desprendido del renga haikai, empezó a llamarse haikú, palabra compuesta de haikai y hokku. Un haikú es un poema de diecisiete sílabas y tres ver­ sos: cinco, siete y cinco sílabas.2 Basho no inventó estas formas; tampoco las alteró: simplemente transformó su sentido. Cuando empezó a escribir, la poesía se había con­ vertido en un pasatiempo: poema quería decir poesía có­ mica, epigrama o juego de sociedad. Basho recoge este nuevo lenguaje coloquial, libre y desenfadado, y con él busca lo mismo que los antiguos: el instante poético. El haikú se transforau y se convierte en la anotación rápida -verdadera recreación- de un momento privilegiado: ex­ clamación poética, caligrafía, pintura y meditación, todo junto. El haikú de Basho es ejercicio espiritual. Discípulo del monje Buccho -y él mismo medio ermitaño que al­ terna la poesía con la meditación-, acaso no sea imperti­ nente detenerse en la significación del budismo zen en su obra y en su vida. 4 2 Tanto en su forma primera (Hinayana) como en la tar­ día (Mabayana)^ el budismo sostiene que la única manera de detener la rueda sin fin del nacer y del morir y, por con­ siguiente, del dolor, es acabar con el origen del mal. Filo­ sofía antes que religión, el budismo postula como primera condición de una vida recta la desaparición de la ignoran­ cia acerca de nuestra verdadera naturaleza. Sólo si nos damos cuenta de la irrealidad del mundo fenomenal pode­ mos abrazar la buena vía y escapar del ciclo de las reen­ carnaciones, alimentado por el fuego del deseo y el error. El yo se revela ilusorio: es una entidad sin realidad pro­ pia, compuesta por agregados o factores mentales. El co­ nocimiento consiste ante todo en percibir la irrealidad del yo, causa principal del deseo y de nuestro apego al mundo. Así, la meditación no es otra cosa que la gradual destruc­ ción del yo y de las ilusiones que engendra; ella nos des­ pierta del sueño o mentira que somos y vivimos. Este despertar es la iluminación (Sambodbi en sánscrito y Satori en japonés). La iluminación nos lleva a la liberación defi­ nitiva (Nirvana). Aunque las buenas obras, la compasión y otras virtudes forman parte de la ética budista, lo esen­ cial consiste en los ejercicios de meditación y contempla­ ción. El estado satori implica no tanto un saber la verdad como un estar en ella y, en los casos supremos, un ser la verdad. Algunas sectas buscan la iluminación por medio del estudio de los libros canónicos (Sutras); otras por la vía de la devoción (ciertas corrientes de la tendencia Ma- hayana); otras más por la magia ritual y sexual (tantrismo); algunas por la oración y aun por la repetición de la fór­ mula Namu Amida Butsu (Gloria al Buda Amida). To­ dos estos caminos y prácticas se enlazan a la vía central: la meditación. La doctrina zen -y esto la opone a las demás tendencias budistas- afirma que las fórmulas, los libros 43 canónicos, las enseñanzas de los grandes teólogos y aun la palabra misma de Buda son innecesarios. Zen predica la iluminación súbita. Los demás budistas creen que el Nirvana sólo puede alcanzarse después de pasar por mu­ chas reencarnaciones; Gautama mismo logró la ilumina­ ción cuando ya era un hombre maduro y después de haber pasado por miles de existencias previas que la leyenda bu­ dista ha recogido con gran poesía (jatakas). Zen afirma que el estado satori es aquí y ahora mismo, un instante que es todos los instantes, momento de revelación en que el uni­ verso entero -y con él la corriente de temporalidad que lo sostiene- se derrumba. Este instante niega al tiempo y nos enfrenta a la verdad. Por su misma naturaleza el momento de iluminación es indecible. Como el taoísmo, a quien sin duda debe mucho, zen es una «doctrina sin palabras». Para provocar dentro del discípulo el estado propicio a la iluminación, los maes­ tros acuden a las paradojas, al absurdo, al contrasentido y, en suma, a todas aquellas formas que tienden a destruir nuestra lógica y la perspectiva normal y limitada de las cosas. Pero la destrucción de la lógica no tiene por objeto remitirnos al caos y al absurdo sino, a través de la expe­ riencia de lo sin sentido, descubrir un nuevo sentido. Sólo que este sentido es incomunicable por las palabras. Apenas el humor, la poesía o la imagen pueden hacemos vislum­ brar en qué consiste la nueva vision. El carácter incomu­ nicable de ia experiencia zen se revela en esta anécdota: un maestro cae en un precipicio pero puede asir con los dien­ tes la rama de un árbol; en este instante llega uno de sus discípulos y le pregunta: ¿en qué consiste zen, maestro? Evidentemente, no hay respuesta posible: enunciar la doc­ trina implica abandonar el estado satori y volver a caer en el mundo de los contrarios relativos, en el «esto» y el 44 «aquello». Ahora bien, zen no es ni «esto» ni «aquello» sino, más bien, «esto y aquello». Así, para emplear la co­ nocida frase de Zhuang Zi: «el verdadero sabio predica la doctrina sin palabras». La actitud zen ante los problemas filosóficos puede ejemplificarse también con un diálogo que hace tiempo me refino el doctor Erich Fromm. Pa­ rece que el profesor Suzuki -el gran expositor de zen- visitó hace años a Martin Heidegger. El filósofo alemán mostró interés por saber cuál era la posición del budismo zen frente al problema del Ser. Suzuki repuso que no podía darle ninguna contestación categórica pero que le contaría una anécdota que respondería a su interrogación: un dis­ cípulo se acerca a un maestro y, antes de hablarle, le hace una reverencia. En lugar de contestar al saludo, el maestro lo golpea con su bastón. «Pero ¿por qué me pegas si aún no he hablado?» A lo que el monje responde: «No era ne­ cesario esperar a que lo hicieses». Para zen no sólo salen sobrando las respuestas sino también las preguntas... Y no obstante, hay una indudable y extraña analogía entre el budismo zen y las meditaciones de Heidegger sobre el tiempo y la nada. Desde el período Muromachi (1333-1600) la cultura ja­ ponesa se impregna de zen. Para los samurais^ zen era el otro platillo de la balanza. En un extremo, el estilo de vida bushido, es decir, el estilo del guerrero vertido hacia el ex­ terior; en el otro, la Ceremonia del té, la decoración floral, el Teatro N o y, sustento al mismo tiempo que cima de toda esta vida estética, cara al interior, la meditación zen. Según Issotei Nishikawa esta vertiente estética se W^m^furyu o sea «diversión elegante»^ Las palabras «diversión» 7 «ele­ gante» tienen aquí un sentido peculiar y no denotan dis­ tracción mundana y lujosa sino recogimiento, soledad, intimidad 7 renuncia. El símbolo de furyu sería la decora- 45 ción floral (ikebana) cuyo arquetipo no es el adorno si­ métrico occidental, ni la suntuosidad o la riqueza de colo­ rido sino la pobreza, la simplicidad y la irregularidad. Los objetos imperfectos y frágiles -una piedra rodada, una rama torcida, un paisaje no muy interesante por sí mismo pero dueño de cierta belleza secreta- poseen una calidad furyu. Bushido y furyu fueron los dos polos de la vida ja­ ponesa. Economía vital y psíquica que nos deja entrever el verdadero sentido de muchas actitudes que de otra ma­ nera nos parecerían contradictorias. Gracias al budismo zen la religiosidad japonesa se ahonda y tiene conciencia de sí misma. Se acentúa el lado interior de las cosas: el refinamiento es simplicidad; la sim­ plicidad, comunión con la naturaleza. Las almas se afinan y templan. El culto al mundo natural, presente desde la época más remota, se transforma en una suerte de mística. El octavo Shogun Ashikaga (Yoshimasa) introduce la Ce­ remonia del Té, regida por los mismos principios: simpli­ cidad, serenidad, desinterés. En una palabra: quietismo. Pero nada más lejos del quietismo furibundo y contraído de los místicos occidentales, desgarrados por la oposición inconciliable entre este mundo y el otro, entre el creador y la criatura, que el de los adeptos de zen. La ausencia de la noción de un Dios creador, por una parte, y la de la idea cristiana de una naturaleza caída, por la otra, explican la diferencia de actitudes. Buda dijo que todos, hasta los ár­ boles y las yerbas, algún día alcanzarían el Nirvana. El estado búdico es un trascender la naturaleza pero tam­ bién un volver a ella. El culto a lo irregular y a la armonía asimétrica brota de esta idea de la naturaleza como ar­ quetipo de todo lo existente. Los jardineros japoneses no pretenden someter el paisaje a una armonía racional, como ocurre con el arte francés de Le Notre, sino al con- 46 trario: hácen del jardín un microcosmos de la inmensidad natural. La actitud zen ha influido en todas las artes, desde la pintura y la poesía hasta el teatro y la música. Zen es alu­ sivo y elusivo, Chikamatsu nos ha dejado una excelente definición de esta estética: «El arte vive en las delgadas fronteras que separan lo real de lo irreal». Y en otra parte expresa: «El poeta no dice: esto es triste sino que hace que el objeto mismo sea triste, sin necesidad de subrayarlo». El artista muestra; el propagandista y el moralista de­ muestran. También las reflexiones críticas de Zeami -el gran autor del teatro N o - están impregnadas del espíritu zen. En un pasaje nos habla de que hay tres clases de ac­ tuación teatral: una es para los ojos, otra para los oídos y la última para el espíritu. En la primera sobresalen la danza, los trajes y los gestos de los actores; en la segunda, la música, la palabra y el ritmo de la acción; en la tercera, se apela al espíritu: «Un maestro del arte no moverá el co­ razón de su auditorio sino cuando ha eliminado todo: danza, canto, gesticulaciones y las palabras mismas. En­ tonces, la emoción brota de la quietud. Esto se llama: la ¿伽 2这 Y agrega: «Este estilo místico, aunque se llama N o que habla al entendimiento, también podía llamarse: N o sin entendimiento». La conciencia se ha di- suelto en la quietud. Zeami muestra la transición de los es­ tados de ammo del espectador, verdadera escala del éxtasis, de este modo: «El libro de la crítica dice: olvida el espec­ táculo y mira al N6; olvida el N 6 y mira al actor; olvida al actor y mira la idea; olvida la idea y comprenderás el No».4 El arte es una forma del conocimiento. Y este conocer, con todas nuestras potencias y sentidos, sí, pero también sin ellos, suspendidos en arrobo inmóvil y vertiginoso, cul­ mina en un instante de comunión: ya no hay nada que 47 contemplar porque nosotros mismos nos hemos fundido con aquello que contemplamos. Sólo que la contemplación que nos propone Zeami posee un carácter distinto del éx­ tasis occidental; la diferencia es capital porque para la es­ tética del No, el arte no convoca a una presencia sino, más bien, a una ausencia. La cima del instante contemplativo es un estado paradójico: es un no ser en el que, de alguna ma­ nera, se da el pleno sen Plenitud del vacío. Un sucesor de Basho, el poeta Oshima Ryota (1718- 1787), alude a esta suspensión del ánimo en un poema ad­ mirable: N o hablan palabra el anfitrión, el huésped y el crisantemo. Yosa Buson (1716-1783), pintor, calígrafo y poeta, uno de los cuatro maestros del haikú (los otros son Basho, Issa y Shiki), expresa la misma intuición aunque con una iro­ nía ausente en el poema de Ryota y que es una de las gran­ des contribuciones del haikai: Llovizna: plática de la capa de paja y la sombrilla. A lo que responde Masaoka Shiki (1867-1902): Ah, si me vuelvo ese pasante ya no es sino bruma. Desde un punto de vista formal el haikú se divide en dos partes: una de la condición general y la ubicación tem­ poral o espacial del poema (otoño o primavera, mediodía o atardecer, un árbol o una roca, la luna, un ruiseñor); la otra, relampagueante, debe contener un elemento activo. Una es descriptiva y casi enunciativa; la otra, inesperada. La percepción poética surge del choque entre ambas. La índole misma del haikú es favorable a un humor seco, nada sentimental,y a los juegos de palabras, onomatopeyas y aliteraciones, recursos constantes de Basho, Buson e Issa. Arte no intelectual, siempre concreto y antiliterario, el haikú es una pequeña cápsula cargada de poesía capaz de hacer saltar la realidad aparente.5 Un poema de Basho -que ha resistido, es cierto, a todas las traducciones y que doy aquí en una inepta versión- quizá ilumine lo que quiero decir: Un viejo estanque: salta una rana ¡zas! chapaleteo. Nos enfrentamos a una casi prosaica enunciación de he­ chos: el estanque, el salto de la rana, el chasquido del agua. Nada menos «poético»: palabras comunes y un hecho in­ significante. Basho nos ha dado simples apuntes, como si nos mostrase con el dedo dos o tres realidades inconexas que, de algún modo, tienen un «sentido» que nos toca a nosotros descubrir. El lector debe recrear el poema. En la primera línea encontramos el elemento pasivo: el viejo es­ tanque y su silencio. En la segunda, la sorpresa del salto de la rana que rompe la quietud. Del encuentro de estos dos elementos debe brotar la iluminación poética. Y esta ilu­ minación consiste en volver al silencio del que partió el poema, sólo que ahora cargado de significación. A la ma- 49 ñera del agua que se extiende en círculos concéntricos, nuestra conciencia debe extenderse en oleadas sucesivas de asociaciones. El pequeño haikú es un mundo de resonan- cias, ecos y correspondencias: Tregua de vidrio: el son de la cigarra taladra las rocas. El paisaje no puede ser más nmdo. Mediodía en un lugar desierto: el sol y las rocas. Lo único vivo en el aire seco es el canto de las cigarras. Hay un gran silencio. Tbdo calla y nos enfrenta a algo que no podemos nombrar: la naturaleza se nos presenta como algo concreto al mismo tiempo, inasible, que rechaza toda comprensión. El canto de las cigarras se funde al callar de las rocas. Y nosotros también quedamos paralizados y, literalmente, petrifica­ dos. El haikú es satori: El mar ya oscuro: los gritos de los patos apenas blancos. Aquí predomina la imagen visual: lo blanco brilla dé­ bilmente sobre el dorso oscuro del mar. Pero no es el plu­ maje de los patos ni la cresta de las olas sino los gritos de los pájaros lo que, extrañamente, es blanco para el pöeta. En general, Basho prefiere alusiones más sutiles y con­ trastes más velados: Este camino nadie ya lo recorre, salvo el crepúsculo. La melancolía no excluye una buena, humilde y sana alegría ante el hecho sorprendente de estar vivos y ser hombres: Bajo las abiertas campánulas comemos nuestra comida, nosotros que sólo somos hombres. Un poema de Issa contiene el mismo sentimiento, sólo que teñido de una suerte de simpatía cósmica: Luna montañesa: también iluminas al ladrón de flores. El haikú no sólo es poesía escrita -o 5 más exactamente, dibujada- sino poesía vivida, experiencia poética recreada. Con inmensa cortesía, Basho no nos dice todo: se limita a entregarnos unos cuantos elementos, los suficientes para encender la chispa. Es una invitación al viaje pero a un viaje que debemos hacer con nuestras propias piernas; como él mismo dice: «No hay que viajar a lomos de otro. Piensa en el que te sirve como si fuese otra y más débil pierna tuya». Y en otro pasaje agrega: «No duermas dos veces en el mismo sitio; desea siempre una estera que no hayas calentado aún» _ Los diarios son un género muy antiguo y popular en la literatura japonesa. Zeami escribió uno -El libro de la Isla de Oro- en el que entrevera pensamientos sueltos, poemas y descripciones. Basho escribió cinco diarios de viaje, ver­ daderos cuadernos de bocetos, impresiones y apuntes. Estos diarios son ejemplos perfectos de un género en boga 51 en la época de Basho y del cual él es uno de los grandes maestros: el haibun^ texto en prosa que rodea, como si fue­ sen islotes, a un grupo de haikús. Poemas y pasajes en prosa se completan y recíprocamente se iluminan. El me­ jor de esos cinco diarios de viaje es, según la opinión ge­ neral, Oku no HosomocbL En ese breve cuaderno hecho de veloces dibujos verbales y súbitas alusiones -signos de inteligencia que el autor cambia con el lector- la poesía se mezcla a la reflexión, el humor a la melancolía, la anécdota a la contemplación. Es difícil leer un libro -y más aún cuando casi todo su aroma se ha perdido en la traducción- que no nos ofrece asidero alguno y que se despliega ante nuestros ojos como una sucesión de paisajes. Quizá haya que leerlo como se mira al campo: sin prestar mucha aten­ ción al principio, recorriendo con mirada distraída la co­ lina, los árboles, el cielo y su rincón de nubes, las rocas... De pronto nos detenemos ante una piedra cualquiera de la que no podemos apartar la vista y entonces conversa­ mos, por un instante sin medida, con las cosas que nos ro­ dean. En este libro de Basho no pasa nada, salvo el sol, la lluvia, las nubes, unas cortesanas, una niña, otros peregri­ nos. N o pasa nada, excepto la vida y la muerte: Es primavera: la colina sin nombre en tre la niebla. La idea del viaje -un viaje desde las nubes de esta exis- 丨 tencia hacia las nubes ae la otrá- está presente en toda la obra de Basho. Viajero fantasma, un día antes de morir es- ! cribe este poema: Caído en el viaje: mis sueños en el llano dan vueltas y vueltas. En una forma voluntariamente antiheroica la poesía de Basho nos llama a una aventura de veras importante: la de perdernos en lo cotidiano para encontrar lo maravillo­ so. Viaje inmóvil, al término del cual nos encontramos con nosotros mismos: lo maravilloso es nuestra verdad hu­ mana. En tres versos el poeta insinúa el sentido de este encuentro: Un relámpago y el grito de la garza, hondo en lo oscuro. El grito del pájaro se funde al relámpago y ambos de­ saparecen en la noche. ¿Un símbolo de la muerte? La po­ esía de Basho no es simbólica: la noche es la noche y nada más. Al mismo tiempo, sí es algo más pero es un algo que, rebelde a la definición, se rehúsa a ser nombrado. Si el poeta lo nombrase, se evaporaría. N o es la cara escondida de la realidad; al contrario, es su cara de todos los días... y es aquello que no está en cara alguna. El haikú es una crítica de la realidad: en toda realidad hay algo más de lo que llamamos realidad^ simultáneamente, es una crítica del lenguaje: Admirable aquel que ante el relámpago no dice: la vida huye... Crítica del lugar común pero también crítica a nuestra 53 pretensión de identificar, significar y decir. El lenguaje tiende a dar sentido a todo lo que decimos y una de las mi­ siones del poeta es hacer la crítica del sentido. Si decimos que la vida es corta como el relámpago no sólo repetimos un lugar común sino que atentamos contra la originalidad de la vida, contra aquello que efectivamente la hace única. La verdad original de la vida es su vivacidad y esa vivaci­ dad es consecuencia de ser vida mortal, finita: la vida está tejida de muerte. Pero al decirlo convertimos en dos con­ ceptos, vida y muerte, la vivaz y fúnebre unidad vida- muerte. ¿Hay un lenguaje que diga, sin decirla, esa unidad? Sí, el haikú: una palabra que es la crítica de la realidad, un lenguaje que es la burla oblicua de la significación. El haikú de Basho nos abre las puertas de satori: el sentido y la fal­ ta de sentido, vida y muerte, coexisten. N o es tanto la anu­ lación de los contrarios ni su fusión como una suspensión de ¿mimo. Instante de la exclamación o de la sonrisa: la po­ esía ya no se distingue de la vida, la realidad reabsorbe a la significación. La vida no es ni larga ni corta sino que es como el relámpago de Basho. Ese relámpago no nos avisa de nuestra mortalidad; su misma intensidad de luz, seme­ jante a la intensidad verbal del poema, nos dice que el hombre no es únicamente el esclavo del tiempo y de la muerte sino que, dentro de sí, lleva a otro tiempo. Y la vi­ sión instantánea de ese otro tiempo se llama poesía: crítica del lenguaje y de la realidad: crítica del tiempo. La sub­ versión del sentido produce una reversión del tiempo: el instante del haikú es inconmensurable. La poesía de Basho, ese hombre frugal y pobre que escribió ya entrado en años y que vagabundeó por todo el Japón durmiendo en ermitas y posadas populares; ese reconcentrado que contemplaba largamente un árbol y un cuervo sobre el árbol, el brillo de la luz sobre una piedra; ese poeta que 54 después de remendarse las ropas raídas leía a los clásicos chinos; ese silencioso que hablaba en los caminos con los labradores y las prostitutas, los monjes y los ñiños, es algo más que una obra literaria: es una invitación a vivir de veras la vida y la poesía. Dos realidades unidas, insepara­ bles y que, no obstante, jamás se funden enteramente: el grito del pájaro y la luz del relámpago. O.P. Mexico, 1954 !• U tilizo para m i traducción la versión inglesa de D onald Keene ^Japanese Literature: An Introduction for Western Readers^ Londres, 1953). 2. El haiku n o se con stituye com o una form a propiam ente autó­ nom a hasta principios del siglo x ix . 3. Floral art of Japan^ Tokio, 193 6. 4. C itado por Arthur W aley en The No plays of Japany Londres, I95〇 _5. Sobre el haikú, su técnica y sus fuentes espirituales, léase la obra que, en cuatro volúm enes, ha dedicado R . f i . B lyth d tema: //¿«fe« , H ok useid o, T okio, 1951. 55 Sobre Yosa Buson Su vida Yosa Buson nació, según se cree, en Kema (provin­ cia de Settsu), barrio actual de la ciudad de Osaka, el año 1716. N o se sabe mucho de sus padres, acerca de los cua­ les Buson no aejo nada escrito. Parece haber sido hijo ilegítimo del alcalde del lugar, quien acaso lo haya tenido de una sirvienta o concubina proveniente de Yosa (actualmente en la prefectura de Kioto). Así se explica su apellido adoptivo Yosa; el real es Taniguchi. Hacia k edad de veinte años5 Buson, ya huérfano y des— pués de haber gastado alguna fortuna que le había dejado su padre, se dirige a Edo, la actual Tokio, que por enton­ ces empezaba a cobrar creciente importancia como sede del Gobierno del Shogún Tokugawa. Joven de gran inclinación poética y artística, ingresa en el grupo de discípulos del renombrado poeta Hayano Hajin (167 6-1742), quien se conocía con el seudónimo Soka 7 reunía en «Yahantei», como llamaba a su casa, a va­ rios poetas. Soka fue discípulo de Enomoto Kikaku y de Hattori Ransetsu, primeros seguidores de Matsúo Basho. Yosa Buson de veintitrés años se hace pupilo de Ya- hantei, y comienza a componer y pintar bajo el seudónimo Saicho y la influencia del maestro Soka, hombre de vasta cultura y de conducta intachable. Buson parece haber perdido el deseo de vivir en Edo a la muerte de su venerado maestro Soka, ocurrida en 1742. Abandona, pues, Edo para emprender una vida errante de diez años, viajando sin cesar por sus alrededores y por aquellos lugares del norte del Japón que Basho había re­ corrido más de cincuenta años atrás. En 1 7 5 1 , a los treinta y seis años de edad, Buson -ya comenzaba a usar este seudónimo- se traslada a Kioto, en donde se abre camino, con la amistosa acogida de Mochi- zuki Sooku (1 688-1766), discípulo también del maestro Soka, logrando dedicarse a sus poesías. Su vida sosegada y bastante holgada en Kioto le per­ mite visitar lugares históricos y literarios y mantener di­ versos contactos con los poetas de la ciudad. Pasa algunos años en Miyazu, ciudad costera del mar del Japón, cuyo ambiente y exuberantes paisajes parecen haberlo llevado a dedicar más tiempo a la pintura que a la poesía. Su estilo, hasta entonces cercano al de la escuela Tosa o Kano, pasa a otro más personal de líneas sencillas y suel­ tas, y en él dejo varias obras importantes, tales como biombos de paisajes chinescos en combinación de tinta negra con suave o tenue colorido, que le han dado tanta fama. En 177 0, Buson traslada a Kioto la Yahantei, fundada en Edo por su maestro Soka, y se entrega de nuevo a la ac­ tividad poética sin dejar la pintura. Como poeta de haikai, reacciona contra la tenden­ cia -entonces generalizada- de vulgarizar el estilo de Ba- 57 sho, promueve su recuperación, y junto con sus seguido­ res publica obras como hAkegarasu (1773). Su dedicación a Basho fue tanta que llegó a decir que le parecía que la boca se le llenaba de espinas si pasaba tres días sin recitar los poemas de Basho. Además, en diversas obras alegaba la importancia y necesidad de seguir sus líneas de sabi o ele­ gancia sosegada. En 1775 reconstruye la Choza Basho en el recinto del templo Kompuku-ji de Kioto, y despliega diversas activi­ dades literarias y pictóricas. En la pintura también, llega a la madurez a partir de sus sesenta años, y deja varias obras de paisajes sobre las cuatro estaciones del año, entre otras que firma con el seu­ dónimo Shain. Son obras ricas en expresiones, llenas de sentimiento poético y de hermoso colorido. También de la misma época son las pinturas del género Haiga a las que pertenecen los renombrados rollos de Oku-no-Hosomichi. En 1783 enferma, 7 fallece a los sesenta y ocho años de edad. Sus restos mortales descansan en Kompuku-ji de Kioto. Su Oku-No-Hosomichi El Oku-no-Hosomichi ác Buson que reproducimos en esta edición es el texto íntegro de los dos rollos que se con- servan en el Museo Itsuo de la ciudad de Ikeda, prefectura de Osaka, como colección privada del conocido empresa­ rio y amante de las artes Kobayashi Ichizo (1873-1957). Estos rollos tienen ambos 28 cm. de ancho; uno mide 117 cm. de largo, y 121,5 el otro. El texto va de derecha a iz­ quierda, e intercala catorce pinturas. Buson, como gran admirador de Basho, visitó los lu­ gares donde éste había estado. Mostró interés especial en caligrafiar e ilustrar sus crónicas de viaje, entre ellas su pre­ dilecto Oku-no~Hosomichi. Buson parece haber caligrafiado por encargo entre 1778 y 1779 unos diez ejemplares de Oku-no~Hosomicbiy tres de los cuales se conservan todavía: uno en biombo en el Museo de Yamagata, y los otros dos en rollos. De estos rollos, uno es el de Itsuo 7 el otro se halla en el Museo Na­ cional de Kioto. El Museo Itsuo guarda también unas setenta obras de Buson de diferentes épocas. A esta colección pertenece el retrato de Buson que utilizamos en la presente edición. Los tres ejemplares existentes son similares aunque las pinturas que intercalan tienen leves diferencias, y no todos intercalan el mismo número de pinturas. En la caligrafía del texto se notarán cambios de estilo en sus letras del texto, pudiendo considerarse en él cuatro es­ tilos. Esto se atribuye a la costumbre practicada desde el siglo XII de cambiar de estilo caligráfico en textos largos de rollo. En todo caso, Buson sin duda cambió de estilo para destacar la parte que más le atraía, y con el mismo ob­ jeto escribió los poemas en letras un poco más grandes. En los últimos años de la vida de Buson, cuando éste había alcanzado una perfecta combinación de la poesía y la pintura, se intensifica aún más su devoción a Basho, re­ cuerda con añoranza sus días juveniles de continuos viajes, y desea más que nunca antes la vuelta del mundo poético del haikai al estilo Basho. Es entonces cuando crea esta obra, que es sin duda una de las que mejor representan su género de pintura haiga. Eikichi Hayashiya Tokio, octubre de 1992 5 9 Sendas de Oku Los meses y los días son viajeros de la eternidad. El año. que se va y el que viene también son viajeros. Para aque­ llos que dejan flotar sus vidas a bordo de los barcos o en­ vejecen conduciendo caballos, todos los días son viaje y su casa misma es viaje. Entre los antiguos, muchos murie­ ron en plena ruta. A mí mismo, desde hace mucho, como girón de nube arrastrado por el viento, me turbaban pensamientos de vagabundeo. Después de haber recorrido la costa durante el otoño pasado, volví a mi choza a ori­ llas del río y barrí sus telarañas. Allí me sorprendió el tér­ mino del año; entonces me nacieron las ganas de cruzar el paso Shirakawa y llegar a Oku cuando la niebla cubre cielo y campos. Todo lo que veía me invitaba al viaje; tan poseí­ do estaba por los dioses que no podía dominar mis pen­ samientos; los espíritus del camino me hacían señas y no podía fijar mi mente ni ocuparme en nada. Remendé mis pantalones rotos, cambié las cintas a mi sombrero de paja y unté moxa quemada en mis piernas, para fortalecerlas. La idea de la luna en la isla de Matsushima llenaba todas mis horas. Cedí mi cabaña y me fui a la casa de Sampu,1 para esperar ahí el día de la salida. En uno de los pilares de mi choza colgué un poema de ocho estrofas.2 La primera decía así: Otros ahora en mi choza -mañana casa de muñecas.5 62 Salimos el veintisiete del Tercer Mes. El cielo del alba envuelto en vapores; la luna en menguante y ya sin brillo; se veía vagamente el monte Fuji. La imagen de los ramos dé los cerezos en flor de Ueno y Yanaka me entristeció y me pregunté si alguna vez volvería a verlos. Desde la noche anterior mis amigos se habían reunido en casa de Sampu, para acompañarme el corto trecho del viaje que haría por agua. Cuando desembarcamos en el lugar lla­ mado Senju, pensé en los tres mil ri de viaje que me aguar­ daban y se me encogió el corazón.4 Mientras veía el camino que acaso iba a separarnos para siempre en esta existencia irreal, lloré lágrimas de adiós: Se vä la primavera, quejas de pájaros, lágrimas en los ojos de los peces. Este poema fue el primero de mi viaje. Me pareció que no avanzaba al caminar; tampoco la gente que había ido a despedirme se marchaba, como si no hubieran querido moverse hasta no verme desaparecer. Sin muchas cavilaciones decidí, en el segundo año de la era de Genroku (1689), emprender mi larga peregrinación por tierras de Oou. Me amedrentaba pensar que, por las penalidades del viaje, mis canas se multiplicarían en luga­ res tan lejanos y tan conocidos de oídas, aunque nunca vis­ tos; pero la violencia misma del deseo de verlos disipaba esa idea y me decía: ¡he de regresar vivo! Ese día llegué a la posada de Soka. Me dolían los huesos, molidos por el peso de la carga que soportaban. Para viajar debería bas­ tarnos sólo con nuestro cuerpo; pero las noches reclaman un abrigo; la lluvia, una capa; el baño, un traje limpio; el pensamiento, tinta y pinceles. Y los regalos que no se pue­ dan rehusar... Las dádivas estorban a los viajeros. Visitamos el santuario de Muro-no-Yashima. Sora,5 mi compañero, me dijo que la diosa de este santuario se llama Konohana Sakuyahime (Señora de los Árboles Floridos) y que es la misma del monte Fuji. Es la madre del príncipe Hikohohodemino-Mikoto.6 Para dar a luz se encerró en esa casa tapiada y se prendió fuego. Por eso el santuario se llama Muro-no-Yashima, que quiere decir «Horno de Yashima». Así se explica la costumbre de mencionar al humo en los poemas que tiénen por tema este lugar. Tam­ bién se conserva una tradición que prohíbe comer los peces llamados konoshiroJ El día treinta nos hospedamos en una posada situada en la falda del monte Nikko. El dueño de la posada me dijo que se llamaba Gozaemon y que, por su rectitud, la gente lo nombraba Gozaemon del Buda. «Reposen sosegados esta noche», nos dijo,《 aunque su almohada sea un manojo de hierbas.» Preguntándome qué Buda había reencarnado en este mundo de polvo y yerros para ayudar a tan pobres peregrinos como nosotros, me aeaiqué a observar la con­ ducta del posadero. Aunque ignorante y tosco, era de ánimo abierto. Uno de esos a los que se aplica el «Fuerte, resuelto, genuino: un hombre así, está cerca de la virtud».8 En verdad, su hombría de bien era admirable. El día primero del Cuarto Mes oramos en el templo de la montaña sagrada. Antiguamente la montaña se llamaba Putara, pero el gran maestfo ICukai' al fundar d templo, cambio su nombre por el de Nikko, que quiere decir «Luz del Sol». El gran sacerdote adivinó lo que ocurriría mil años después, pues ahora la luz de esta montaña resplan­ dece en el cielo, sus beneficios descienden sobre todos los horizontes y los cuatro estados10 viven pacíficamente bajo su esplendor. La discreción me hace dejar el tema.1 1 M irar, admirar hojas verdes, hojas nacientes entre la luz solar. 7〇 罜 ー ふ-5 ハ於 - ^ ^ ^ 3 - ^ l v 办 v v ^、t M > ^ > ? 客 ^>令も 奮 、 展 -/'2^1 5! 0:^'^0^今 >^ へ ^ ^ ^ ト ^ ö i ^ i >^ ^ ^ ナ >« 袋 ^ v % ^p Y L ^ ^ ^ 秀 霧 參 m -卞 > ^ ^1卞 堂 4 零 ^ ? 笔 1$ユ r、p - v ^ ^ ^ す ^令 M イ1 3 今 ン ^ 受のそ ^ -^ 巧て *^ ^ ^ ^ づ ^ ^ 6 マ^ ^ 兴 ^ の 媒 ^ ^ if孑^ ^ ^ * 奪 身 ^ >í ^ 5 ^ >< .^分 玄 ^P -^T ^V J ^ La niebla envolvía al monte Cabellera Negra y la nieve no perdía aún su blancura. Sora escribió este poema: Rapado llego a ti, Cabellos Negros: mudanza de hábito.1 2 Sora es de la familia Kawai y su nombre de nacimiento es Sogoro. Vive ahora cerca de mi casa, bajo las hojas de Basho,1 3 y me ayuda en los quehaceres diarios. Deseando ver los panoramas de Matsushima y Kisagata, decidió acompañarme y así prestarme auxilio en las dificultades del viaje. En la madrugada del día de la partida afeitó su cráneo, cambió su ropa por la negra de los peregrinos bu­ distas y cambio la escritura de su nombre por otra de ca­ racteres religiosos.1 4 Estos detalles explican el significado de su poema. Las palabras con que alude a su mudanza de hábito dicen mucho sobre su temple. En la montaña, a más de veinte cho de altura, hay una cascada. Desde el pico de una cueva se despeña y cae en un abismo verde de mil rocas. Penetré en la cueva y desde atrás la vi precipitarse en el vacío. Comprendí por qué la llaman «Cascada vista de espaldas». Cascada - ermita: devociones de estío por un instante.IS 73 Tengo un conocido en un sitio llamado Kurobane, en Nasu. Por buscarlo, atravesé en línea recta los campos en lugar de ir por los senderos. A lo lejos se veía un pue­ blo pero de pronto empezó a llover y se vino encima la noche; me detuve en casa de un campesino, que me dio alojamiento. Al día siguiente crucé de nuevo los campos. Encontré un caballo suelto y a un hombre que cortaba yerbas, a quien pedí auxilio. Aunque rústico, era persona de buen natural y me dijo: «Es difícil encontrar el camino porque los senderos se dividen con frecuencia; un foras­ tero racilmente se perdería. N o quisiera que esto le ocu­ rriese. Lo mejor que puede hacer es tomar este caballo y dejarse conducir por él hasta que se detenga; después, de­ vuélvamelo». Monté el caballo y continué mi camino. Dos niños me siguieron corriendo durante todo el trayecto. Uno era una muchacha llamada Kasane: nombre extraño pero elegante. ¿Kasane, dices? 1 El nombre debe ser ' ‘ del clavel doble.16 | A poco llegué al pueblo. En la silla de montar puse una gratificación y devolví el caballo. 1 74 ぶ ^ ^ 、 3 ^ を\ 戈ハ冷 -1 V S ? - , v 分 ^ ^ ^ 秦 ¿ 象 X 拿 上 ^ ^ 、 ふ 穴 々 ^ K í ^ \ 、 、 乾 ” 3 ^ )v ^ 3 . ^ ^ 0 ゴ ^ A --í: : !- ^ % ^ ^ f p ^ c í b K / ^ n r . v ^ヒ ; ;、l ^ t ^ ス ^ Q r ^ ^ . u 戏 4 ' f í K ” 卞餘 f 唸 f 論 命 々 や 今 聊 祭棘 《 r今 レ W ( . 4ヴ ト rCÄ^ 货 ー 艿 其 ち 5^ - r t ^ :C V4 ^ ぺ 奶 知 泳 CT 益 v > ^ T r W < - Ó S ^ v > で 砂 叫 ペ ^ v ^ 免 ぶ さ 》 へ で i , ル ^ シ ^ 心^ e ^ V ^ 3^ ' ^ r ^ A J “ み 德 べ 綠 や ら 碎 'S r e ^ f e ^ i J今 今 ■〇’ ' ' ^ が 忘 V^j Visitamos al administrador del señorío de Kurobane, un tal Jyoboji. N o nos esperaba y esto pareció redoblar la alegría con que nos recibió. Pegamos la hebra y pasamos charlando días y noches. Su hermano Tohsui también nos visitó con frecuencia, nos llevó a su casa y nos presentó a su familia. Todos nos hacían invitaciones. Al cabo de unos días de descanso, recorrimos los alrededores y visitamos el lugar en donde se ejercitaban en la cacería de perros.1 7 En el llano de bambúes de Nasu visité la tumba de la señora Tamamo1 8 y el santuario de Hachiman. Me enteré de que Yoichi,1 9 cuando flechó el ábanico, invocó especialmente a Hachiman, patrón de su país. El dios de este santuario es precisamente aquel al que pidió ayuda Yoichi. Todo esto me conmovió. Al ponerse el sol, regresé a casa de Tohsui. Cerca hay un monasterio Shugen, llamado Komyo-ji. Nos llevaron allí y en la ermita de Gyojya, ante sus san­ dalias gigantescas, compuse lo siguiente: Sandalias santas: me inclino: a mí me aguardan verano y montes.20 En esta región, atrás del Ungan-ji, templo del Risco entre las Nubes, perdida en la montaña, se encuentra la er­ mita del Venerable Buccho.2 1 Una vez él me dijo que había escrito sobre la roca, con carbón de pino, esto: Mi choza de paja: ancho y largo menos de cinco shaku.2 2 ¡Qué carga poseerla! Pero la lluvia... 77 Para ver lo que quedase de la cabaña me dirigí al templo. Algunas gentes, la mayoría jóvenes, vinieron a ofrecerse como guías. Conversando animadamente y sin darnos cuenta llegamos a la falda de la montaña. La espesura era impenetrable y sólo se veían a lo lejos los distintos sende­ ros del valle; pinos y cedros negros; el musgo goteaba agua y estaba frío aún en el cielo del Cuarto Mes. Tras de con­ templar los Ríos Panoramas,2 3 cruzamos el puente y pasa­ mos el Pórtico... pero ¿dónde estaban las ruinas de la ermita de Buccho? Al fin, trepando la montaña por detrás del templo, descubrimos frente a una cueva una pequeña choza colgada sobre la roca. Sentí como si me encontrase en presencia de la Puerta de la Muerte del Gran Bonzo Myo o de la Celda de Piedra del Maestro Houn.2 4 Escribí estos versos allí mismo y los deje pegados en uno de los pilares de la ermita: Ni tú la tocarás pájaro carpintero: oquedal en verano. 终 l 十 ^ ^ T 、 ち 勢 マ で 广 、 、「 一/^ 家ルハ\ t 上 戈 廣 裟 ^ • 誤 ^ 4 塞 ^— . Cerca de Kurobane se encuentra la Piedra-que-mata.2 5 Como decidiese ir a verla, el administrador del señorío me prestó un caballo y un palafrenero. Durante el trayecto aquel hombre de ruda apariencia me rogó que compusiese un poema. Me sorprendió tanta finura y escribí lo si­ guiente: A caballo en el campo, y de pronto, detente: ¡el ruiseñor! Detrás de la montaña, junto al manantial de aguas ter­ males, se halla la Piedra-que-mata. El veneno que destila sigue siendo de tal modo activo que no se puede distinguir el color de las arenas en que se asienta, tan espesa es la capa formada por las abejas y mariposas que caen muertas ape­ nas lo rozan. En el pueblo de Ashino están los «sauces temblando en el agua clara».26 Se les ve entre los senderillos que dividen un arrozal de otro. Koho, el alcalde de este lugar, nos había prometido muchas veces que un día nos lo mostraría. Ahora por fin podía contemplarlos. Pasé un largo rato frente a un sauce: Quedó plantado el arrozal cuando le dije adiós al sauce. 81 Había estado varios días inquieto pero mi ansiedad errante se apaciguó cuando llegamos al Paso de Shirakawa. Cuánta razón tenía aquel poeta que al llegar a este lugar dijo: «¡Si sólo pudiera darles un vislumbre de esto a los de la capital!».^ El Paso de Shírakawa es uno de los tres más famosos del Japón y es el más amado por los poetas. En mis oídos soplaba «el viento del otoño»/8 en mi imagina­ ción brillaban «sus hojas rojeantes»,^ pero ante mis ojos, delicia de la vista, manchas reales de verdor se extendían aquí y allá. Blancas como lino las flores de U ^° y no menos blancos los espinos en flor -era como si caminásemos sobre un campo de nieve. Kiyosuke cuenta que hace mu­ chos años, al atravesar este paraje, un viajero se vistió con su traje de corte y se colocó en la cabeza el sombrero de ceremonia.3 1 Aludiendo a este episodio, Sora escribió estos versos: La flor U en mi sombrero. Para cruzar Shirakawa no hay mejor atavío. 82 Con animo indiferente pasamos el río Abukuma. A la izquierda, las cimas de Aizu; a la derecha, los caseríos de Iwaki, Soma y Miharu; a lo lejos, las cadenas de montañas que dividen Hitacm de Shimo-tsuke. Bordeamos la La­ guna de los Reflejos: como el día estaba nublado, nada se reflejaba en ella.32 En la posada del río Suga visitamos a cierto Tokyu, que nos detuvo cuatro o cinco días. Lo pri­ mero que hizo al verme fue preguntarme: «¿Cómo atra­ vesó el paso de Shirakawa?». En verdad, desasosegado por viaje tan largo y el cuerpo tan cansado como el espíritu; además, la riqueza del paisaje y tantos recuerdos del pa­ sado me turbaron e impidieron la paz necesaria a la con­ centración. Y no obstante: Al plantar el arroz cantan: primer encuentro con la poesía. Al decirle estos versos, agregué a guisa de comentario: «Imposible pasar por ahí sin que fuese tocada mi alma». Mi poema le gustó a Tokyu, quien escribió a continuación un segundo, Sora añadió otro y así.compusieron una tríada. Al lado de la posada había un gran castaño, a cuya som­ bra vivía un solitario. Recordé a aquel que había vivido de las bellotas que encontraba y anoté la siguiente reflexión: «El ideograma de castaño está compuesto por el signo de oeste y el signo de árbol, de modo que alude a la Región Pura de Occidente.33 Por eso el cayado y los pilares de la ermita del bonzo Gyoki34 eran de madera de castaño». Sobre el tejado: flores de castaño. El vulgo las ignora. Aproximadamente a cinco ri de la casa de Tokyu está la posada de Hiwada y cerca de ella, bordeado por el camino, el monte Asaka. Abundan las lagunas. Se aproximaba la época de la cosecha de katsumi, por lo que pregunté a la gente: «¿Cuál es la planta que llaman hanakatsumi?».3 5 Nadie lo sabía. La busqué a la orilla de las lagunas, volví a preguntar a los nativos y así anduve indagando por kat- sumi y katsumi. Mientras tanto, el sol rozaba la cresta de la montaña. Torciendo a la derecha desde Nihonmatsu, fuimos a echar un vistazo a la cueva de Kurozuka.30 Nos hospedamos en Fukushima. Al amanecer salimos rumbo a Shinobu, para contem­ plar la piedra con que imprimen los dibujos en las telas.3 7 La encontramos, medio cubierta de tierra, en un pueblo en la falda de la montaña. Los muchachos del lugar se acer­ caron y nos dijeron: «Antes estaba en la punta del cerro pero las gentes que pasaban por aquí cortaban las plantas de cebada, que luego machacaban con la piedra. Los cam­ pesinos se enojaron y la echaron al valle. Por eso la piedra está boca abajo». Manos que hoy plantan el arroz: ayer, diestras, dibujos imprimían con una piedra. 86 、 a» ” ,J 'r, í í - w - > v - < - - 1s f 窗 í s l í A ^ l ß c ^ y c v - ^ r ^ f ^ tó^ ^ ' - ^ í J 、ス ? t l)! 、 T >0 ^ y S^M rsi/^rö^e^h^s^A ^ ^ n n k ® A l 案 ^ ^ ^ ハ 今 ^ ^ Después de haber atravesado el vado de Tsukinowa lle­ gamos a la posada de Senoue. Cerca de la montaña, a ri y medio a la izquierda, se hallan las ruinas de la mansión de Sato Shoji.3 8 Como nos dijeron que estaban en Sabano de Iizuka, nos echamos a andar y preguntando por los ca­ minos llegamos hasta Maruyama: ahí está el antiguo casti­ llo de Shoji. Nos enseñaron lo que quedaba de la Gran Puerta en la falda del monte y los ojos se me humedecie­ ron. En un viejo monasterio cercano se conservan todavía las estelas de la familia entera. Me conmovieron sobre todo los epitafios de las dos nueras. El llanto mojaba mis man­ gas mientras pensaba cómo estas dos mujeres, no obstante su sexo, habían inscrito sus nombres en los anales del valoré? La estela que contemplaba merecía llamarse como aquella de la antigua China: «Lápida grabada con lágri­ mas».40 Entré en el templo y pedí una taza de té. Ahí en­ señan como tesoros la espada de Yoshitsune y el morral de Benkei.4 1 Espada y morral: Fiesta de Muchachos, banderas de papel... Hoy es el primero del Quinto Mes.4 2 Esa noche nos hospedamos en Iizuka; allí nos bañamos en las aguas termales. La casa en donde nos dieron posada era miserable y su piso era de tierra. Como no había si­ quiera una lámpara, arreglé mis alforjas al resplandor del fuego del hogar y extendí sobre el suelo mi estera. Apenas cayó la noche se desató la tormenta y empezó a llover a cántaros. El agua se colaba por los agujeros del techo y me empapaba; además, las pulgas y los mosquitos me martiri­ zaban sin que me dejasen cerrar los ojos. Entonces mi vieja enfermedad se despertó, volvió a atacarme y sufrí tales có­ licos que creí morir. Pero las noches de esta época son cor­ tas y poco a poco el cielo comenzó a aclararse. Partimos con la primera luz. No me sentía bien y el dolor no me de­ jaba. Alquilamos caballos y nos dirigimos hacia Koori. Con un viaje aún largo en perspectiva, mi estado me de­ sasosegaba aunque el andar de peregrino por lugares per­ didos, me decía, es como haber dejado ya el mundo y re- signarse a su impermanencia: si muero en el camino, será por voluntad del cielo. Estos pensamientos me dieron áni­ mos y zigzagueando de aquí para allá por las veredas de­ jamos atrás la Gran-Puerta-de-Madera4 J de Date. 90 J &Ä 5 5 ® ぅ專ズ濟炎 « 嫁 H l 滿泉 で^ ;入 ? ^ y 3'卜 > ^ 2 /¿一 ^ ^ -'w ,1^ 家^^で い'^' め次沢 ? « 新 >^ - ^ て 1>*?炎マ入弋 雪 -Ä命 *々 づ ^ ^ 备 v * ^ * - v を ,<^¿;^- —<T ^ の ^ -P ^ A P ^ % ^ o ^ >?n ^ ^ Ä ^ ^ 、^ v x _ ^ 禹 嚎 í íつ 释5 行 今 袭 A ろt t 推身無命め說合 氫 磬 f 占れ舞是天 0 命 念 , ^ 赛 嘮 ぺ } 、 容 、 路錄擴;踏マ? : 皮り大成尸 ^ - ゝV 夺 攻 嗜 今 蒼 麵 鳞 弋 鉍 : つ^ ^ べ ^ 対 ^ V f ^ r a ゃ 蟓 ベ ® ^今 ^ 短 咖 > ^ べ X 令 卜 1 や ^ ^ ゃ 墙 、 吟 ^へ 贫 卜 f \ C 。 丫 ぐ ゼ ^ •" ダ ブ " ^ - ^ 命 ! !へ ! 》^ ^ V ぃ 公 /% 4 汉 盡 : 卜 ■か 〜 へ nr 調 ^瀠 城f ~pM^3?霞ぐ¿N r'こ令:S pん , W 4 ;二卜ィ シ fC ^ H ^ íC; 巧 炎 ® ^ 夺 知 r» Pasamos por el pueblo de Abumizuri y el castillo de Shiroishi y llegamos al departamento de Kasajima. Pre­ guntamos a la gente por la tumba de Toh-no-Chujyo Sa- nekata.4 4 Nos indicaron que «allá lejos, a la derecha, al pie de la montaña, entre dos lugares llamados Minowa y Ka­ sajima, existen aún el Santuario del Dios de los Caminos y los Juncos del Recuerdo».4 S Las lluvias de mayo habían deshecho los senderos y estábamos muy fatigados, de modo que nos contentamos con ver desde lejos aquellos sitios. Mientras caminaba se me ocurrió que Minowa (capa) y Kasajima (sombrero) eran nombres que tenían in­ dudable relación con las lluvias del mes: El Quinto Mes, sus caminos de lluvia: ¿dónde estará Kasajima? Nos hospedamos en Iwanuma. 93 Al ver el pino de Takekuma, de veras sentí como si des­ pertara. Desde la raíz el árbol se divide en dos troncos; según nos dijeron, la forma de ahora es la misma que tenía hace siglos. Recordé al maestro Noin.46 Hace mucho pasó por este lugar un señor que iba a tomar posesión de la gubernatura de Mutsu y cortó el árbol, para usarlo como pilar del puente del río Natori; y a esto alude la poesía de Noin: «no hay ya ni restos del famoso pino». Una gene­ ración lo corta y otra lo vuelve a plantar; ahora, crecido de nuevo, parece como si tuviese mil años de edad- Real­ mente es hermoso: Ya que no vuestras flores, mostradle, cerezos tardíos, el pino de Takekuma. ) Un discípulo llamado Kyohaku me dedicó, al despe­ dirme, este poema. Así le respondí: De los cerezos en flor al pino, de dos troncos: tres meses ya. 氏 1^^ 拼 ミ , 、 ィ 8 戈 パ 4 /11汾 > 1 ^ 二未;P-<íて脅め ^ ^ マ ^- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - '^d v w、J¿ A 0 0 の 未 取 ^ ろ橋 !ä ス V -,x J ^ ^ s ¿ Y Í A ^ 11 ^ ^ r t 3 V T t ^ { } A ^ i J 1 7^ Á ß ^ i r > 1 v ¿ 4 v>' o c ^T wc < ¿ % ¿ V ^V ¿:Y£ ^ ニ ß n Cruzamos el río Natori y llegamos a Sendai. Era el día en que adornan los tejados con hojas de lirios cárdenos.4 7 Encontramos una posada y allí nos alojamos cuatro o cinco días. En esta villa vive un pintor llamado Kaemon. Nos habían dicho que era un hombre sensible; lo busqué y nos hicimos amigos. El pintor me dijo que se ocupaba en localizar los lugares famosos que mencionan los antiguos poetas y que, por el paso de los años, ya nadie sabe dónde se encuentran. Un día me llevó a visitar algunos: en Miya- gino los campos estaban cubiertos de hagi^% e imaginé su hermosura en otoño; en Tamada, Yokono y Tsutsuji-ga- oka (colina de azaleas), florecía el asebia penetré en un bosque de pinos adonde no llegaba ni una brizna de sol, paraje que llaman «Penumbra de árboles», tan húmedo por el rocío de la arboleda que dio lugar a aquella poesía que comienza: «¡Ea, los guardias! ¡Su sombrero!». Después de orar en el templo de Yakushi-do y en el santuario de Tenjin, contemplamos la puesta de sol. El pintor me regaló pinturas de paisajes de Matsushima y también, como despedida, dos pares de sandalias de cor­ dones azules. Su gusto era perfecto y en esto se reveló tal cual era: Pétalos de lirios atarán mis pies: ¡correas de mis sandalias! 97 Siguiendo el trazado del mapa que nos había hecho aquel pintor, llegamos al sendero de Oku. A un lado del sendero, cerca de la montaña, se hallan los juncos de Tofu. Nos contaron que los lugareños, todos los años, todavía tejen una estera y se la ofrecen como homenaje al gober­ nadora1 La estela de Tsubo está en el castillo de Taga, en el valle de Ichikawa. Mide un poco más de seis shaku de largo y cerca de tres de ancho. A través del musgo que la cubre se distingue apenas una inscripción. Primero indica las distancias que hay desde este sitio hasta todas las fronte­ ras y después dice: «Este castillo fue edificado en el pri­ mer año de Jinki (724) por el inspector y capitán general Ohno Azumahito y fue reconstruido en el sexto año de Tempyo-Hohji (762) por el consejero de la corte, visita­ dor y capitán general Emi Asakari. Primer día deja de- cimosegunda luna». Pertenece a la época del emperador Shomu. Al visitar muchos lugares cantados en viejos poemas, casi siempre uno se encuentra con que las colinas se han achatado, los ríos han cambiado su curso, los caminos se desvían por otros parajes, las piedras están medio ente­ rradas y se ven pimpollos en lugar de los árboles aquellos antiguos y venerables. El tiempo pasa y pasan las genera­ ciones y nada, ni sus huellas, dura y es cierto. Pero aquí los ojos contemplan con certeza recuerdos de mil años y llegaba hasta nosotros el pensamiento de los hombres de entonces. Premios de las peregrinaciones... El placer de vivir me hizo olvidar el cansancio del viaje y casi me hizo llorar. « ^ ハ^C' ^1 ^ ^ ^ . p ^^ w- 5 y 去M 採V iT T 多 ^ 略 - を ¿ V ^ < t M. ^ 哝^ 邋 ^ ^ ろ 矣 重 ^ —^ 批、 % •ザ逢 > 50弩摊 -§使爱錄 4 命 >5-筆 大驿朝 IÍ衆 ん 之 疥 置 4 夭 彡 宝 芩ハ事象 » 蒙 # 素 ^ y gp í tR T9ぬ葦 Ä 奚麴 诠雜猬 榨 銮 ス • V ニ铒 2 9* ^ ^ ^ f ^ 食 身 ^ ^ rv-iyc-v— wí ^'í'T^^^- く 、 ^ "-T g y - ^ ^ ^ T U - ^ 1 1 1^ ^ ^ ^ o ^ l 土 1 ^ 本 ; : ^v ^: rv ■, ^ v " - 4 ^ "'^p^ - 戈 ^ h ¿ ^ 、ミ ^ : ^ ^ ^$^:^0"^<1ゥ ps 9 石w マ - 备 遵 ゆ ^ ^ 覉 夸 考 慈故 _ 夺 舟円礴 拿 )奚 # 螬 主ニ見^寞ん : #書 4 勢漯 # 幸邦之行«令族人ス翕迷逸 r v ^ v ^ , 、 w 拿入ん暴み書 ^ n i ^ c ^ l l抑 ltg f 、 i:< ^ -1 < K Ä ^ r ^ y r ^ 」K i } ^ 母 ^ 多 ^ 寶 誊 か4 l Ä :f 華 暴 ル , l ^ r t n ^ p 神 龟 え等 ^ 手 躁 聖 ^ 帝九 _ 实 冷本( 耸 の炎 十七十. 真 年 r J V 天 年 寶 李 士 % ^ 數蒂1一 聲 f ^ 永 ^ T 心 、 '^,í > 十 *V * ^ T 石 ® r f c上 チ 悔 一 - !^ ! 0 多梦 场 4 解要霄 部§せ黑 备 秦陸涵参 ^ - 否 *H t ^ 去个 择 國零ニ^ネ 妒 宏 Í ソ丟 % _ I i客?ィ冒 於^ 神龜ル等等抽察使 ä 燊 守骑 軍 f it政 偉 上 敦 妒 等 大 W親ぼ秉人 - s « rs 重弟寶? ”多 寒 餐 ^ 抑冒鍊寮 f 莫與泛 ^ 讀 微 Ä 及 欠 ス 十 み 費 芩C 伊士 \舀i日 Nota 52 畜 ^ ^\\a o ^> /> ^ ^ t x 簍 ” ^ v ^ /0冬 r Y » > $ ¿ 、 もな 镇 蹇っ擇マ入 gv^T3TP 命 , マ í k 夢嘈 t Y ® — 奢 ^* 1*音 í > ? 許 Ä 年 4 ぐ ? f で ^ 0 É^ s ^ 7 f r $ ^ t ^ 了 名 5 家 ^ ^ ^v ^ l^ r v f^- 令 Después visitamos el río Tama de Noda y la roca de Oki.s3 En Sue-no-Matsuyama hay un monasterio llamado Masshozan. Entre los pinos hay muchas tumbas. Ver que en esto terminan todos esos juramentos y promesas de vivir «como el pájaro de dos cabezas» o «los árboles de ra­ mas unidas»5 4 aumentó mi tristeza. Cuando llegamos a la bahía de Shiogama, tañían las campanas del crepúsculo re­ pitiéndonos que nada permanece. El cielo lluvioso del Quinto Mes se aclaró levemente y la luna del atardecer se mostró pálida. La isla de Magaki parecía al alcance de la mano: tan cerca se veía. Los pescadores remaban en sus barquitas, todas formadas en hilera y se oían las voces de los que repartían los peces. Recordé el verso: «atados con sogas».5 5 Comprendí al poeta y me conmoví. Esa noche oí a un bonzo ciego cantar en el estilo del norte llamado Oku-Johruri, acompañado por el instru­ mento biw aJ6 Su estilo no era el usual del acompaña­ miento de las baladas guerreras o de los cantos para danzar. El son era rústico y como tocaban cerca de donde reposaba me pareció demasiado ruidoso. Pero era admi­ rable que en tierras tan lejanas no se hubiese olvidado la tradición y se cantasen esos viejos romances. 103 En la madrugada fui al santuario de Shiogama. Re­ construido por el actual gobernador, sus columnas son suntuosas y pesadas; las vigas de la techumbre relucen pin­ tadas de colores brillantes y los peldaños de su escalera de piedra se repiten hasta perderse de vista. El sol temprano chisporroteaba sobre las balaustradas de laca roja. Me im­ presionó que en rincones tan apartados de este mundo manchado, la devoción a los dioses estuviese tan viva. Esto es algo muy de la tradición de mi país. Frente al santua­ rio hay una antigua linterna con una pequeña puerta de hierro que dice: «Ofrenda de Izumi Saburo^7 año tercero de Bunji» (1187). Cómo sería todo esto hace quinientos años... Este Izumi fue un guerrero valiente, fiel y leal; su nombre aún es venerado y todo el mundo lo recuerda con amor. La verdad de los clásicos resplandece: «Leal a tu ley y a tu palabra: la fama te seguirá». Cerca ya del mediodía, tomamos un barco que nos condujo a Matsushima, que está a unos dos ri de distancia, y desembarcamos en la playa de Ojima. 104 Ya es un lugar común decirlo: el paisaje de Matsushima es el más hermoso del Japón. N o es inferior a los de Do- teiko y Seiko,ss en China. El mar, desde el sureste, entra en una bahía de aproximadamente tres ri, desbordante como el río Sekkoh5 9 de China. Es imposible contar el nú­ mero de las islas: una se levanta como un índice que señala al cielo; otra se tiende boca abajo sobre las olas; aquélla parece desdoblarse en otra; la de más allá se vuelve triple; algunas, vistas desde la derecha, semejan ser una sola y vis- tas del lado contrario se multiplican. Hay unas que pare­ cen llevar un niño a la espalda; otras como si io llevaran en el pecho; algunas parecen mujeres acariciando a su hijo. El verde de los pinos es sombrío y el viento salado tuerce sin cesar sus ramas de modo que sus líneas curvas parecen obra de un jardinero. La escena tiene la fascinación dis­ tante de un rostro hermoso. Dicen que este paisaje fue creado en la época de los dioses impetuosos, las divinida- des de las montañas.6 0 N i pincel de pintor ni pluma de poeta pueden copiar las maravillas del demiurgo. Ojima es una estrecha lengua de tierra que penetra en el mar. Todavía hay vestigios de la ermita del bonzo Ungo y aún puede verse la roca sobre la cual meditaba. Se entrevén algunos devotos que viven a la sombra de los pinos, reti­ rados de la vida mundana. Habitan apaciblemente en cho­ zas de paja, de las que sale continuamente el humo de los conos de pino y hojas secas que queman. Aunque no sabía . qué clase de gente realmente era aquélla, sentí unas extra- ñas ganas de conocerlos, pero cuando me acercaba a una de sus chozas me detuvo el reflejo de la luna sobre el mar:61 el paisaje de Matsushima se bañaba ahora en una luz dife­ rente a la del día anterior. Regresé a la playa y me hospedé en su parador. Mi cuarto estaba en el segundo piso y tenía grandes ventanas. Dormir viajando entre nubes, mecido por el viento. Extraña, deliciosa sensación. En Matsushima ¡sus alas plata pídele, tordo, a la grulla!62 Sora Me acosté sin componer poesía pero no pude dormir.1 Recordé el poema chino sobre Matsushima que Sodo me regaló al abandonar mi choza. También Hara Anteki me había dedicado un tanka con el mismo tema. Abrí mi alforja e hice de esos dos poemas los compañeros de mi insomnio. Había también los haikús de Sampu y Jyo- kushi• 幻 • :í 108 加^^い 1 ハ ^ ^^ ^ v^ *,ぎ f ぃ 冬 - ^ ^ ^ 1 ^ 次 ^ 5 ^ ^vrK- á > X 9 2 C > ^ 3.^.7 寄 J^*,& 参 . . #' 1 @ マ V-^ M\ ^ ^ ^ 旁 て ^や Ä 爲 Jrk / V 丨 KiO í 0 á 5 ^ ^ $ % 辱 5 ^ ゼ入 ^ ^ を 、 ち -v^i脅 ネ ャ 、 名 參 麽 萚 儀 曼 卞 , 御 备 ? i'Q ^ % ^ ^ w o へ i ^ ^ r ろ舎 V'つ く . ^ ^v r > 〔 s 十 : 泠 $ 於 象 ろ 0 餐 ナ ^ < ^ 4 4 換必幕著め - ^ p ^ r í r ^ t : ふ ^ ^ ^jí h í n ; 5 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 3 ^ ^ 4 0 x z í V 2 W V I ^ ^ V K ¿ - ^ < 4^ - ^ r ^ ^ ¿ v >^ u し 会 í ^ ^ ^ f K ネ 1 A V ? S ^ ^ A 4 f e # S Á ^ - - ^ \ t ^ e ^ ^ ^ I ^ ^ l n t絮 f そ , El día once practicamos nuestras devociones en el tem­ plo de Zuigan-ji. El trigésimo segundo patriarca, Heishiro de Makabe, a su regreso de China, fundó este templo. Des­ pués, gracias al maestro de zen, el bonzo Ungo, se her­ mosearon los edificios principales, resplandecieron sus oros y azules y el templo se convirtió en una construcción que parece la réplica del Paraíso. ¿Cuál sería, entre todas estas construcciones, la de aquel santo Kembutsu?64 Día doce. Deseábamos ir a Hiraizumi y en el camino preguntamos por el pino de Aneha y el puente de Odae,6^ a los que tantos poemas se refieren. Como apenas si pasa gente por esos senderos, veredas para cazadores y leñado­ res, nos extraviamos, confundimos el camino y sin que­ rerlo llegamos al puerto de Ishinomaki. Desde allí se ve, al otro lado del mar, el monte Kinkazan, del que un antiguo poeta dijo: «el monte donde florece el oro...»/6 Cientos de barcos se apiñan en la bahía丨 las casas se apeñuscan unas contra otras y el humo de sus chimeneas enturbia el cielo. Me dije: yo no quería venir a este lugar... Buscamos po­ sada para pasar la noche pero nos rechazaron en todas par­ tes. Al fin logramos albergue en una cabaña miserable y al día siguiente continuamos nuestro camino, sin saber a ciencia cierta qué dirección deberíamos tomar. Camina­ mos por los bordes del río y, sin detenernos, echamos un vistazo al vado de Sode, la dehesa de Obuchi y el cañave­ ral de Mano. Más tarde, con el corazón en un puno, reco- rrimos las orillas de un inmenso pantano. Pasamos una noche en Toima y llegamos al fin a Hiraizumi. Creo que caminamos más de veinte ri. El esplendor de tres generaciones de Fujiwara duró el sueño de una noche. Los restos de la entrada principal de la mansión están a la distancia de un ri del conjunto de las ruinas. El palacio de Hidehira67 es un erial y sólo queda en pie el monte Gallo de Oro. Subí a las ruinas del palacio Takadate. Desde allí se ve el Kitakami, gran río que viene del sur; el río Koromo, tras de ceñir al castillo de Izumi, se le une bajo el palacio Takadate; las ruinas del castillo de Yasuhira, con el paso de Koromo, que está más adelante, guardan la entrada del sur y constituyen una defensa con­ tra toda invasión. Aquí se encerraron los fieles elegidos.68 De sus hazañas nada queda sino estas hierbas. Recuerdo el antiguo poema: «Las patrias se derrumban, ríos y mon­ tañas permanecen; sobre las ruinas del castillo verdea la hierba, es primavera».69 Me siento sobre mi sombrero y lloro, sin darme cuenta del paso del tiempo: Hierba de estío: combates de los héroes, menos que un sueño. Sora escribe otro poema: Flores de U: ¡Ah, canas del héroe Kanefusa! 7。 ; ー 「 任ふ今> >々 未 暫 ^ 皤 ^ ぞ 多 雜3'^,)?- y v ^ v 、 プ ^ 宅 ^ 之 ^ r > ^ y > 小 A 大 ) い ¡ ^ & 何ハ^衆 > #v^á á り Í * \ i か詼 ス康知そ旧 ^ ^ 令 ^ v ^y L ^ ^ ä u c T s ^ くと ' ^N N J ^ > V J V > ^ Ä i そ ^ ^ ^ 5 飞 3 \ >5>み ^ 表 I t l v x とド? - W V ^ Y ^ 9 >^ ^ - ^ V ? T V ^ > K ^ 今 1 5 ^^客 夕 ( í o t 善 a 堂 , ¿ o tろ # ^ ^ ^ 坌 k ¿ 久 の 孩T ^ \ E ^ ゴ ズ\ r D1s ^ ^ V 餐 V N ^ ^ ^ ??:Qr羅 W ふ ^ ^ 袈 言 ふ H Í 3マ 淑 ^ ^ 、 ^ ® 14 足 ^ ^ ^K v ^ v ^ r p ^ r ^ 5 ^ Me habían encomiado mucho las dos famosas capillas. Ambas estaban abiertas; en la de los Sutras están las es­ tatuas de los tres capitanes y en la de la Luz7 1 yacen tres ataúdes, tres Budas velan. Los Siete Tesoros7 2 se han dis­ persado, el viento ha roto las puertas incrustadas de perlas y las columnas doradas se pudren bajo la escarcha y la nie­ bla. Hace tiempo que todo se habría derrumbado, agrie­ tado por el abandono y comido por las plantas salvajes, pero han levantado nuevos muros y han construido un techo contra el agua y el viento. Estos monumentos, vie­ jos de mil años, todavía afrontarán al tiempo: Terco esplendor: frente a la lluvia, erguido templo de luz.7 ; Mientras a lo lejos se veía el camino de Nambu, llega­ mos al pueblo de Iwade, en donde pernoctamos. Reco­ rrimos después Ogurosaki y las islas de Mizu; tras de pasar por las fuentes termales de Narugo, intentamos penetrar en la provincia de Dewa por el paso de Shitomae. Como por ese camino son pocos los viajeros los guardias nos ob­ servaron con desconfianza y nos detuvieron bastante tiempo. Ya había oscurecido cuando nos acercamos al monte Ohyama, de modo que, pasando cerca de la casa de un guardia, nos aproximamos y le pedimos albergue por la noche. Se desató un temporal y durante tres días nos vimos obligados a quedarnos en esas ariscas soledades. Piojos y pulgas; mean los caballos cerca de mi almohada, p I 0 ^ w ^ t ^ ^ ^ * ^ ^ ^ & - 8 \ ^ 3 T ^ r マ - ^ ^ ^ ふ ^ ^> t^s c ^§v ? ^ ><^ノ<N ^ 、 ‘ ^ í 5 r> C N C ^ > fv y ^ \ p - — Ju^r WT^ ^ l ^ > ] \ 1 ^ ロ Y^ ^ F^C^ > S I9、 ,f ,'*ss r' 'l'y cí'íi: *- tw;s4 5 ^ y ^ s ^ J J ia - § % 0 K ^ t í v f A ^ ► m z ^ f z ^ > .ÄL Au\ ^í ^ X 成 - ^ M^、i^ ^ v^ > 0*~^ (^> r d ^ c ^ ^ v t- /;^=L^ * T t s> J.^ - a-、^ i ' 洛 ゎ ^T J V L 7 ^ ? 7 f e ^ l r ^ - ^ y:r^ r — 飞 矣 旁 ^ ¿ つ ふ 綮 ? | 髮 」 rt搿 ク? 々 ¥7 ,ít^'vv ^,^p^ ^ a < i ^ N l ^ v s i ? ^ ^ Y n ^ > ^ u ll ^ y 2 > El dueño de la posada nos advirtió que el camino hacia la provincia de Dewa no era muy seguro, pues había que cruzar el monte Ohyama, y nos recomendó que contratá­ semos un guía. Como asintiésemos, él mismo se encargó de conseguirlo y al poco tiempo se presentó con un rollizo joven, daga curva al cinto y en la diestra un grueso bastón de roble. El mocetón marchaba delante de nosotros. Mien­ tras trotaba a su zaga, me decía: «ahora sí de seguro nos acecha un percance». Según lo había anunciado el posa­ dero, la montaña era abrupta y hostil. N i el grito de un pá­ jaro atravesaba el silencio ominoso; al caminar bajo los árboles la espesura del follaje era tal que de veras andába­ mos entre tinieblas; a veces parecía caer tierra desde las nubes.7 4 Hollamos matas de bambú enano, vadeamos ria­ chuelos, tropezamos con peñascos y, con el sudor helado en el cuerpo, culebreamos sin parar hasta llegar a la villa de Mogami. Al despedirse, el guía nos dijo sonriendo: «en este camino siempre suceden cosas inesperadas y ha sido una fortuna traerlos hasta aquí sin contratiempos». Aún me dan frío sus palabras. 119 En Obanazawa visitamos a un tal Seifu.7 5 Hombre nada vulgar, a pesar de su riqueza. Como de vez en cuando sus negocios lo llevaban hasta la capital, comprendía las nece­ sidades de los viajeros y las penalidades que sufren en sus viajes. Nos dejó su casa por unos días y, no satisfecho con dar reposo a nuestros quebrantados cuerpos, nos ofreció muchos entretenimientos. En la frescura me tiendo y sesteo como en mi lecho. Sal, no te escondas -bajo la Kaiya76 en sombra vocea el sapo. Flor carmín,7 7 cardo que recuerda al pincel para las cejas. しrían gusanos de seda pero en sus ropas: aroma de antigua inocencia.7 8 Sora 12 0 逄Ä 輝 { 構 作 /f んハ 寅 ^ - ^ ^ ^ も ^ い ^ ^ ysv ^íiA^t wfcfr^ - w ¿ 一 j Ig/^ ^ c ク ^ ^ ぅ v 兮 ^ )ィ マ ^ / ^ ^ H '^ v ^ ' / ^耷 • 玖 ^ ム ^ ^ ^ ^ ñ ^ ^4— ^ - N、 、 5 ?V Y Í r v í ^ ^ l \ y L ヘ ^ ^ 1 0 4 — — -n ^ c ' 秦 ゴ § > ^ r ^ ? í ri>y ^ ^ r ベ -s ¿ M ^ 5.夂 み í l ^ tT-í ^ s ^ 今マ ^ 亏 f?,く ,V J^\a> 罗 1 、r ^?- J. )3tr 、 L ^ d jí^r*^ ; v-^ : 々 ろ A > Y A ^ ^ - Y ? 1 ) ^ É ? < ^ i \ En el señorío de Yamagata hay un templo en la mon­ taña llamado Ryushaku-ji. lo fundó el gran maestro Ji- kaku^ y es un lugar famoso por su silencio. Como me recomendaron que fuésemos a verlo, tuvimos que regresar a Obanazawa y caminar cerca de siete ri. El sol no se ocul­ taba aún y pedimos hospitalidad en uno de los asilos para los peregrinos que se encuentran en las estribaciones del monte. Después subimos al santuario, que está en la cum- bre. La montaña es un hacinamiento de rocas y peñas, entre las que crecen pinos y robles envejecidos; la tierra y las piedras estaban cubiertas por un musgo suave y todo parecía antiquísimo. El templo está construido sobre la roca; sus puertas estaban cerradas y no se oía ningún ruido. Di la vuelta por un risco, trepé por los peñascos y llegué al santuario. Frente a la hermosura tranquila del pai­ saje, mi corazón se aquietó: Tregua de vidrio: el son de la cigarra taladra rocas.8。 Habíamos planeado hacer la travesía en barca por el río Mogami y en el lugar llamado Ohishida hicimos alto en espera de que el tiempo mejorase. Allí me dijeron: «Las semillas de la vieja escuela de haikai cayeron hace mucho en esta tierra; los días de su florecimiento no han sido ol­ vidados y todavía conmueve a la soledad en que viven los poetas de Ohishida el sonido de las flautas mongólicas... Queremos marchar juntos por el camino de la poesía; va­ cilamos entre el nuevo y el viejo estilo porque no tenemos a nadie que nos guíe: ¿quiere ayudarnos?». No pude re­ husarme y me uní a ellos para componer juntos una serie de poemas. De todas las reuniones poéticas de mi viaje, ésta fue la que dio mejores frutos.8 1 124 1 ^ 々 〜 十 ョ : ^ # マ Ä ^ 1>パ て 東 々 tw- ^ T 3 V V 作 V ví- u-rfc マ ご 5 M Í — j l ' j ^ lc/ ^ '、^ ? 今 I い ^3?、' ス一 ^ へブ了べ - ^ 人 ” r v z « ? - t i ^ ^ L ¡ A ^ , ' ^ i 5 p^ ^ 1 4 r', r、 ^ ÖM^aTMw«w«^— a« áw &- M+ ß- Tfx ^y^® «.WA • ajk I *( 4^r W3BÖ- Ü : T V C ^ V ^ ? VWVY- ろ * ^ 飞 ス 為 ^ 3 ^ ? J x T5ÄV ^ A?r w u r ^ ^ v ^ / T ^ ^ v ( ? <、 ィ 今 A さ T 、 昼 ^ 4^ ^ ¿.a r ^ ^ f j - ^rv- t p x ^^ á 幻 , ^ * ろ ^ v ^ a r ^ K S ^ 4 h ^ u ® 幻 ^ ? í ^® V^K< 9 5 Í Y 1マ 卿 て ' ^^ w ? i i ^ T J - ^ v ¿ ( ^ El río Mogami sale del señorío de Michinoku, deja atrás Yamagata y bordeando el costado norte del monte Itajiki desemboca en el mar de Sakata. En su trayecto fluye entre gargantas angostas y erizadas, como Goten y Hayabusa. A la izquierda y a la derecha las montañas parecían juntarse sobre nuestras cabezas, mientras el barco se deslizaba bajo la espesura ae los árboles que crecen a sus flancos. A bar­ cos como el nuestro los llamaban «barcos de arroz».8 2 Vimos despeñarse a la cascada de Shiraito entre el verde follaje y a la orilla, colgado de un farallón, al Templo del Ermitaño. Por la crecida, la navegación era ardua: Junta las lluvias del Quinto Mes el río- y al mar las lanza.8 5 El tercer día del Sexto Mes subimos al monte Haguro. Preguntamos por uno que se llama Zushi Sakichi, poeta en haikai. Él nos llevó ante el abad Egaku, prior del mo­ nasterio, quien después de recibirnos ordenó que se nos hospedase en uno de los templos dependientes de Mina- midani. Allí fuimos atendidos con exquisita cortesía. El día cuatro, en el templo principal, celebramos una reunión de renga-haikai. Mi estrofa inicial: ¡Qué cortesía! Hasta la nieve es fragante en Minamidani. 127 El día cinco oramos en el gran Santuario. N o se sabe en qué época vivió su fundador, el sacerdote Nohjyo. En los Ritos de Erigid aparece como el Santuario de Ushu-sato- yama; el nombre original debe haber sido Ushu-kuroyama y, abreviándolo, lo convirtieron en Haguro-yama (monte Haguro). La razón de que esta provincia se llame Dewa (rica en plumas) es que, según dice la crónica, fue aquí donde se hizo la ofrenda de las plumas de ave a la Casa Imperial.8 5 El paraje se llama Tres Montes, aludiendo a Haguro, Gassen y Yudono. Actualmente el santuario está bajo la jurisdicción del templo de Kan-ei-ji, en Edo. En este monasterio la doctrina del budismo Tendai -«la negación conduce al conocimiento»- brilla como una luna límpida y su prédica de la conquista de la serenidad por medio de la identidad (de los contrarios) es como una lám- parä que no se apaga nunca. Las celdas no están apartadas sino juntas y los monjes peregrinos que pasan por aquí ri­ valizan en rigor ascético con los que viven en permanen­ cia. Todo lo que se ve és prueba del milagroso poder de este lugar santo y mueve a la piedad. La montaña, admi­ rada y venerada por todos, difunde su poder sagrado en toda la región. 128 糞 ^ Ä 埂 rv l iみ田山期! ! ^ 除欠 ^ : ^ め ^ス ん 連 喜 令 ; ^ 里 ^ 神 社 t « 書冩 ?t2tf T€*s - ^ r^ >^ - 55ff ä v ^ 中 略 丨 f y Ä ァ ^ 洱 柄 . 7 い f 島 り 毛 ^ ^ 、-e s o 負 キ 软 ^ 姿 ふ ^! # . ^ s 爽 叙 - 屢 1 丨 九 苕 我 ^ Q a f 、 > cド ^ ^ 勘 歲 ろ 拎 ゥ 灯 , 1 げ ネ 又 罢 5 靈 A A Ä , 砂 V 奏 Ä ^ 3 . i g ^ ^p-N- ;: «^ - ¿-T ' ^ ' LV- * - ^ つ ?^— . 〇 i k »? 冬 ; 木 ^ ^ ^ - f 冠 ^ • 塔 ^ ‘ 匁 ク ^ マ ^ 會 > ^ 飞 め ^ /1 T パ室 ^ ョ 荩 ^ 還 >>^ 1 又 } í ^ - i ^ u É ^ ^ i i a ¿ A< a i lr 玲穴 V 每ァ綠 备 下 ^ 匕 - ^ - ^ 价 7 ^ - > ^ 诗 *!一^ ? 、 で^れ wi^ > ^ r- > d r ' 、 o 輟洛 »1>^ r 、1令 外 澈 OMÍ? — i a ^ t a^ V マ〜, b と ス í t p? 3 5 マ食、1ぐ 〜 。 ;C 靛 泉 - « 1 管 > ^ ナ猜 聋 分 ^ -1 T f , ^ El día octavo escale el monte Gassan. Llevaba una bu­ fanda de algodón en los hombros y una capucha blanca en la cabeza; conducido por el guía caminé ocho ri sobre nie­ ves, bajo nubes y entre nieblas. Era como andar por esos pasos de bruma en las rutas del sol y de la luna. Al llegar a la cumbre, el cuerpo helado y la respiración cortada, el sol se ponía y la luna se asomaba, me tendí y esperé a que amaneciera. Cuando las sombras se abrieron y el sol apa­ reció, me incorporé e inicie mi marcha hacia Yudono. En un rincón del valle se encuentra la «cabaña de los forjadores». En esta provincia los forjadores usan agua sa­ grada del valle para sus ritos de purificación y sólo des­ pués de cumplirlos baten sus espadas, a las que estampan la marca Gassan, de gran renombre en su tiempo. Segura­ mente siguen el ejemplo de aquellos chinos que cinglaban sus espadas en la fuente del Dragón; la devoción de estos herreros por su oficio los ha llevado a forjar sables dignos de ios más famosos, como Kansyo y Bakuya.86 Me senté sobre una roca y mientras descansaba descu­ bría un árbol de cerezo de tres shaku de altura, ¡sus capu­ llos estaban entreabiertos! Maravillosa lección la de ese cerezo tardío que rio olvidaba ä la primavera ni aun sepul­ tado bajo la nieve. Flores y hielo me recordaron a aquellas flores de ciruelo bajo un cielo incandescente de que habla una poesía china; y también me hicieron pensar en el poema del maestro Gyoson -y aún con mayor intensidad.8 7 Según las leyes de los peregrinos budistas, está prohi­ bido dar pormenores de lo que ven los ojos en este monte; obedezco y me callo... Regresé al templo que nos servía de posada y a petición del prior escribí los siguientes poemas sobre nuestra peregrinación a los tres montes: ¡Ah, la frescura! La luna, arco apenas sobre el Ala Negra.8 8 Picos de nubes sobre el monte lunar: hechos, deshechos.8 9 Sobre Yudono ni una palabra: mira mis mangas mojadas.9。 Sora escribió este poema: Yudono: piso la senda de monedas corren mis lágrimas, 1 I32 < ^ 、、ろ ^ ^ 关 天 め 疮 ^ ^ ふ ^_ _ /tí 4 マ^ ^ ^ ^ 凡み中ろ傲 ^ ^Vf の ^ U A t —?^&t^TJ7R.^ 0 x ^ w ^ r w v ( u z l ^ i v A i t é c & ? ^ 谁 CV 由 T '钱 i i ^ J ^ v o s l ä To ^ 八々 (]?>名 ム 〜 备 ^ - ,ゐ f n i て • 錄 " & t n f i^ め あ ? V c/ 、S‘ パ マ ' ^ ^5 基 々 私盡 t 々 S > )^ ? ^ N ^^チ ハ ^ ^ l b / T > い、 w r 、 ^ ^ H Salimos de Haguro y llegamos al pueblo que está al pie del castillo de Tsurugaoka. Paramos en casa de un samurái, Nagayama Shigeyuki. Allí compusimos un renga haikai. Hasta aquí nos acompaño aquel Zushi Sakichi. En barco fuimos al puerto de Sakata y nos alojamos en casa de un médico llamado Enan Fugyoku. Rueda del monte al mar, de Atsumi a Fuko, la tarde fresca.9 2 Río Mogami: tomas al sol y al mar lo precipitas. 135 Ríos o montes, playas o valles: había visto muchos y admirables pero ahora la idea de ver a Kisagata me atena­ zaba. Desde el puerto de Sakata caminamos y caminamos, subiendo y bajando colinas, hollando sableras, bordeando litorales y no habíamos avanzado más de unos diez ri cuando, el sol ya a ras del horizonte, el viento de alta mar amotinó las arenas y empezó a llover... así vimos esfu­ marse el perfil del monte Chokai. Me dijo que si el paisaje con lluvia era hermoso -como ver algo en la penumbra- lo sería también sin ella. Con esta idea pernoctamos en la choza de un pescador, esperando que cesase de llover. Al día siguiente por la mañana el cielo estaba despejado y la luz del sol matinal lucía radiante. Nos embarcamos en la bahía de Kisagata. Primero nos acercamos a la isla de Noin y visitamos el lugar en donde el Maestro estuvo re­ cluido durante tres años;9 3 después desembarcamos en la orilla opuesta: allí todavía está un viejo árbol de cerezo, sobre el cual el Maestro Saigyo escribió el poema «Re­ man sobre las flores».9 4 Muy cerca, a la orilla del agua, se encuentra un mausoleo que dicen es de la emperatriz Jingu.?5 El monasterio vecino se llama Kanmanju-ji; nunca he oído que la emperatriz hubiese visitado ese lugar. ¿No es extraño?... En la celda del prior del templo me siento y corro la cortina de bambú: la bahía entra por mis ojos. Al sur, el monte Chokai sostiene al cielo y la imagen de su mole flota sobre las aguas; al oeste, la barrera de Muya- muya cierra el paso a la ruta; al este hay un dique y, más allá, se ve el camino hacia Akita, que se adelgaza hasta des­ vanecerse; la mar se tiende al norte y el paraje golpeado por las olas se llama Shiogoshi. La bahía tiene un ri apro- 136 •^^ v 賣 ' i ' w ^ ^ w ^ r ^ ^ ^ ^ ví f* ^ - 办 , 残 > ^ 1A V ,?1 7 $ や 、 ' ^ ^ t ' E 3 $ T . 1 ふ & ^ w 戈 ^ 1 ヤ 、 r l ? í JK v ^ A K X V W t í ^ ^ 0^KL c^.T - や り 嶙 冬 ^ ム れ ぇ 銬4 M a P V T K V ¿ 5 ^ ^ >'^ í ~ > ^ í T V - ^ ^ } 17 a c ^ ^ ( ^ ; < f r / . Í A ( ? X V 1 s< ^ yr t^. ^ w fe 御 婁 f : />脅 卞 千 满 味 寺 ^ ^ A マ 行 幸 ^ ^ i ^ v t , s ^ / t > V M V ? y,d^ 多 文マ#- v^-- 餐 卞 够V 名 豪 t ^ r»《 ? s,^ ^ i^l ^ > ixsrw?^ > ^ ~7,t -ヌ逢: v^ ííí^ 々i V } ^ v l ^ i ^ ’: i- f¡ r.K 遂^ ^ Í f ぐr地^ 汲h Vす 聲 馆 ギ tf ? - § j t-r; ^ y:4> vv ->^L4 清 u^y^r ll^ 、 ? ド ‘ 1 、 £ 1 isr > 2#免 ” f 及 導 蓼V>在 1- ■^パ の ぁ ぺ &.'> ó q >、 ^¿ ximadamente de ancho y de largo. Se parece a Matsushima y es distinta. Matsushima se ríe y Kisagata frunce el en­ trecejo; a la serenidad une la melancolía y la quietud del paisaje pesa sobre el alma: Bahía Kisa: Seishi duerme en la lluvia, mimosas húmedas.96 Mojan las olas Shiogoshi Las patas de las grullas ¡Qué fresco el mar!9 7 Sobre el festival, Sora escribió este poema: En esta Kisa ¿Qué guisos comerán, el día del Festival?9 8 Un comerciante de la provincia de Mino, Teiji, escribió este otro: Frente a su choza, sobre la tabla echado: sobre el frescor." Sora halló un nido de pájaros misago y compuso lo si­ guiente: Nido del águila: amores que no alcanzan los oleajes.1 。0 x39 Se nos hacía imposible irnos de Sakata y en ese embe­ leso se pasaron unos días. Al fin, me despertó la idea de los caminos del norte cubiertos de nubarrones y me opri­ mió el pecho calcular la distancia que aún nos faltaba para recorrer: había más de ciento treinta ri, nos dijeron, hasta la capital de la provincia de Kaga, Transpuesto el paso de Nezu, entramos en tierras de Echigo; luego de nueve días llegamos al paso de Ichiburi, en la provincia de Etchu; el calor y la humedad me marti­ rizaban y la enfermedad de siempre volvió a atacarme. No escribí nada, excepto estos poemas: Séptima luna: la noche del seis no es como las otras.101 Tendido fluye del mar bravo a la isla: río de estrellas. D f0 あ ^ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ^v í í )^ 7 ^ ^ t*十 Í 6 ^ > ^ ^ t rtx ^ ä f y 7 ú 4 ^ l . ^ ) ¿ ^ í マ ^T"を r y ブ C Ü & 、^ / l\ > ^ i > t:^ v ^ ^ £ : o ^ Ixw^ ^ ^.Y i s t í/ I V v ^ ^ ^>t \ て ^ ' t “ 右 1> 勘 て ^w ; d> ^ ^ す 士^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^v\4r 2 ^ ^* ? 、^ ? K S Í V ? Después de atravesar los lugares más abruptos del país del norte -esos con nombres como Hijo que Reniega del Padre, Huérfano Abandonado, Vuelta del Perro, Regreso del Potro- me sentí agotado y me acosté en seguida. En la habitación contigua se oían voces que parecían ser de dos mujeres; después se les unió la de un anciano. Al escu­ charlas, adiviné que se trataba de cortesanas de Niigata; se dirigían al santuario de Ise y el viejo las había acompañado hasta Ichiburi; al día siguiente regresaría aquel hombre a su tierra y ellas escribían recados y le daban pequeños en­ cargos. Casi dormido seguía oyendo sus conversaciones: somos hijas de pobres pescadores, esas que llaman «blan­ cas olas que corren a su ruina al caer sobre la playa», cada noche una unión distinta y ninguna duradera, no hay pro­ mesas ciertas, malhaya sea nuestra suerte, ¿qué hicimos en 143 nuestras vidas pasadas para merecer esto?... A la mañana del otro día, al salir de nuestro albergue, nos dijeron llo­ rando: «No conocemos el camino y nos da miedo el largo viaje; quisiéramos seguirlos, aunque sea a distancia; sean benévolos, llevan ropas de monjes peregrinos, ayúdenos a encontrar la senda del Buda». Sentí piedad pero las deja­ mos diciendoles: «Nos da mucha pena: tenemos que visi­ tar muchos lugares y sería mejor que ustedes se uniesen a otros viajeros. Anden tranquilas, los dioses las protegen y las harán llegar sanas y salvas a su destino». Y al despe­ dirlas con estas palabras apenas podía contener mi com­ pasión. Dije a Sora este poema y él lo escrioio en su libro: B ajo u n m ism o tec h o d u rm iero n las co rtesa n a s, la lu n a y el tr é b o l.I O í 144 5 1 1 0 /Kc\ 1 ^ ^ /v飞 ^~ ■ 、 ハ # } 、办 ぐ ^ r 2 A - 各 め ^ y € ^ > k9 a 秦 ä h v n v ^4 ' ^ ^ í é x t z T r ñ v ^ ^ ^ v ^ ^ ^ > s ^ ^ v v r Í 3 ,飞 、 — V ^ ^v ^ ---------------------------- ) ^ ^ )ユル | |- <^ * ^ ^ 1 ぅデ ^ ^ J o 、 で> > f ^ > 七つ - ^ s ^ l v ^ y b J í > u ^ t ^ ® u > N ^ J フ ^ 〜 ^ V T ^ V P ^ ^ V ^ マ Y 飞 IÍ Q ^ ぐ ^ 及 の 笑 、^r、含 、^ C ^ V Q i r 7Í ^ v y v y Á - ^L o- ^ f í せ の 南 〜 f > 右 广 令 外 ^ £ Dicen que el río Kurobe tiene cuarenta y ocho rabiones y yo creo que los cruzamos todos y otros más, hasta que al fin fuimos a dar a una rada que nombran Nago. Aunque había pasado la primavera, nos dijimos que las célebres gli­ cinas de Tako bien merecían que las contemplásemos en el otoño temprano. Indagamos con la gente y nos contesta­ ron: «Desde aquí son unos cinco ri. Hay que pasar por la playa y en la falda de la montaña las encontrarán; pero como no hay sino unas cuantas chozas de pescadores, será muy difícil que puedan hallar un lugar en donde pasar la noche». Me asusté y decidí seguir hasta la provincia de Kaga: Penetro en el aroma del arrozal temprano. El mar de Ariso late, a mi derecha.104 147 Cruzamos los montes de Uno-Hanayama y el valle de Kurikara y llegamos a Kanazawa el día quince del Séptimo Mes. Un comerciante que venía de Osaka, de nombre Kasho, se alojó en la misma posada que nosotros. Era poeta también. Vivía en esta ciudad un señor llamado Is- shoh; su afición a la poesía le había dado cierto renombre entre los entendidos pero había muerto el invierno pasado. Su hermano organizó una reunión para recordarlo. He aquí uno de mis poemas: Muévete, tumba, oye en mis quejas al viento de otoño. Al visitar una ermita: Frescor de otoño. Melón y berenjena a cada huésped. En el camino compuse otro: Arde el sol, arde sin piedad - mas el viento es del otoño. En un lugar llamado Komatsu, que quiere decir pino enano: El nombre es leve: viento entre pinos, tréboles, viento entre juncos. 148 « s ' \ ^ l s ^ v 逆 t - 今 ^ * . ^ 、 、 欠 ^ 一,- ^. 、 ^ _ 乂 i 策 上 ス v f f \ ? ^ T ^ A t o i u ^ 9 £ - 不 ¿ パ *-'^? 、 、 1、 シ ^ ^ 1 K 4 r l í^v v ^ ^ Í 多ザ 嗖 J 、ノ 1^ > >々 笔 权 の ; ^ ^ f 4, ^ IF} ^ ^)% ^ Ar If ^L 、> ^ ^ 5 ^ ^.^ 寶 & ^ ^ ^ $ 、 象 . ^ ? !A rrr K . T I M r ^ É ^ ^ i ^ v w n ^ v v ^ A f ß 0 } 1 1 ^ ^ 筆 努 ^ ^ 知 妙 ィ ユ 3 7 萬 ? ザ— V é.¿ n 未 ^ , ^ 4 ^ 0 Visitamos el santuario de Tada, que guarda el yelmo y parte de la armadura de Sanemori.10^ Dicen que fue un re­ galo de Minamoto Yoshitomo, cuando Sanemori pertene­ cía al clan de Minamoto. En efecto, no son armas de un simple samurái. En la visera y las partes laterales del yelmo está grabada una guirnalda de crisantemos de oro; el frente ostenta una cabeza de dragón, junto con dos cuernos sa­ lientes en forma de arado. Se cuenta que, muerto Sane­ mori, las dos reliquias fueron enviadas al santuario, con una carta suplicatoria, por el mismo que lo mató, Kiso Yoshinaka. Su secuaz, Higuchi-no-Jiro, fue el mensa­ jero.10 6 ¡Qué irrisión! Bajo el yelmo canta un grillo Mientras nos dirigíamos a la fuente termal de Yama- naka contemplamos el monte Shirane, que dejábamos atrás de nosotros. A la izquierda, a la orilla de la montaña, se levanta un templo dedicado a Kannon.107 El emperador y monje Kazan,108 después de hacer una peregrinación por los treinta y tres lugares santos,109 colocó la estatua de la Piedad en este templo y lo llamó Nata. Formó el nombre uniendo las sílabas iniciales de dos lugares: Ñachi y Tani- gumi. En estos parajes hay rocas de formas extrañas y vie­ jos pinos. Una pequeña ermita con tejado de yerbas secas se yergue sobre una roca. Un sitio memorable: Viento de otoño: más blanco que tus piedras, Monte de Rocas. 152 ^ a i ü it .,hg xr .- « i舊p*s、i « ; ^ : 4 5#^ 、^?t-'-- ' '..M ' ' '■-í -:"^s ^'; 'i. . . I ¡ ^ «>ズ 山 ^y \ i ィ 砂 冬 ^ ^ ^ ¿ 4 ^ A u い t 、 - r f ぐ 冬 V C、 # 谫 > 哕 : r ^v c 家 客 - J \い ^ T v u ^ マ 42C IVの § x ^ s ^ l f e^ 、r 6 神 A © ^ 6 ^ ー ^ 的 1 0 )9 ^ ^ 冬 Me bane en la fuente termal. Dicen que su eficacia sólo le cede a la de Arima: Aroma de aguas. Inútil ya cortar un crisantemo.1 10 El dueño de la posada se llamaba Kumenosuke y aún era un muchacho. Su padre había sido un aficionado del estilo haikai 7 se cuenta que cuando Teishitsu de Kioto, aún joven, visitó este lugar, tuvo una disputa con él y el posadero-poeta le mostró cuán ignorante era.1 1 1 Después de su regreso a Kioto, Teishitsu se afilió a la escuela de Tei- toku y se hizo un nombre. Ya célebre, no quiso nunca aceptar los honorarios de la gente de este lugar, a quienes corregía los poemas. Tbdo esto ya se volvió anécdota... 155 A Sora se le ocurrió enfermarse del vientre. Tiene un pariente en Nagashima, en la provincia de Ise, y decidió adelantarse. Al partir me dejó este poema: Ando y ando. Si he de caer, que sea entre los tréboles. La pena del que ya se va y la tristeza del que se queda son como la pareja de gaviotas que, separadas, se pierden en la altura. Yo también escribí un poema: Hoy el rocío borrará lo escrito en mi sombrero.1 1 2 15 6 す 、 か ' 7 錄 扒 せ 1 1 ,% 卞丄 丄 ^ フん わ マ v ^íヤ ^ : 久 í , ^ 絲て ^ 泰 夺 > ^ 枰 ^ t i f No 0 Me hospedé en el suburbio de Daishoji5 en un monas­ terio llamado Zensho-ji. ¿ste sitio pertenece todavía a la provincia de Kaga. Sora también se había hospedado en ese templo la noche anterior y había dejado este poema: Viento de otoño: lo oí toda la noche en la montaña. Nos separaba la distancia de unas horas pero me pare­ ció que entre nosotros había ya más de mil ri. Yo tamoien, escuchando el viento otoñal, me acosté en el dormitorio destinado a los novicios. Al romper el alba se oyeron rezos, sonó la campana y me apresuré a entrar en el refec­ torio. «¡Ahora a Echizen!», me dije con brío y salí a toda prisa del templo, mientras unos jóvenes bonzos me perse­ guían con papel y pinceles hasta el pie de la escalera. En ese momento caían las hojas de los sauces en el jardín. Al po­ nerme las sandalias, y aparentando más prisa de la que tenía, tracé estas líneas: Antes de irme ¿barro el jardín hojoso, sauces pelados? En la frontera de Echizen me embarqué para visitar la ensenada de Yoshizaki y ver los pinos de Shiogoshi.1 1 3 El maestro Saigyo compuso un poema sobre este lugar: Toda la noche amotina las olas el viento en cólera. Y los pinos chorrean húmeda luz de luna. El poema dice todo sobre este paisaje. Si añado algo más sería como añadir otro dedo a la mano. 160 C 7)\/V \ > ^ r マ 々 飞 今 、 办 7 ビ、 ラ ¿ ベ ) レ - ^ — . .:...... \ .こ- . : . ■ ■: •r v ? , ^ m a x x ^ 0 ^ 1 ts ^ oK,?^ 7 ^ I V ^^~ " ^ o f v ó ^ , > ^ ^ < % i ^ — 7 A ^ j á o4 T 8 -c^ ;J1 > w r 5 Q ^ 3 v ^ l§マ ,7 ¿ ^ ^ t r v > >v ^ Visité al gran bonzo de Tenryu-ji de Maruoka, viejo amigo mío. Un tal Hokushi de Kanazawa quiso caminar conmigo un trecho y al fin me acompañó hasta allí. Du- rante el trayecto me enseñó lugares pintorescos, añadiendo de vez en cuando alguna ingeniosa improvisación en verso. Al decirle adiós improvisé, a mi vez, un poema: Este abanico hay que tirarlo - pero - mis garabatos... Después de caminar cincuenta cho me interné en la co­ lina y cumplí con mis devociones en Eihei-ji, en el mo­ nasterio fundado por el maestro de zen, el monje Dohgen. Dicen que un día huyó a mil ri de la capital y se refugió en estas montañas, en busca de la serenidad anónima. N o obstante, al fundar, por motivos admirables, este templo, dejó huellas de su paso en este mundo.1 1 4 La distancia que me separaba de Fukui era sólo de tres ri, de modo que después de la cena me puse en camino. La caminata en el crepúsculo fue lenta. En Fukui vive un an­ ciano ermitaño llamado Tosai. Hace ya mucho, tal vez unos diez años, fue a Edo a visitarme. Aunque temía que estuviese muy viejo o que hubiese muerto ya, pregunté por él a la gente. Me enseñaron el lugar donde aún vivía. Su morada se hallaba situada en las afueras de la ciudad; era una casita extraña, cubierta de enredaderas de flores de yugao y hechima. Las ramas de keito y hahakigi1 1 5 cubrían la puerta. «Aquí debe ser», pensé. Llamé y salió una mujer de humilde apariencia, que me dijo: «¿De dónde viene usted, reverendo? Mi dueño fue a casa de un señor que vive cerca. Si quiere verlo, búsquelo allá». Parecía una de esas figuras de los cuentos antiguos y presumí que era su esposa. Busqué a mi amigo, lo encontré y pasé dos noches en su casa. Al despedirme, le dije que deseaba ver la luna llena en el puerto de Tsuruga. Por toda respuesta Tosai dobló la falda de su kimono y, muy contento de ser mi guía, se fue conmigo. 164 y f ^ ft ^ r v i - ^ v ^ l ft M * TT ^ ' V . r r ^ i s ¿ d * r - ^ r rふ Y ^ u y l ^ ^ c > i\í f)i tsふ ^ ^ Mr- ^ i, ^,-An^ ^ lv o'wv^y u —V® 4 ^í) ve " 、 - ^T > ^ A4J^CV ^V^_______________________________________________ A ------------------------------ ¿/A^ ^ AJfí^Ilv^y^ - ^ v K. w 4: 哭 臺 る ネ^CV ITL771 v^-防 o '"¿、 ハ ^ : v ^ '-^ K l t r w お . ' A /)^ y r a ( 噶 を ^ ょ # '- 1 t o t# - d *、 \ s •) ^g^lcs^ て (i)'^ ^ こ ^ d い , ^ * - ^ 於 , r - ^ ~ ^ l • ¿ r p— ' T ^ 3 ^ Ay ¿ / ^ マ 〇 ., /^ t 3 ^ v ^ i ^ v ^ & r Á P IT tó尺 ス 疼 ^V — T ^ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ^— v i o o f by ^lx 4^, V ^v , < 2 炸ォ ^ r > >T O ^ * 衣長自玉 ^ ^J. ¿ ^ ^ v^y Las nubes cubrieron al Monte Blanco pero del otro lado apareció el monte de Hiña; cruzamos el puente de Asamutsu y llegamos a Tamae; las cañas de Tamae ya os­ tentaban henchidas espigas; atravesamos el Paso del Rui­ señor y el de la montaña de Yunoo y llegamos al castillo de Hiuchi; en el monte Kaeru oímos los primeros gritos de los gansos salvajes y en el puerto de Tsuruga, la tarde del día catorce del Octavo Mes, encontramos alojamiento. Esa noche la luna lucía extraordinariamente clara. Le dije al dueño de la posada: «Ojalá aparezca tan clara la de ma­ ñana, que es la luna llena». Me contestó: «En estas tierras del norte no se sabe nunca cómo será la luna de mañana», y nos sirvió sake. Más tarde fui a visitar el santuario de Kei-no-Myo-jin, que fue del emperador Chuai.1 16 Es im­ ponente. La luz de la luna atravesaba los pinos y caía sobre las blancas arenas, frente al santuario. Era como si hubiese caído una helada. El posadero me contó que el segundo 167 bonzo Yugyo, hace mucho, había hecho el voto de arre­ glar la senda y él mismo había cortado las yerbas y apiso­ nado las piedras y la tierra. Desde entonces los bonzos de este templo siguen su ejemplo, llevan arena al santua­ rio, -Esto se llama Porta arena de Yugyo- y hoy los visi­ tantes encuentran un camino sin asperezas: Sobre la arena esparcida por Yugyo luna clarísima. El día quince, como había anunciado el dueño de la po­ sada, llovió. ¿Luna de otonor* Promesas y perjurios, norte cambiante. 168 — - k S VA / - L C — ' ^ A ¿ T ^ < ^ ^ ¿ í ¿ T ^ ^^ ^ x y d ^ 7 5 > l 為 _ 十V ^ V ^ T - ^ o 4 t て f 一六 ^ 科 系 “ n ^ v ^ > ^ - ^ i ^ T e , ^ ^ 5 t$ x c - 3 1 é 々 降 パ る ^> タ ^1> > ^ n s ^ í t l!i 、 聲 á 令 今 |<^ ^ > 々 1 > ¿ c . ^ ^ « K n 、 ^誇系 ^ . o vo l -^ - 才 El día dieciséis se aclaró el cielo. Quise recoger Con­ chitas rojas en la ribera y fui en barco hasta la playa de Iro.1 1 7 No hay más de siete ri por mar. Un señor llamado Tenya preparó la comida y botellas de sake e hizo que nos acompañase mucha servidumbre. El barco llegó en un ins­ tante a la playa, gracias al viento favorable. Ahí no había más que unas cuantas chozas de pescadores; tomamos el té y calentamos el sake en un pobre monasterio de Hokke. El triste atardecer penetró en nuestros corazones: Melancolía más punzante que en Suma, playa de otoño.1 1 8 La ola se retira: tréboles en pedazos, conchas rojas, despojos. Rogué a Tosai que escribiese los pormenores de esta tarde y dejamos en el libro del templo nuestras impresio­ nes escritas. Rotsu vino a buscarme hasta ese puerto y me acompaño a la provincia de Mino. A caballo entramos en el pueblo de Ohgaki. Sora vino desde Ise; Etsujin, también a caballo, se reunió con nosotros y todos nos encontramos en la casa de Jokoh. Día y tarde me visitaban Zensenshi, Keiko, su hijo y los otros íntimos. Su regocijo al verme era como el de aquellos que se encuentran en presencia de un resuci­ tado.1 ^ Llegó el seis del Noveno Mes y aunque todavía no me recuperaba del cansancio del viaje, como quería estar en Ise para presenciar el traslado del Gran Santuario,1 20 me embarqué otra vez: De la almeja se separan las valvas, hacia Futami voy con el otoño.1ユ1 172 ? j/ >>\ h : ^ r r 、Y 、¿ lá v ハ。 沿 ^ ^ ^ r í ’ ^ v ^ r ^ わ , 0 ル - ^ ス ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------V Notas 1. Sugiyama Sampu (1648-1733). Comerciante acomodado de Edo (Tokio), protector de Basho y discípulo suyo. Fue poeta de cierta distinción. 2. Más exactamente: una serie de ocho poemas (renga hai- kai). Basho cita solamente el poema inicial (hokku). Era cos­ tumbre colgar en un pilar de la casa el renga. 3. Las familias con niñas celebran la Fiesta de las Muñecas el día tercero del Tercer Mes de cada año. En esa fecha se colocan las muñecas tradicionales, que se conservan de generación en ge­ neración, en el salón principal de la casa, adornado con flores. Basho piensa en la metamorfosis de su choza, hasta entonces ha­ bitada por un poeta que hacía vida de ermitaño. 4. Senju era la primera posada en el camino del norte. Ri: medida antigua de longitud; cada ri estaba compuesto de 36 cho; un cho equivale a 109 metros y un ri a 3,92 km. Tanto en la poe- sía china como en la japonesa, k expresión «tres mil ri» equi­ vale a «gran distancia». 5. Iwanami (después: Kawai) Sora (1649-1710), discípulo de Basho. Lo acompañó en este viaje y en otro anterior (Una visita al santuario de Kashima). 6. Hohodemi-no-Mikoto es el nombre del Primer Empera­ dor (Jinmu), antes de su ascensión al trono. Según el relato mi­ tológico (Nibon-Sbokiy primera cronología de Japón), la gran diosa-sol, Amaterasu, envía a su nieto, el príncipe Ninigi, a go­ bernar las islas japonesas. Ninigi contrae matrimonio con la princesa Konohana-Sakuya y ésta concibe la misma noche de la boda. El príncipe duda de la legitimidad de su hijo; la princesa se encierra en una cueva tapiada y se prende fuego; si el ser que va a nacer no es hijo de Ninigi, se incendiará; si lo es, ni el fuego podrá hacerle daño. Así nació el príncipe Hohodemi («Nacido del Fuego» o «Visible por el Fuego»). 7. En el siglo Vil, al ser descubierta una conspiración contra el emperador, se destierra al príncipe Arana, a Shimotsuke. Allí se enamora de la hija de un rico, prometida ya al gobernador del 174 lugar; el príncipe visita con frecuencia a la joven, hasta el día en que se descubre que la muchacha está encinta. Mientras tanto, el gobernador apremia al padre para que se lleve a cabo el matri­ monio. El rico no encuentra otra excusa que decir al prometido que la joven ha muerto repentinamente. Para consumar el en­ gaño colocan en el ataúd, en lugar del cuerpo de la muchacha, un pescado que al quemarse despide un olor parecido al que se des­ prende del cuerpo humano al ser incinerado. Desde entonces a esta clase de pescados se les llama konoshiro, que quiere decir «en lugar del niño». 8. Cita de las Analectas de Confucio. s 9. Kukai (774-835), más conocido por su nombre postumo: Kobo Daishi. Fue el fundador de la secta Shingon y es uno de los grandes santos del budismo japonés. 10. Los cuatro estados o clases del Japón en la época medie­ val: los samurái o guerreros, campesinos, artesanos y comer­ ciantes. " ^ 1 1 . En este monte, hoy santuario Toshogu, se venera al pri­ mer shogún de la familia Tokugawa, Ieyasu. Dice el poeta que «la discreción le hace dejar el tema» por tratarse de un antepa­ sado de la familia del shogún reinante. 12. Antes del viaje Sora se afeita el cráneo, a la manera de los bonzos budistas. Los dos viajeros llegan al monte Kuro Kami, que quiere decir Cabello Negro, justamente en la época de cam­ biar el hábito de primavera por el de verano. 13. Juego de palabras: Sora vive cerca de la casa del poeta y bajo su protección; Basho, seudónimo del poeta, también es el nombre de un árbol parecido al banano. 14. Transformado en peregrino, Sora escribe su nombre con signos distintos y que poseen una significación religiosa aunque la pronunciación sea la misma. 15. La segunda línea alude a la época en que dan comienzo los ejercicios espirituales de verano de los bonzos, período de encierro total. 16. Kasane: quiere decir doblar o doble. 17. Era un deporte marcial en que competían los guerreros en la equitación y la habilidad del manejo de arcos, durante los siglos XII al XIV. 175 18. Tamamo-no~mae era la amante del emperador Konoe (1142-1155). Una noche la tierra tembló y se apagaron todas las luces del palacio; en la oscuridad se vio brotar un relámpago del cuerpo de la muchacha y desde esa noche enfermó gravemente el emperador. El adivinador imperial declaró que la culpable era Tamamo-no-mae; descubierta, la joven se convirtió en una zorra de pelo color de oro con nueve rabos y huyó a Nasu. Miura-no- suke-Yoshiaki fue nombrado capitán de cacerías y logró matar a la zorra color de oro, pero el espíritu de la hechicera se con­ virtió en una piedra dotada de una extraña propiedad: los insec­ tos que la rozaban, morían. 19. Nasu-no-Yoichi fue un guerrero oriundo de ese lugar, contemporáneo de las luchas entre los clanes Taira y Minamoto (1156-1192). Yoichí pertenecía al ejército mandado por el famoso Minamoto-no-Yoshitsune. En la batalla naval de Yashima se des­ tacó de la escuadra de los Taira un barco en cuyo mástil se había atado un abanico, decorado con un dibujo del sol. En el barco iban sólo un remero y una mujer, lujosamente ataviada, en señal de burla y menosprecio. Yoshitsune ordenó a Yoichi tirar contra el abanico y derribarlo. Yoichi lo consiguió con un tiro, obte­ niendo la fama de ser un gran arquero. Los Taira fueron derro­ tados y así se inicio una nueva época de la historia japonesa. 20. El fundador de la secta Shugen, el asceta En-no-Gyoya, recorrió el país a pie, predicando la doctrina y calzado con san­ dalias de madera (guetas). La estatua de Gyoya, objeto del haiku de Basho y de su plegaria, está calzada de inmensas guetas. 21. Buccho-Osho (1643-1715), monje y maestro zen. Fue di­ rector espiritual de Basho durante algunos años. 22. Un shaku equivale a 30,3cm. 23. Diez Panoramas famosos del templo Ungan-jí. 24. La Puerta de la Muerte del Gran Bonzo Myo es la cueva donde meditó durante quince años Yuen-Miau (Myo en japo­ nés), monje budista chino de la época Sung; la Celda de Piedra del Maestro Houn es la celda de Fa-yun (Houn en japonés), monje chino del período Liang. 25. Véase nota 18. 26. En la colección S h in k o k in (antología de poemas waka, recopilada por orden imperial en el año de 1205), hay un poema 176 del bonzo Saigyo (i 118-1190) que dice: El sauce tiembla en el agua corriente. Bajo su sombra -rumores y reflejos- un momento reposo. 27. Alude al poema de Taira no Kanemori (?-99〇 ), poeta del período Heian, quien quedó muy impresionado al llegar a este paso de Shirakawa. 28. Alude al poema del maestro Noin: Dejé la capital con niebla de primavera; el viento del otoño sopla ahora aquí, en el paso de Shirakawa. 29. Alude al poema de Minamoto Yorimasa (1104-1180): En la capital vi los arces verdes; hoy veo caer rojeantes sus hojas: paso de Shirakawa. 30. Flor U: Deutzia scabra Thunb. Se da también en México y es una planta parecida a la hortensia blanca. 31. Fujiwara no Kiyosuke (1104-1177), poeta y erudito. El viajero se viste de gala en homenaje al maestro Noin y a su poe­ ma sobre este lugar (véase nota 27). 32. La Laguna de los Reflejos está a 25 kilómetros del paso de Shirakawa. A principios del siglo xm destierran a este lugar a un cortesano. Su mujer emprende el viaje desde la capital para unirse a él pero al llegar encuentra que lo han ejecutado y en­ tonces se arroja al agua. Los reflejos de la laguna son los del es­ pejo que llevaba en el pecho la suicida. 177 3 3 * El paraíso de Buda? que se creía existir en dirección oeste. 34. Gyoki, gran bonzo de k época de Nara (668-749), fa­ moso por las diversas obras civiles que emprendió con sus fie- les. Fue encargado por el emperador Shomu de la colecta para la erección del gran Buda de Nara. 35. Zizania latifolia, especie de avena local. Basho confunde, según René Sieffert, esta planta con una variedad de iris que tam­ bién se llama katsumL Es palabra que aparece con frecuencia en los poemas clásicos. 36. En la cueva de Kurozuka vivía un demonio legendario llamado Adachigahara. 37. En Shinobu se fabricaban ciertos tejidos; para teñirlos se colocaban yerbas silvestres sobre una piedra y sobre ellas la tela; después, con otra piedra, se hacía presión hasta machacar las yerbas y lograr que los relieves quedasen impresos en la tela, formando desordenados y extraños dibujos. El método no es distinto úfrottage de los pintores surrealistas, especialmente de Max Ernst. En la antigua poesía japonesa con frecuencia se com­ para el sentimiento del amor perdido -corazón destrozado- con el dibujo obtenido por las piedras impresoras, hecho de líneas rojas. 38. Consumada la derrota de los Taira, renace la discordia entre los dos hermanos Minamoto: Yoritomo y Yoshitsune. Yo- ritomo duda de la lealtad de su hermano menor; Yoshitsune huye y se hace fuerte en la tierra de Sato Shoji, su partidario y amigo, cuyos dos hijos habían dado la vida combatiendo por su señor. Sato Shoji también muere trágicamente, mostrando su lealtad. 39. Para consolar a su suegra -que se lamentaba de haber perdido s i sus dos hijos y de no poder así contribuir la causa de Yoshitsune- las viudas de Tsugunobu 7 Tadanobu se ponen los yelmos de sus maridos, ya fallecidos, y le muestran que ellas pueden sustituirlos en los combates. 40. En China había una estela de piedra que conmemoraba las virtudes de Yang Hu (221-278), conocida como el Monu­ mento de las Lágrimas. 41- Bonzo legendario famoso por su gran valor y su fidelidad a Yoshitsune, a quien desde joven siguió hasta morir. Ha sido protagonista en varias obras musicales y teatrales. 178 42. El día cinco del Quinto Mes es la Fiesta de los Varones. Las familias con niños tienen la costumbre de colocar muñecos vestidos de guerreros, yelmos y otros arreos bélicos en el salón principal de la casa, adornado con astas de banderas y grandes carpas de tela. La carpa, que nada contra la corriente, es símbolo del valor. 43* En japonés Ohkido, puertas de control construidas en las entradas de ciudades o señoríos en la época de Edo. Ésta es la entrada del señorío de Date, cuya gente tenía fama de ser ex­ travagante o teatral en su atavío y modales. 44, Toh-no-Chujyo Sanekata (?~998), poeta de la época del emperador Ichijyo y comandante de la Guardia Imperial. Un día, encontrándose en el palacio, Sanekata discute sobre temas de poesía con el famoso poeta Fujiwara Kohsei; la discusión llega a mayores y Sanekata comete actos de violencia. El empe­ rador lo destituye y lo destierra en Mutsu, la tierra de que tanto hablaban los poetas. La leyenda quiere que el poeta pase sin de­ tenerse ante el templo del Dios de los Caminos; la divinidad, en castigo, lo fulmina. 4j. El bonzo Saigyo (P-upo), a quien tantas veces alude Basho y por el que sentía veneración, al pasar por estas tierras había visitado también la tumba de Toh-no-Chujyo Sanekata. Al ver unos juncos secos junto a la tumba, compuso este poema: Todavía erguidos, aunque de juncos sólo guarden el nombre, guardan el suyo: juncos del recuerdo. 46. Noin-Hoshi (988-?), religioso y poeta del período Heian. Su poesía ejerció influencia sobre la de Saigyo, que, a su vez, in­ fluyó en Basho. En dos ocasiones Noin visitó Takekuma y en su segunda visita, al no ver el célebre pino (pasaba por vivir mil años), escribió este poema: Del pino aquel ahora, en Takekuma, 179 ni una traza. ¿Desde que vine habrán pasado ya mil años? 47. El día cinco de mayo, en la fiesta a que se alude en la nota 42, también se acostumbra adornar con hojas de lirio los teja- dos. Sus hojas tienen la virtud de alejar a los demonios. Por la noche la gente se baña en el agua en que se sumerge a las hojas. La costumbre perdura todavía. 48. Hagi: Lespedeza bicolor Turez. Es una planta con flores purpúreas; florece en el otoño. 49. Asebi: Pieris japónica D. Don. Arbusto que da flores blancas y es parecido al madroño del Valle de México. jo. Poema anónimo de la antología Kokinshu: ¡Ea, los guardias! Decidle al amo que se ponga el sombrero: rocío en Miyagino, ¡chubasco y no rocío! 51. En una laguna que está en Tofu crecen unos juncos es­ peciales. Los habitantes de este lugar tenían por costumbre tejer una estera con la que obsequiaban todos los años al señor de la región. 52. Buson, además de dibujar la estela, transcribe una expli­ cación sobre ella, que no existe en el original de Basho. Los datos pueden haberse sacado de una antología de la época. 53. Ambos lugares son renombrados en poesía. La Roca de Oki surgía de una charca cercarisi a ks ruinas del castillo de T agíi. 54. Alude a un poema del famoso poeta chino Po-chu-i (772- 846) que habla del amor entre el emperador Hsuan-Tsung y Yang Kuei-fei: Desearon ser, en el cielo, como el pájaro de dos cabezas; y en la tierra, como dos árboles que juntan sus ram as. 180 55- Alude a un viejo poema de autor desconocido: En Michino Oku todos los paisajes son hermosos, pero ninguno como el de Shiogama: en filas los barcos atados con sogas. 56. Biwa\ instrumento musical de cuatro cuerdas, parecido a la guitarra. Oku-Johruri: suerte de cantar de juglares que cantan los bonzos en el norte. 57. Izumi Saburo, tercer hijo de Fujiwara Hidehira, murió de veintitrés años en batalla contra su hermano Yasuhira, cuando éste atacaba a Minamoto Yoshitsune. 58. Doteiko, en chino Dong-Ting-Hu, está en Hunan-Sheng. Seiko, en chino Xihu, está en Zhejiang-Sheng. Ambos son lagos mencionados con frecuencia en poesías chinas. 59. Sekkoh, en chino Zhejiang, actual Qiantang-Jiang, río fa­ moso por la marea en su desembocadura. 60. Dios de Oyamazumi: hijo de los dioses Izanami e Iza- nagi, y mitológico creador de las montañas. 61 * Versión de la primera edición: «Aunque no sabía qué clase de gente realmente era aquélla, sentí afecto por ellos y entré en una de las chozas. Mientras tanto, la luna se reflejaba en el m ar y el paisaje cambió». 62. Versión de la primera edición: En Matsushima pídele su plumaje a la grulla, ¡oh ruiseñor! Los nombres japoneses de los pájaros referidos son Tsuru y Hototogüu. Tsuru corresponde a grulla.玉1 Hototogisu (Cuculus poliocephalus), o cuco chino, es muy popular en el Oriente y lo mencionan con frecuencia los poetas. Por su parecido al ruise- ñor (X鉍 puede llamarse «ruiseñor japonés». 63. Yamaguchi Sodo (1647-1716), poeta en haikai; riara An- teki (se ignoran las fechas de su nacimiento y muerte), poeta en 1 8 1 tanka; Sampu (véase nota i); Nakagawa Jyokushi (tampoco se saben las fechas de su nacimiento y muerte), poeta y discípulo de Basho. 64. Kembutsu: asceta de la época del emperador Toba (1107- 1158) que vivió mucho tiempo en Ojima. 65. El pino de Aneha es muy famoso por su hermosura y desde la antigüedad muchos poetas lo celebraron. Estaba cerca de la carretera de Oou. El pequeño puente de Odae era de ma- dera, arqueado, y también fue tema poético. 66. Ohtomo Yakamochi (718-745), que felicita eñ su poema al emperador Shomu (720-749), con motivo del primer hallazgo de oro en ese lugar: Para honrar la Era Imperial, en el este, en un monte de Michinoku, florece el oro. Kinkazan quiere decir «Monte de las Flores de Oro». 67. Hidehira, penúltimo de los cuatro patriarcas de la fami­ lia Fujiwara que reinó sobre esa parte del Japón (Michino Oku) a mediados del siglo XII. La sede de los Fujiwara estaba en Hi- raizumi, ciudad que pudo mantener su prosperidad -muchas veces comparada con la de Kioto- por haber guardado cierta neutralidad durante la lucha entre los Taira y los Minamoto. Cuando triunfan los últimos y estalla la pelea entre los dos her­ manos, Yoshitsune, el menor, se refugia cerca de Yasuhira (1155- 1189), el cuarto de la familia Fujiwara, que se había mostrado su amigo y partidario. Yasuhira, al ver que la suerte se inclinaba a favor de Yoritomo, traiciona a Yoshitsune y le da muerte en el castillo de Koromogawa, esperando así obtener la protección del vencedor. Yoritomo se limitó a comentar la traición con esta frase: «demasiado tarde». Sus hombres arrasaron Hiraizumi, dando término a una grandeza que había durado siglos. «El esplendor de tres generaciones» se refiere a los tres pri­ meros señores de la familia Fujiwara: Kiyohira, Motohira e Hi- dehira. 182 68. Alude a los que lucharon con Yoshitsune contra las fuer­ zas de Yasuhira. 69. Basho parafrasea un conocido poema del poeta chino Tu Fu (712-770). 70. Kanefusa era un fiel servidor de Yosmtsune que, a pesar de su avanzada edad y de su cabello cano, luchó hasta el último momento. Al ver el fin de Yoshitsune, Kanefusa y su hermano se lanzan contra el enemigo y mueren. 71. Hikarido es el edificio principal del templo Chuson-ji y quiere decir «Templo de la Luz». Se le dio este nombre por sus muros decorados con oro. 72. Los libros budistas hablan de siete tesoros: oro, plata, nácar, ágata, esmeralda, perla 7 lapizlázuli. 73. Versión de la primera edición: Las lluvias de mayo no te atacan ya, Templo de Oro. 74. Alusión a un poema de Tu Fu. 75. Mercader de flores de carmín, de nombre Shimodaya Ha- chiemon. Poeta. 76. criadero de gusanos de seda. 77. Flor carmín (beni): planta de cuya flor se sacaba el colo­ rete para las mujeres. 78. Las mujeres que se dedican a la crianza de los gusanos de seda no se arreglan el cabello ni se pintan los labios y visten ropas ordinarias. Al poeta le parece que esta sencillez o acaso el estilo de su ropa es semejante a la de los antiguos. 79. Jikaku, patriarca de la secta Tendai (P-864). 80. Mi traducción es tal vez demasiado libre. Antes había tra­ ducido así: Quietud: los cantos de la cigarra penetran en las rocas. La de Donald Keene: 183 Such stillness The cries of the cicadas Sink into the rocks. La de Geoffrey Bowxias y Anthony Thwaite: Silent and still: then Even sinking into the rocks, The cicada's screech, La de René Sieffert: Ah le silence et vrillant le roc le cri des cigales La de Earl M iner: In seclusion^ silence. Shrilling into the mountain boulder The cicada's rasp. La de Yuasa Nobuyuki: In the utter silence of a tempiも a cicada、 voice alone penetrates the rocks. Procuraré justificar ahora mi versión. Basho opone, sin opo­ nerlos expresamente, lo material y lo inmaterial, lo silencioso 7 lo sonoro, lo visible y lo invisible, la quietud del campo frente a la agitación humana, la extrema dureza de la piedra y la fragili­ dad del canto de las cigarras. Doble movimiento: la conciencia intranquila del poeta se sosiega y aligera al fundirse en la inmo­ vilidad del paisaje; el berbiquí sonoro de la cigarra penetra en la roca muda; lo agitado se calma y lo pétreo se abre; lo sonoro in­ visible (el chirriar del insecto) atraviesa lo visible silencioso (la 184 roca). Todas estas oposiciones se resuelven, se funden,0 en una suerte de fijeza instantánea que dura lo que duran las diecisiete sílabas del poema y que se disipa como se disipan la cigarra, la roca, el paisaje y el poeta que escribe... Se me ocurrió que lapa- labra tregua -en lugar de quietud^ sosiego, calma- acentúa el ca­ rácter instantáneo de la experiencia que evoca Basho: momento de suspensión y armisticio lo mismo en el mundo natural que en la conciencia del poeta. Ese momento es silencioso y ese si­ lencio es transparente: el chirrido de la cigarra se vuelve visible y * traspasa a la roca. Así, la tregua es «de vidrio», una materia que es el homólogo visual del silencio: las imágenes atraviesan la transparencia del vidrio como el sonido atraviesa al silencio. Creo que las dos otras líneas de mi versión se defienden solas... 81. He aquí la serie de poemas (renga) a que se refiere Basho, traducidos de la versión inglesa de Donald Keene: Äpacentado aguas del Quinto Mes hacia el m ar, el Mogami. Basho Los botecitos de los pescadores anudan sus luces de luciérnaga a la ribera. Ichiei Los campos de melones aguardan a la luna titubeante en el cielo. Sora A la salida del pueblo: un sendero entre las zarzamoras. Sensui 82. Alude a un viejo poema anónimo que figura en la anto­ logía clásica Kokinsbu: Por el río Mogami - 18 5 suben y bajan las barcas de arroz: no lo tomes por desdén, sólo que este mes... El poema gira sobre un juego de palabras, arroz y desdén, intraducibie. 83. Versión de la primera edición: Junta todas las lluvias de mayo y se lanza rápido el río Mogami. 84. Los Ritos de Engi es una obra en 50 volúmenes -escrita o fechada el año 967, época del emperador Daigo- en la que se consignan las ceremonias de la corte y se mencionan los santua­ rios del país. 85. El nombre de Dewa se escribe con dos caracteres: uno significa «salir» y el otro, «pluma». En el santuario del monte Haguro se venera desde antiquísimos tiempos a una divinidad (gongen) de la religión shinto. Los budistas la han transformado en una encarnación de un bodisatva. 86. En todo este párrafo, loa de la habilidad de los herreros japoneses tanto como de su piedad religiosa, Basho los compara con los chinos. La Fuente del Dragón: Lung ShJ üan (en japonés Ryusen). Kansyo y Bakuya (Kan Chiang y Mo Yeh): pareja de forjadores chinos de la dinastía W u. 87. La poesía de Gyoson (1057-1135) a que se refiere figura en la colección Kinyoh (1127). Cuando el bonzo Gyoson se en­ tregaba a sus ejercicios religiosos, en las profundidades del monte Yoshino, escribió este poema: Haz como yo y compréndeme, cerezo silvestre: nadie me conozca, salvo tus flores. 186 88. Ala Negra: el monte Haguro. 89. Monte Gassan: Monte de la Luna. Una versión anterior: Entre los derrumbados picos de las nubes: el Monte de la Luna. 90. «Mangas mojadas»: se sobrentiende «con mis lágrimas». 91. En el camino al monte Yudono los peregrinos dejan caer monedas como ofrendas, y nadie las recoge. El poeta las pisa y se emociona. 92. íiay im juego de palabras entre 忒 “ 鉍 , 《 calor», y /紅 左 如 , «sopla» (el viento). 93. Se dice que el bonzo Noin estuvo encerrado en esta isla durante tres años, entregado a la práctica de ejercicios espiri­ tuales. 94. El poema: Bahía K isa: los cerezos en flor cubren las olas. Sobre las flores reman los barquitos pesqueros. 95. Emperatriz legendaria. Según las crónicas, esposa del em­ perador Chuai del siglo III y madre del emperador Oojin. Do­ minó con su esposo la rebeuon de Kumaso; y, muerto su esposo, dirigió clk misma la expedición japonesa a Gorca, 96. El poeta Su Tung-Po (1036-1101) comparaba el paisaje del lago m Hu con la belleza de una mujer de la época, Hsi-tzé (Seishi). Basho, al contemplar la bahía de Kisagata, imagina el paisaje del lago Si Hu y recuerda el poema chino y a Seishi. 97. El nombre de Shiogoshi se escribe con dos caracteres: uno quiere decir pasar; otro, olas. 98. Sora se pregunta qué podrán comer las gentes el día del Festival, en lugar tan pobre y aislado. 99. En las casas de los pueblos se usan tablas corredizas en lugar de puertas. Los pescadores toman el fresco sentados o ten- 187 didos sobre esas tablas, que quitan de su lugar y colocan en el suelo. 100. Se refiere a las águilas de m ar. Otra versión: Nido del águila: juraron no mojarlo los oleajes. 101. El día siete del Séptimo Mes es la Fiesta de las Estrellas. Según la leyenda, en este día se juntan dos estrellas enamoradas que se sitúan en ambas orillas del Río del Cielo (Vía Láctea). 102. La isla es la de Sado. Versión de la primera edición: M ar brava. ■ ■' Hacia la isla de Sado se tiende la Vía Láctea. 103• La luna simboliza al poeta-monje y el ramo de trébo­ les a las cortesanas. Otra versión: Monje y rameras alberga el mismo techo: trébol y luna. 104. Aviso Umii el mar furioso. Ofrezco otras tres versio- nes, otras tres aproximaciones: Entró en el aroma precoz del arrozal. Axiso al lado. . ........ . . . . . . . . Ando entre el precoz aroma del arrozal y el mar colérico. Entre el aroma precoz del arrozal y el mar colérico... 188 i 〇 5 * Saito Sanemori fue un guerrero del clan Minamoto. Al ser derrotado Minamoto Yoshitomo por Taira Munemori, pasó a l, clan Taira. Al comenzar la lucha contra Minamoto Yoshi- naka, Sanemori, que entonces contaba setenta y tres años de edad, luchó bajo las órdenes de Taira Koremori. Para él este combate, librado en las cercanías de Kanazawa, sería el último. Los guerreros de Minamoto vieron, extrañados, que el caaaver teñía cabello negro y no las canas que lucía en vida. Para ase­ gurarse de que realmente era el cadáver de Sanemori, lavaron la cabeza y descubrieron que se había teñido el pelo: el viejo soldado encontraba indecoroso morir tardíamente y con el cabello blanco. Los guerreros de esta época frecuentemente per­ fumaban su yelmo, para impedir o atenuar el hedor que despe- dirían sus cadáveres. Mostraban así que no pensaban regresar con vida. 106. Higuchi Jiro, uno de los cuatro generales de Minamoto Yoshinaka, fue el que mató a Sanemori. 107. Bodisatva de la misericordia, concebido popular 7 ge­ neralmente en forma femenina. En chino: Kuan Ying. 108. Emperador Kazan (968-1008). A los dos años de rei­ nado, se hizo monje budista. Hombre de letras 7 poeta. Hizo varias peregrinaciones. 109. Peregrinación a los treinta y tres templos del oeste de­ dicados a Kannon. Es aún hoy día popular junto con la peregri­ nación a los ochenta y ocho templos de Shikoku, Se cree que comenzó en la época de Heian (siglo XII). no. En Oriente el crisantemo ha sido siempre símbolo de larga vida y en China se bebía un licor de crisantemos el día nueve de septiembre. n i. Teishitsu de Kioto (1571-1653): discípulo de Matsu- naga Teitaku 7 poeta de nombradía. 112. Los peregrinos budistas llevaban ropas blancas y som­ breros de paja. En el sombrero, una inscripción decía: «Somos dos», alusión al acompañante imaginario que es el Santo Kobo Daishi (véase nota 9). Versión de la primera edición: Desde hoy el rocío 189 borrará tu nombre de mi sombrero. 113. En el cabo de Hamasaka, orilla opuesta de Yoshizaki, había unas decenas de pinos. Por su hermosura ha servido varias veces de tema poético. 114. El bonzo Dohgen (1200-1253), hijo de un gran noble, tomó las órdenes a los catorce años; a los veinticuatro salió para China y a su regreso fundó ese templo. Dicen que escogió un lugar parecido a aquel en donde hizo sus estudios 7 por éso el santuario se encuentra tan alejado de la capital* 115. Yugao: Lagenaria vulgaris Ser; tiene una flor parecida a la que en México llaman campanera. Hechima: Luffa cylindrica Roem\ en México: estropajo. Keito: Celosía cristata L; en Mé­ xico: manto. Hahatetgi: Kocbia Seoparia Schrad^ sus tallos se usaban como escobas. n6. Según las crónicas, decimocuarto emperador (192-200), esposo de la emperatriz Jingu. 117. La playa se llamaba, por sus famosas conchas de color, Iro no hama («playa de los colores»). Hay un poema de Saigyo sobre ellas. 118. Suma es un pasaje cercano a Kobe, citado en la litera­ tura antigua como un lugar triste. 119. Todos los nombres que aparecen en este párrafo son de discípulos de Basho. 120. Desde el siglo IX ha existido la costumbre de recons- truir cada veinte aüo$ los Cuatro Santuarios más importantes del Japón, siendo I$e el principal de ellos. 121. El original del poema es como sigue: Hamagurino Futamim wakare Yuku akizo. quiere decir «de k alm eja»* ば; « d o s par­ tes» , o sea «dos valvas». Pero Futami es asimismo el nombre de la bahía a que Basho se dirige. 190 índice de los nombres de personas y lugares Abukuma, 85 Abumizuri, 93 Aizu, 85 Akita, 136 Aneha, m , 182 Arima, 155 Ariso, 147, 188 Asaka, 86 Asamutsu, 167 Ashino, 81 Atsumi, 135 Bakuya, 131, 186 Benkei, 89 Buccho, 36, 42, 77, 78,177 Chokai, 136 Chuai, 167, 187 Daishoji, 159 Date, 90, 179 Dewa, 116, 118, 128, 1S6 Dohgen, 163, 189 Doteiko, 107, 181 Echizen, 159, 160 Edo, 36, 38, 39, 56, 57, i 164, 179 Egaku, 126 Eihei-ji, 163 Emi Asakari, 98 Enan Fugyoku, 135 Etchu, 140 Etsujin, 172 Fuji, 2i, 65, 69 Fujiwara, 112, 182 Fuko, 135 Fukui, 164 Fukushima, 86 Futami, 172, 190 Futara, 70 Gassan, 131, 186 Goten, 126 Gozaemon, 70 Gyojya, 77 Gyoki, 85, 178 Gyoson, 132, 186 Hachiman, 77 Haguro, 126, 128, 135, 186 Haguro-yama, 128 Hara Anteki,108, 182 Hayabusa, 126 Heishiro, n i Hidehira, 112, 182 Higuchi-no-jiro, 151 Hiwada, 86 Hiña, 167 Hiraizumi, n i, 182 Hitachi, 85 19 1 Hiuchi, 167 Hohodemi-no-Mikoto, 69, 174 Hokke, 171 Hokushi, 163 Houn, 78, 177 Ichiburi, 140, 143 Ichikawa, 98 Iizuka, 89, 90 Iro, 171, 189 Ise, 143, 156, 172, 190 Ishinomaki, i n Isshoh, 148 Itajiki, 126 Iwaki, 85 Iwanuma, 93 Iwade, 116 Izumi, 112 Izumi Sab-uro, 104,181 Jikaku, 123, 183 Jokoh, 172 Jyoboji, 77 Jyokushi, 108, 182 Kaemon, 97 Kaga, 140, 147, 159 Kaeru, 167 Kanazawa, 148, 163, 188 Kanefusa, 112, 183 Kan-ei-ji, 128 Kanmanju-ji, 136 Kannon, 152, 189 Kansyo, 131 Kasajima, 93 Kasane, 74, 176 Kasho, 148 Kawai, 73, 174 Kazan, 152,189 Keiko, 172 Kei-no-Myo-jin, 167 Kembutsu, u i, 182 Kinkazan, u i, 182 Kioto, 35, 38, 57, 58, 155, 189 Kisa, 139, 187 Kisagata,73, 136, 139, 187 Kiso Yoshinaka, 151 Kitakami, 112 Kiyosuke, 8 2 ^ 178 Koho, 81 Komatsu, 148 ' Komyo-ji, 77 Konohana Sakuyahime, 69 Koori, 90 Koromo, 112 Kukai,70, 175 Kumenosuke, 155 Kurikara, 148 Kurobane, 74, 77, 81 Kurobe, 147 Kurozuka, 86, 178 Kyohaku, 94 Magaki, 103 Makabe, iii. Mano, i n Maruoka, 163 Maruyama, 89, Masshozan, 103 Matsushima, 62, 97, 104, 107, 108, 136, 139, 181 Michinoku, 126, 182 Miharu, 85 Minamidani, 126 Minamoto, 151, 176 192 Minamoto Yoshitomo, 151, Ohyama, n6y 119 188 0 jima, 104, 108, 182 Mino, 17z Oki, 103, 180 Minowa, 93 Oou, 12, 66, 182 Miyagino, 97; 180 Mizu, 116 Osaka, 37, 38, 56,148 Mogami, up, 124, 126, 135, Rotsu, 172 185, 186 Muro-no-Yashima, 69 Ryushaku-ji, 123 Mutsu,94, 179 Saigyo, 136, 160, 177 Muyamuya, 136 Sabano,89 Myo, 78 Sakata, 126, 135, 136, 140 Sampu, 36, 6z, 65, 1 08, 174, Ñachi, 152 182 Nagäshima, 156 Sanemori, 151, 188 Nagayama Shigeyuki, 135 Sato Shoji, 89, 178 Nago, 147 Seifu, 120 Narugo, 116 Seiko, 107, 181 Nasu,74, 77, 176 Seishi, 139, 187 Nambu, 116 Sekkoh, 107 ,181 Nata, 152 Sendai, 97 Natori, 94, 97 Senju,65, 174 Nezu, 140 Senoue, 89 Nihonmatsu, 86 Shimo-tsuke, 85, ^Niigata, 143 Shinobu, 86, 178 Nikko, 7 。 Shiogama, 103, 104, 181 Noda, 103 Shiogoshi, 136, 139, 160, 187 Nohjyo, 128 Shiraishi, 93 Noin , 94, 136, 177, 178, 180, Shiraito, 126 186 Shirakawa, 62, 82, 85,177,178 Obanazawa, 120, 123 Shirane, 152 Obuchi, i l l Shitomae, 116 Odae, 65, 182 Shoji, 89 Ogurosaki, 116 Shomu, 98, 178, 182 Ohgaki, 172 Sode, i l l Ohishida, 124 Sodo, 108, 182 Ohno Azumahito, 98 Sogoro, 73 193 Soka, 66 Soma, 85 Sora,12, 13, 36, 69, 73, 82, 85, ip8,112,12。 , 132, 139, 144,15 6,” 9, 172, 174, 175,ヮ6, i85, i87 Sue-no-Matsuyama? 103 Suga, 85 Suma, 171, 190 Tada, 151 Taga, 98, 180 Takadate, 112 Takekuma, 94, 180 Tako, 147 Tam a, 103 Tamada, タ 7 Tamae, 167 Tamamo, 77, 17 6 Tanigumi, 152 Teiji, 139 Teishitsu, 155, 189 Teitoku, 17, 24, 35, 155 Tenjm, 97 Tenryu-ji, 163 Tenya, 171 Tofu, 98 Toh-no-Chujyo Sanekata, 93, 179 Tohsui, 77 Tokyu, 85, 86 Tosai, 164,171 Tsubo, 98 Tsukinowa, 89 Tsuruga, 164, 167 Tsurugaoka, 135 Tsutsuji-ga-oka, 97 Uno-Hanayama, 148 Ueno, 35, 65 Ungan-ji, 77, 177 Ungo, io8? i n ' Ushu-kuroyama, 128 Ushu-satoyama, 128 Yakushi-do, 97 Yamagata, 123, 127 Yamanaka, 152 Yanaka, 65 Yashima, 176 Yasuhira, 112, 181, 182, 183 Yoichi, 77,176 Yokono, 97 Yoshitsune, 89, 176, 178, 179, 181, 182,183, Yoshizaki, 160, 189 Yudono, 128, 131, 132,186 Yugyo, 168 Yunoo, 167 Zensenshi, 172 Zensho-ji, 159 Zuigan-ji, i n Zushi Sakichi, 127, 135 194 Plano de los principales lugares visitados ESTA SEGUNDA EDICIÓN DE SENDAS DE OKU, DE MATSÚO BASHO, SE ACABÓ DE IMPRIMIR Y ENCUADERNAR EN BARCELONA EN LA IMPRENTA ROTOCAYFO (IMPRESIA IBÉRICA) EN JUNIO DE 2016 Últimos títulos publicados 44. En los oscuros lugares del saber. Peter Kingsley. 4a ed. 45. El fuego secreto de los filósofos. Patrick Harpur. 4a ed. 46. Algo elemental. Eliot Weinberger 47. Rämäiaj^ia. Välm Tki 48. Vampiros. W . AA. 2a ed. 49. Jin Ping Mei. El Erudito de las Carcajadas. 3a ed. 50. El mundo bajo los párpados. Jacobo Siruela. 2a ed. 51. £/ mar de iguanas. Salvador Elizondo 52. Mis aventuras con monjas. Giacomo Casanova 53. Cuentos de lo extraño, Robert Aickman 5 4 » Origen y presente. Jean Gebser 5J. Érase una vez una mujer.». Liudmila Petrushévskaia 56. Paprika. Yasutaka Tsutsui 57. Cuaderno de noche. Inka Martí 58. Aventuras en Venecia. Giacomo Casanova 59. Vidas de Pitagoras. David Hernández de la Fuente. 2a ed. 60. Socotra, la isla de los genios. Jordi Esteva. 2a ed. 61. Jin Ping Mei IL El Erudito de las Carcajadas 62. Mientras los dioses juegan. Alam Daniélou 63. La noche, Francisco Tario 64. Consciencia más allá de la vida. Pim van Lommel.4a ed. 65. Decadencia y caída del Imperio Romano L E. Gibbon. 3a ed. 66. El mundo en el que vivo. Helen Keller 67. Rudolf Steiner. Gary Lachman 68. La casa inundada, Felisberto Hernandez 69. Imagen del mito. Joseph Campbell.aa ed. 70. Decadencia y caída del Imperio Romano II. E. Gibbon. 3a ed. 71. Cuentos de hadas. George MacDonald 72. El Palacio de Liria. W . AA. 73- La pérdida del reino. José Bianco 74. La tradición oculta del alma. Patrick Harpur. 2a ed. 75 ,Los últimos años de Casanova. Joseph Le Gras & Raoul Véze 76. OcÄö e似 沈 ; yos W ¿//¿ 在; w Kathleen Raine 77. Las extensiones interiores del espado exterior. J. Campbell 7^. Una historia secreta de la consciencia. Gary hachim^in 7分• Antología universal del relato fantástico. YV. Ak f eá. 80. Libros prof éticos L William Blake 81. Sendas de Oku. Matsúo Basho. 2a ed. 82. Manual de filosofía portátil, Juan Arnau. 3a ed. 83. La senda de las nubes blancas. Lama Anagarika Govinda 84. Libros prof éticos IL William Blake 8j. Filosofía para desencantados, Leonardo da Jandra. 2a ed. 86. Itinerario poético. Octavio Paz 87, Fantastes. George MacDonald 88. Las mil y una noches L Anommo 89. Las mil y und noches IL Anónimo 90, Las mil y una noches IIL Anónimo 91, Mercurius. Patrick Harpur 92, Salvar las apariencias. Owen Barfield 93. El arte de morir. Peter y Elizabeth Fenwick 94,Capturar la luz. Arthur Zajonc 95. Diosas. ]oseph Campbell 96* Libros, secretos. Jacobo Siruela 97. Cinco llaves del mundo secreto de Remedios Varo. W . AA. 98. El Palacio de las Dueñas. Vicente Lleó / Luis Asín 99. Bhagavadgita. adición de Juan Arnau 100. Obra completa bilingüe. Arthur Rimbaud 101. La invención de la libertad, Juan Arnau 102* Lluvia y otros cuentos. W . Somerset Maugham 103. Las casas de los rusos. Robert Aickman 1 2 Colección dirigida por Javier Martín Lalanda Diseño y cubierta de Blanca Ortega Comentario: 3 4 Título original: The Broken Sword, Abelard-Schuman, 1954, para la primera versión; Ballantine Books, 1971, para la presente edición revisada © Del texto: Poul Anderson, 1971 Published by agreement with Scott Meredith Literary Agency, Inc., 845 Third Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022 © De la introducción y traducción: Javier Martín Lalanda © De esta edición: Grupo Anaya, S. A., Madrid, 1992 Telémaco, 43. 28027 Madrid 1. a edición, octubre 1992 ISBN: 84-207-4827-7 Depósito legal: M. 30.855/1992 Compuesto en Puntographic, S. A. L. Sol Naciente, 31. 28027 Madrid Impreso en GRAFUR, S. A. Ctra. Paracuellos de Jarama a Belvis, Km. 0,3 Polígono Industrial Igarsa 28860 Paracuellos de Jarama (Madrid) Impreso en España-Printed in Spain 5 Reservados todos los derechos. De conformidad con lo dispuesto en el artículo 534-bis del Código Penal vigente, podrán ser castigados con penas de multa y privación de libertad quienes reprodujeren o plagiaren, en todo o en parte, una obra literaria, artística o científica fijada en cualquier tipo de soporte, sin la preceptiva autorización. 6 La dedicatoria de la primera edición de esta obra fue para mi madre ASTRID ANDERSON lo mismo que esta, sólo que ahora ha de ser compartida (duplicando de tal modo mi satisfacción) con mi hija, quien lleva su mismo nombre. 7 INTRODUCCIÓN De espadas y aventureros: la fantasía de Poul Anderson Hay espadas que empuña el entusiasmo y jinetes de luz en la hora oscura. Julio Martinez Mesanza, Europa A la hora de presentar al autor que inaugura esta nueva colección de literatura fantástica, Poul Anderson, con su obra La espada rota, antes que nada habrá que decir que tal elección no es debida al azar, sino a un deseo editorial consciente que responde a la necesidad, profundamente sentida, de presentar al público de lengua castellana las mejores obras, y más injustamente olvidadas, de los autores más destacados de ese amplísimo campo que es la literatura fantástica, sin distinción de géneros ni subgéneros, que han influido notablemente en posteriores obras de autores más recientes. La espada rota y otra excelente novela de Anderson, La saga de Hrolr Kraki, que también forma parte de los primeros títulos de la colección Ultima Thule, rondaban por mi mente durante los últimos años, insinuándoseme con insistencia a la espera de verse editadas, como si tuviesen vida propia. Y ambas me dejaban oír una y otra vez el estruendo del combate y el clamor de las espadas que se encierra entre sus páginas, y que quienes tengan la gentileza de leer estas líneas de presentación no tardarán en descubrir. La espada rota, que pertenece al género conocido como «fantasía 8 heroica», resulta ser, en una primera aproximación, algo así como una mezcla, explosiva, sin dudarlo, y a partes iguales, entre el Rober E. Howard más salvaje y sombrío, y el J. R. R. Tolkien más élfico que uno se pueda imaginar, ya que narra la historia de Skafloc, el Ahijado de los Elfos, en el marco histórico de las invasiones vikingas de la Inglaterra del siglo IX. Pero aún hay más, ya que el trasfondo mítico-simbólico de la obra va a entrelazar, de manera sorprendente, motivos de la mitología, irlandesa con otros del mundo nórdico, para proyectarlos sobre un fondo fantástico y muy querido por todos nosotros, estoy seguro, que es el Mundo de las Hadas —o de Faerie, como lo llama su autor—, de suerte que, en más de un momento, trolls y elfos llegarán a codearse con Lugh Brazo Largo y con Odín, aunque sin perder de ojo el mundo real, el mundo de los hombres, corno se dice en la novela. Sólo por ello, por la riqueza de combinaciones e interpenetraciones de estos cuatro universos indicados y por el simple hecho de curiosear en ese curioso ejercicio de imaginación que representa, creo que bien vale la, pena leérsela. Y aun podría añadirse otra razón más: porque tal y como su autor, Poul Anderson, uno de los más prolíficos —y más premiados— de la literatura fantástica, reconoce en el posfacio a esta edición, La espada rota constituye uno de los momentos más brillantes de su producción, que sólo sería continuado, en cierto modo, por Hrolf Kraki, lo que explica que ambos títulos se hayan escogido para la presente colección. Ello no quiere decir que ésta vaya a recoger obras inusuales ni raras por sí mismas, sino sólo aquellas que lo sean debido al interés que encierren y por estar bien escritas. Habría que puntualizar, por tanto, que La espada rota está escrita de tal manera que recrea formalmente las sagas escandinavas —hay mucho en ella de las Eddas y dé la Saga de Grettir, que narra la lucha del héroe islandés Grettir contra los trolls—, con poemas que se han intentado poner en métrica en la presente traducción y una notable densidad de prosa poética, cuajada de kenningar. Por otra parte, es de destacar en ella la meticulosidad de las descripciones de los combates y batallas —no en vano Anderson fue miembro de la Sociedad para el Anacronismo Creativo, una asociación de «guerreros» que diseñaban sus equipos y realizaban torneos incruentos, muy activa en los USA por la década de los años setenta— y la finura de los tipos psicológicos de sus protagonistas, 9 sobre todo de los dos más importantes: Skafloc, el Ahijado de los Elfos, y Valgard Berserkr, su doble, sombra o imagen especular, ya que, realmente, es el «hijo cambiado» o changeling que los elfos le dejaron a su madre en la cuna al llevarse a Skafloc. Comentaba antes la importancia que tienen los volúmenes de la colección Ultima Thule como modelos que han influido en obras posteriores. Pues bien, el lector verá que la espada Tyrfmg, rúnica y maldita, que empuña Skafloc y que da título a la novela, aun participando del arquetipo de «espada encantada que causa la muerte cada vez que resulta desenvainada» (D 1653.1.1.1 del Motif-índex of Folk-Literature de Stith Thomson), se encuentra en el origen de la Stormbringer, o Atraetormentas, la espada de otro héroe de estos mundos de fantasía, Elric de Melniboné, creado por el británico Michael Moorcock. y digo esto sin ánimo de vilipendiar a Moorcock ni a su Elric, a quienes dediqué un largo y elogioso estudio en Fan de Fantasía, la revista dirigida por José Luis González Lago (precisamente en su número 6, de junio de 1982), pues la idea de «multiverso», en la que se basa el entramado físico-teórico del discurso de Moorcock, ya había sido desarrollada por Poul Anderson —que es físico de formación— en otra obra anterior, que también transcurre en el reino de Faerie. Me refiero, ciertamente, a Three Hearts and Three Lions — que recrea, en clave que equidista entre la ciencia ficción y la fantasía, las aventuras de un célebre héroe medieval del ciclo carolingio, Ogier el Danés—, publicada por entregas en los números de septiembre y octubre de 1953 de la prestigiosa revista norteamericana The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, pocos meses antes de que apareciese la obra que nos ocupa, La espada rota, que en edición americana, The Broken Sword, fue editada en 1954 por Abelard Schuman. ¿A qué es debido que esta obra de Anderson haya pasado desapercibida? A la edición, al mismo tiempo que ella, de El Señor de los Anillos de Tolkien. En efecto, The Lord of the Rings aparece en Gran Bretaña en 1954, de suerte que frente a una temática similar, el profesor de Oxford eclipsa totalmente al recién titulado nort eamericano. No deja de ser, por tanto, una broma del destino —¿quién sabe si no sería debido a un encantamiento de 10 los trolls y de sus adictos?— que Tolkien, quien, precisamente, quería resucitar esa dimensión feérica que veía perdida, debido a una falta de coordinación con su «aliado» del otro lado del Atlántico, malograse sus encomiables esfuerzos. *** Poul Anderson nació en Pennsylvania (USA) el 25 de noviembre de 1926, de padres daneses. Tras una estancia en Dinamarca, regresó a Estados Unidos, a Minnesota, acabando en 1948 la licenciatura en Físicas, profesión que no llegaría a ejercer, ya que su carrera de escritor había comenzado un año antes, en 1947, con el cuento Tomorrow Children, escrito en colaboración con F. N. Waldrop, que le es publicado en el número de marzo de la revista Aftounding Science Fiction. Desde entonces hasta el día de hoy, su bibliografía se compone de más de 410 entradas, con obras que van desde la ciencia ficción «dura» a la fantasía heroica, pasando por la fantasía histórica, la space opera, la ciencia ficción de aventuras y el relato policial. El número de galardones que atesora, salvo error u omisión, es de dieciséis, entre ellos el Augusl Derleth de 1975 por la novela. Hrolf Kraki's Saga, que, como antes anunciábamos, aparecerá próximamente en esta colección. Con una producción tan extensa, sería empeño vano querer resumir en unas escasas líneas lo más importante de la misma. Sin embargo, debe apuntarse que, si existe una clave común en la temática de Anderson, estaría formada por el sentido de iniciativa y el saber resistirse a la adversidad. Sus héroes son individualistas, vitales y, al mismo tiempo, melancólicos y románticos, con un punto de anarquismo. A pesar de ser físico deformación y de haber escrito ensayos sobre el trasfondo científico de buena parte de sus novelas, como el interesantísimo The Creation of Imaginary Worlds (1974), Anderson resulta ser un fino analista histórico, partidario de un medievalismo ideal, que nada tendría que envidiar al de un William Morris, y defensor de las civilizaciones arcaicas frente a las evolucionadas, lo que le hace introducir mitos y leyendas clásicos en buena parte de sus obras, como en Queen of Air and Darkness (1971), donde unos extraterrestres suscitan en los invasores humanos los terrores ancestrales a espíritus y duendes, o en Goat Song 11 (1972), en donde el mito de Orfeo se entremezcla con el de una civi- lización gobernada por un ordenador: Orfeo muere, pero ocasiona la muerte de aquella civilización. También da idea de esa revuelta contra las máquinas que siente Anderson su cuento The Longeál Voyage (1960), ambientado en un satélite, donde los humanos que viven en él, que han involucionado a una época preindustrial, destruyen una nave espacial que encuentran, por miedo a que su evolución sea más rápida de lo que consideran conveniente. Lo mismo puede decirse de No Truce with Kings (1963), que narra los intentos que realizan unos extraterrestres para que la humanidad, que ha vuelto a la Edad Media, evolucione, de una manera análoga a la conocida novela de los hermanos Strugatski, convertida recientemente en película, ¡Qué difícil es ser Dios! Pero Anderson invierte el desenlace: los extr aterrestres son derrotados, y esto es lo que les responde uno de sus oponentes: «No pongo en duda que los humanos cometamos errores tremendos. Pero la cuestión es que aprendemos mil maneras distintas de resolver nuesTros problemas. Quizá ahora podamos resolver alguno, ¡pero solos! Aquí, en la Tierra, tendremos el derecho a elegir libremente. Antes prefiero estar muerto que domesticado.» Como una variante, Anderson había presentado pocos años antes su novela High Crusade (1960), que participa del mismo orden de ideas de la última obra comentada, pero en clave disparatadamente burlesca: unos individuos medievales de la Tierra se hacen con la nave de unos extraterrestres y se dedkan a conquistar el universo como si realizasen una cruzada. Mención aparte, fuera de las usuales temáticas de los mundos de fantasía y ciencia ficción, se encuentra su novela A Midsummer Tempest (1973), que viene a desarrollarse en un mundo paralelo donde las ficciones de Shakespeare son reales y el dramaturgo británico resulta ser un famosísimo historiador, y que ofrece un desenlace diferente a la lucha de Cromwell con su soberano Carlos 1, que marcaría (Anderson dixit) el comienzo en tierras anglosajonas del maquinismo y del capitalismo liberal, de raíces puritanas. Dentro de la ciencia ficción, pero con contenidos históricos, se encuentra la serie de cuatro relatos Guardians of Time (1960), a la que vendrían a añadirse otros dos más, recogidos en el volumen Time Patrolman (1983). La space opera, esto es, ciencia ficción ambientada en imperios 12 estelares, más o menos decadentes, está representada por las obras recogidas en dos ciclos: el de Dominic Flandry y el del mercader interplanetario Nicholas Van Eijn. Anderson también escribiría su personal versión de las aventuras de Conan el Bárbaro, en Conan the Rebel (1980), novela que marca el decantarse del autor hacia lo fantástico o histórico (en 1960 había escrito dos novelas históricas The Golden Slave y Rogue Sword) ya que ese mismo año aparece su trilogía El último vikingo, con tres volúmenes: The Golden Horn, Road to the Sea Horse y Sign of the Raven, y su novela The Merman's Children (1979), de suerte que en la actualidad, Poul Anderson disfruta de la fama de su último trabajo, la tetralogía El Rey de Ys, escrita en colaboración con su esposa Karen, cuya primera entrega apareció en 1986. * * * Indiquemos, por último, que en lo referente a la traducción se ha mantenido el espíritu y la época de la novela, al traducir tal cual los kenningar que Anderson, como buen nórdico, emplea profusamente —cuando habla, por ejemplo, de «el águila de sangre» para re ferirse a la sangre que brota de una herida— y que se han utilizado las palabras originales, ya fuera en nórdico antiguo (lo que los anglosajones denominan Old Norse) o en gaélico, del vocabulario empleado. Por ello, el cabo Skaw, del extremo norte de Jutlandia, escrito así, en inglés, figura en la traducción como Skagen, que es como corresponde. El inglés berserk pasa a ser berserkr, cuyo plural es berserkir. Tarnkappe, palabra alemana que Anderson ha debido tomar del Nibelungenlied, ajena, por tanto, al contexto escandinavo o élfico —por desgracia desconozco la lengua de los elfos—, se conviene en «manto de invisibilidad». Eochy, uno de los apelativos del dios irlandés Dagda, escrito así al transcribirlo al inglés, ha sido reescrito como Echu, en gaélico. En cambio, se ha conservado el sentido del original inglés longship, al traducirlo por «navío largo», ya que procede del antiguo nórdico langskip, palabra que designa el barco de guerra, también llamado, poéticamente, drakkar (dragón) y snekkja (serpiente), como recordase Lueien Musset en su espléndida obra sobre las invasiones de los «bárbaros», y que sugirió al noveliza sueco Frans G. 13 Bengtsson el título de una maravillosa saga de vikingos. Y Danelaw, la palabra que hace referencia a la parte de Inglaterra que pasa a manos de los daneses tras el convenio al que llegan con el rey Alfredo el Grande, queda en inglés inalterada, por haberse convertido en palabra de uso corriente en los eludios dedicados al respecto. El mayor problema de la traduc ción lo supuso la palabra inglesa changeling que, utilizada en un contexto folklórico, se refiere al ente que los seres feéricos, de Faerie, dejan a cambio del niño recién nacido que se llevan, por lo que la única traducción posible ha sido, y así aparece en algún momento, la de «niño cambiado», que, por otra parte, no resulta muy descaminada, pues se halla refrendada por una expresión castellana que participa del mismo orden de ideas, y que hace referencia al extrañamiento que sentimos al comprobar que una determinada persona parece distinta, lo que nos mueve al comentario de que dicha persona no es la de siempre, «que nos la han cambiado». En la obra encontrarán arcaísmos y palabras poco usuales. Ello no se debe a una predilección del traductor por lo antiguo, sino al deseo de sugerir el empleo constante que Anderson hace de palabras de origen escandinavo y gaélico, que respecto al inglés supon en el mismo contraste que el que ofrecen las palabras y giros introducidos en estas páginas. Añadiré, finalmente, que el glosario que he preparado, y que figura al comienzo de la novela, podrá ilustrar algunos aspectos mitológicos del texto Si se ha arbitrado esta manera y no la usual de notas a pie de página, ello ha sido debido a que el número de estas notas habría resultado excesivo y fuera del contexto usual de una colección de literatura fantástica; de cualquier modo, puede resultar recomendable la consulta de cualquier manual de mitología céltica y nórdica. Dioses y héroes de la mitología vikinga y Druidas dioses y héroes de la mitología celta, escritos, respectivamente, por Brian Branston y Anne Eoss, dos destacados especialistas, y editados por Anaya con espléndidas ilustraciones a todo color, serán de inestimable ayuda al lector que no se halle al tanto de estas cuestiones, quien, en lo referente al mundo de Faerie, también podrá recrearse con otra obra análoga, incluida en el mismo fondo: Enciclopedia de las cosas que nunca existieron, de Michael Page y Robert Ingpen. El mapa que abre la edición proporciona una visión de conjunto del marco físico de la obra y debe suponerse en él que el mundo real y el de Faerie 14 se superponen, lo que ha obligado a utilizar cara cteres en redonda para los accidentes geográficos reales, y en cursiva para los de Faerie, de suene que no se pierda ningún lector en ellos. Pero si entre la magia de la novela y alguna que otra runa mal pronunciada o encantamiento perdido el lector acabase en Faerie... entonces, ¡que no olvide saludar de mi parte a los Inmortales! Javier MARTÍN LALANDA 15 16 17 GLOSARIO Si no aparece referencia al tipo de mitología, habrá de entenderse que se trata de la germánico-nórdica.) Abismo: También conocido como Ginnungagap, es la discontinuidad de la que nació el mundo. Aegir: Dios del mar. un gigante amigo de los Ases Alfredo el Grande: Rey de Inglaterra (reina desde 871 hasta 899) que consigue independizarse de los daneses, tras vencerlos en la batalla de Ethandun Angus Mac Oc: En la mitología irlandesa, hijo del Dagda, literalmente, «hijo de la juventud», o «dios joven» Es una especie de Eros céltico, de dios del amor, eternamente joven y bello También conocido como Angus Og Armórica: Región del norte de Francia que recibiría el nombre de Bretaña tras la colonización, durante los siglos VI y VII, de los celtas llegados de Britania Asa-Loki: «El Loki de los Ases», en contra posición a Utgard-Loki, «el Loki de Utgard», o del mundo de «fuera», donde habitan los Gigantes del Hielo. Hijo precisamente de un gigante, representa el espíritu del mal, siendo el causante, por sus múltiples intrigas, del Ragnarok u Ocaso de los Dioses Ases: Dioses nórdicos que comparten el poder con otro grupo de dioses, los Vanes, de naturaleza mas pacifica Viven en Asgard, una espléndida ciudad que los Gigantes construyeron por encargo de Odín. En uno de sus edificios se encuentra el Valhalla, la famosísima sala donde los einherjar, los guerreros que han de acompañar a Odín en el Ragnarók, se matan a diario, para después renacer y gustar de todo tipo de delicias. El plural de As, si se escribe en antiguo nórdico, es Aesir. Beowulf: Héroe del homónimo poema anglosajón, compuesto entre los siglos VI y VIII, que realiza todo tipo de hazañas. Aunque ha sido adoptado por 18 los ingleses como un héroe propio, Beowulf era originario de Jutlandia o de Gotaland, al sur de la actual Suecia. Berserkr: Apelativo aplicado a los guerreros que en medio de la batalla caían presa de ira homicida —la berserkirgangr—. Esta especie de «epilepsia activa» se debía a una ingestión de drogas, a una autosugestión, a la posesión por el dios Odín, o al hecho de endosar una piel de animal salvaje, de oso (de donde proviene el apelativo) o de lobo, que comunicaba al guerrero su fuerza. El frenesí del berserkr ya había sido descrito por los historiadores romanos con el término de furor germanicus. El plural de berserkr, en antiguo nórdico, es berserkir. Brahmán: Palabra sánscrita, de género neutro, que en los Upanisads de la India representa el principio creativo del universo, el Alma del Mundo. Brockcn: Pico de las montañas del Harz, en Alemania, donde las brujas se aprestan a celebrar la Noche de Walpurgis, tal y como cuenta Goethe en su Fausto (parte I, escena XXI). Cathay: Nombre medieval de China. Caza Salvaje: Motivo folklórico ampliamente difundido, que habla de muertos acechando a los vivos, dos de cuyos múltiples avalares vienen a ser el medieval de la «Danza de la Muerte» y el posterior de la «Santa Compaña», en Galicia. En el caso que nos ocupa, se trata de Odín conduciendo a los guerreros caídos en la batalla. Cipango: Nombre medieval del Japón. Cromlech: Palabra galesa que designa cualquier tumba de cámara megalítica. Cruachan: Cueva encantada en la llanura de Magh Ai, en la provincia de Connaught, en Irlanda. Cu Chulainn: Semidiós y el héroe más importante de la mitología irlandesa, a quien se atribuyen hazañas sin cuento. Dagda Mor: Según la mitología irlandesa, el padre (Ollathir = padre de todos) de los Tuatha Dé Danann. Es el dios de los contratos. Se le representa con un caldero mágico que siempre provee de alimento, una enorme maza capaz de dar y quitar la vida, y un arpa que suscita el sueño, la risa o la pena. También es conocido como Echu Ollathir y Padre de las Estrellas. 19 Danu: La Madre Tierra que engendra la es tirpe de dioses irlandeses que se llaman a sí mismos «Gente de la diosa Danu», esto es, los Tuatha Dé Danann. También conocida como Dana o Ana. Danclaw: Esa parte de Inglaterra adjudicada a los daneses después de la batalla de Ethandum, comprendida entre el Muro de Adriano, al norte, y la línea que une Chester con Londres, al sur. Dríades: Según la mitología griega, especie de ninfas confinadas en los árboles en los que viven, de suerte que la muerte de éstos ocasiona la suya propia. Druida: Miembro de la casta sacerdotal de los antiguos celtas. Eddas: Recopilación de poemas mitológicos, compuestos entre los siglos IX y XIII. Tiene dos partes: la Edda. en Prosa, recopilada por Snorri Sturlusson (o Edda Menor), y la Edda Poética (o Edda Mayor), anterior. Escaldo: Poeta-guerrero de la antigua Escandinavia. Uno de los más importantes fue el islandés Egil Skallagrimsson (ca. 910-990), quien participó en las invasiones vikingas a Inglaterra-. Familiar: Espíritu infernal que anima ratas o gatos y que sirve de compañía a la bruja después de que ésta haya establecido su pacto con el Diablo. Fenrir: Lobo de tamaño descomunal, engendrado por Loki de la giganta Jötun Angrbodha. Participará en la Ultima Batalla contra los dioses. Fomorianos: Gigantes, personificación de las fuerzas del Caos, que vivían en Irlanda antes de la llegada de los Tuatha De Danann, y a quienes estos últimos vencerían. Freyr: Uno de los dioses Vanes, representantes de la fertilidad; junto con Odín y Thor, formaba la terna de divinidades veneradas en el Gran Templo de Uppsala, en los últimos tiempos del paganismo nórdico. Gardharíki: Literalmente, «Reino de las Ciudades», apelativo aplicado por los vikingos a Rusia. Garm: Perro monstruoso que vigila la entrada al mundo de los muertos o Hel, y que tiene características similares a las de Fenrir. Gente Pequeña, la: Habitantes del reino de Faerie de pequeño tamaño, que gastan bromas a quienes los ven. También conocidos como la Buena Gente o el Pueblo Pequeño. 20 Gloriana: La Reina de las Hadas del poema homónimo de Edmund Spenser (1522-1599), The Patrie Quemen. Gnomos: Según la sistematización de Paracelso, seres elementales que viven en el interior de la tierra. Grondel: Monstruo muerto por Beowulf, que aterrorizaba a la corte de Hrotgar, rey de los daneses. A juzgar por su descripción el monstruo del film de Jack Arnold, La mujer y el monstruo, y el del cómic La cosa del pantano. Gul: Necrófago que vive en cementerios y lugares en ruinas. Es propio del folklore árabes. Gulban Glass: Uno de los Cinco Guardianes del Ulster, de la estirpe de los Tuatha Dé Danann, que en Irlanda no se fueron al mundo subterráneo y se quedaron sobre la superficie para incitar a los milesios a combatir. Heimskringla: Parte de la Edda de Snorri, y que comienza con la Ynglingasaga, que trata de los antiguos reyes de Uppsala, de los que da una lista que abarca los siglos IX, X y XI, con una corta noticia histórica y el lugar en que fueron enterrados. Hel: Hija de Loki y reina del mundo de los muertos. Jörmungandr: También conocida como Midgards orm, es la serpiente marina que ciñe con sus anillos el mundo. Símbolo del infinito, o del Ouroboros, la serpiente que se muerde la cola, es hija de Loki y de la giganta Angrbodha. Thor y esta serpiente se matarán mutuamente en la Batalla Final. Jötunheim: Patria de los Gigantes del Hielo o Jötun. Kami: Espíritu de la religión shintoísta japonesa asociado a los distintos accidentes geográficos de la naturaleza: fuentes, ríos, árboles, montañas... Katana: Espada de un filo, ampliamente utilizada en Japón. Kilt: La llamada «falda escocesa», usada por los varones. Kraken: Monstruo mítico del Mar del Norte, que arrastraba los navíos a las profundidades, tras reventar su casco con su poderoso abrazo, de donde procedía su nombre. Posiblemente se tratara de alguna especie de cefalópodo colosal. Lai: Cualquier composición poética antigua que se recitaba, o cantaba, acompañada de un instrumento musical, generalmente el arpa. 21 Leprechaun: Típico duende de Irlanda, al que se representa vestido de verde, con sombrero rojo y zapatos de hebilla. Licántropo: Hombre que se transforma en lobo. Por extensión se aplica a todo aquel capaz de adoptar la forma de cualquier otro animal. Lugh Brazo Largo: Dios pancéltico de la guerra y de la magia. Identificado con el Sol, su nombre hace referencia a lo lejos que llegan los rayos del astro. Los irlandeses le dieron el epíteto de Samildanacri, «el que puede hacer cualquier cosa». Su animal emblemático es el cuervo. Mac Cuill: Este dios de la mitología irlandesa, junto con los dos que le siguen en esta lista, forman una terna que viene a ser una duplicación, en versión masculina, de la Triple Diosa Macha. En la sistematización dumezihana, Mac Cuill encarna la segunda función, la guerrera. Mac Cecht: Encarna la tercera función, la relacionada con la alimentación y la reproducción. Mac Grcinc: Hijo del Sol, encarna la primera función, la regia y sacerdotal. Manannán Mac Lir: Dios de la mitología irlandesa encargado de dispensar el buen o mal tiempo en el mar. Es el soberano de Tir n'an Og. Martillo, Signo del: Durante algún tiempo, los escandinavos confundieron adrede, en un peculiar sincretismo, la cruz de Cristo con el martillo de Thor, ya que ambos símbolos religiosos tenían una apariencia muy parecida. Menhir: Monumento megalítico que viene a ser una gran piedra hincada en el suelo. Midgard: Mundo del Medio, el poblado por los hombres. Milesios: Pueblo mítico (los hijos de Mil Espáne) que llega a Irlanda después de los Tuatha Dé Danann y que ocupa la superficie de la isla, mientras que el subsuelo queda para los Hijos de Danu. Ninfas: Divinidades de la naturaleza en la mitología griega, asociadas al principio húmedo de la vida. Se las encuentra en fuentes, montañas y bosques. Nornas: Divinidades que tejen los destinos de los seres vivos. Son análogas a las Moiras de los griegos y a las Tria Fata de los romanos. 22 Nueve Mundos: Las nueve regiones que result an de dividir los tres planos, tierra, cielo y subsuelo, en otras tres regiones, atravesadas todas ellas por el fresno Yggdrasil. Odín: El dios supremo del panteón nórdico, patrón de la magia, de la poesía y de la guerra. Tuerto (perdió uno de sus ojos al conseguir la sabiduría) y con una larga barba gris, recorre el mundo disfrazado de vagabundo, montado en su caballo de ocho patas Sleipnir, y empuñando la lanza hecha de la madera de Yggdrasil. Su animal emblemático, al igual que sucede con Lugh, es el cuervo. Pan: Dios de la antigua Grecia, personificación de las fuerzas de la naturaleza selvática, representado como un híbrido de hombre y cabra, o sea un fauno, ya que Fauno viene a ser la adaptación que los romanos hacen de este dios al introducirlo en su propio panteón. Al aparecerse a los hombres les inducía ese tipo de terror que se ha dado en llamar «pánico». Pueblo Antiguo: Posiblemente, el que construyera los megalitos. Ran: Esposa de Aegir, a quien dio nueve hijas, especie de sirenas, que atraen a los navegantes a su perdición. Runa: Cada una de las letras de los distintos alfabetos rúnicos utilizados por los escandinavos para la escritura y para fines mágicos. Sabbath Negro: Cónclave o reunión de brujas, celebrado durante la noche de Walpurgis, la madrugada del 1.° de mayo. Samita: Tejido muy preciado con el que en la Edad Media se fabricaban vestidos. Segunda Vísta: Facultad propia de la gente de las regiones célticas que permite vislumbrar acontecimientos futuros. Sídh (Síth o Síde): Palabra que tiene el significado de «reposo» y «calma» ( de la raíz *sed, como en el gaélico Sluagh Síth: «gente que vive en paz»), y que designa tanto la condición de imperturbabilidad como al pueblo feérico que vive en las colinas huecas o túmulos de Irlanda, supuestamente encantados. Este nombre comunicó su significado a las colinas y, más tarde, a los Tuatha Dé Danann que se fueron a vivir a ellas. 23 Skirnir: El mensajero de los dioses. En el Skirnirsmal, que narra sus aventuras, Skirnir convence a Gerd, una joven que vive en Jötunheim, de que acepte los avances amorosos de Freyr, uno de los dioses Vanes, quien le regalará su espada como premio a su buen hacer. Surt: Gigante del Fuego de las regiones situadas al sur, punto cardinal con el que viene a identificarse, que partic ipará en la Batalla Final contra los dioses de Asgard. Taniál: Heredero del trono en Escocia e Irlanda. Thor: El Hércules nórdico, aunque con la categoría de dios. Conduce un carro tirado por dos cabras, maneja el famoso martillo Mjolnir, capaz de abatir a los gigantes, y viste un cinturón, que duplica sus fuerzas, y guantes de hierro, cuando empuña el martillo. Son famosas sus correrías y sus excesos. Era el dios más popular entre los agricultores escandinavos, porque su martillo desencadenaba el rayo y la lluvia. Equivalente al Donar de los germanos. Tir n'an Og: Tierra de la Eterna Juventud, enclave insular de los Tuatha Dé Danann. Tuatha Dé Danann: Literalmente, «Gente de la diosa Danu», uno de los pueblos míticos que invaden Irlanda. Al ser vencidos por los milesios se refugian bajo los monumentos megalíticos de aquella tierra y pasan a denominarse Sídh. Tyr: El dios de la guerra. Se le representaba con la runa que corresponde a la T, inicial de su nombre, y que simboliza una lanza. Es manco, pues perdió la mano derecha en las fauces de Fenrir al ponerla como prenda de una estratagema que consiguió encadenar al feroz animal. Utgard-Loki: El gigante que reina en Utgard. Valkirias: Hijas de Odín que recogen a los muertos caídos en la batalla para nutrir con ellos las filas de los einberjar de su padre. Vanes: Dioses de la fertilidad: Freyr, Freyja y Niord. El plural de Van, en nórdico antiguo, es Vanir. Vigrid: El lugar donde tendrá lugar la batalla final, dando lugar al Ragnarók, el Ocaso de los Dioses. Vikingo: En sus orígenes, palabra despectiva, derivada de vik, «bahía», que daba a entender que los vikingos no eran gente ducha en la navegación, 24 sino en recorrer las costas y fondear en sus bahías y, por extensión, en saquear. Posteriormente, el oficio de vikingo —practicado durante el verano— vendrá a complementar la economía de gente dedicada a la agricultura y a la ganadería. Vísta Encantada: Ese tipo de vista que permite trascender la realidad y vislumbrar lo oculto. Weregild: Indemnización pagada a la víctima de un daño, o a su familia y allegados, según el derecho germánico. Wieland: Antepasado de todos los elfos, célebre por su destreza en la forjan. Wyrd: Principio filosófico o divinidad abstracta, de género neutro, entre los germanos, que viene a simbolizar el Destino, o sea, destino revestido de cierto contenido de sacralidad. En los últimos tiempos del paganismo, los vikingos se ufanarían de no servir a otro dios que a Wyrd. Wyvern: Especie de dragón alado del mundo céltico. Posee la misma raíz que el castellano «víbora». Yggdrasil: Eje del mundo, representado por un fresno gigantesco. Ymn: Espíritu del folklore árabe, tan capaz de ayudar al hombre como de aterrorizarlo. Ys: Ciudad mítica de la Armórica, situada en el mar, como si fuera una especie de isla. Yule: Nombre entre los escandinavos del solsticio de invierno y, por extensión, de la fiesta con que se celebra, ya que supone la llegada del sol y la derrota de las tinieblas. 25 CAPITULO 1 rase una vez un hombre llamado Orm el Fuerte, hijo de Ketil Asmundsson, un rico terrateniente del norte de Jutlandia. La familia de Ketil se había asentado desde siempre en aquella tierra, al menos hasta donde alcanzaba la memoria de los hombres, y muchos eran los acres que poseía. La esposa de Ketil se llamaba Asgard y era hija ilegítima de Ragnar Calzas de Pelo. Por su parte, Orm descendía de gente honrada, pero como aún vivían sus cuatro hermanos mayores, no pensaba que a la muerte de su padre le correspondiese una parte importante de la herencia. Orm era un vagabundo de los mares y pasaba la mayor parte de los veranos ejerciendo de vikingo. Cuando aún era joven, murió Ketil. El hermano mayor, Asmund, se encargó de dirigir la granja. Y así marcharon las cosas hasta que Orm, en su vigésimo invierno, se acercó a él y le dijo: —Ya llevas muchos años apoltronado aquí, en Himmerland, disfrutando de lo que es nuestro. Queremos una parte. Pero si nos repartimos las tierras entre los cinco, sin hablar de las dotes que corresponden a nuestras hermanas, nos veremos convertidos en pequeños propietarios y nadie nos recordará después de muertos. —Es verdad —le contestó Asmund—. Lo mejor es seguir trabajando juntos. —No quiero ser el último de la cola —replicó Orm—, por eso te hago el siguiente ofrecimiento. Dame tres barcos debidamente pertrechados, con las suficientes provisiones y armas que vayan a necesitar los que vengan conmigo, y me buscaré mi propia tierra, renunciando a todos mis derechos a la herencia. 26 Al oír aquellas palabras, Asmund se sintió complacido y mucho más al enterarse de que dos de sus hermanos se irían con Orm. Antes de la primavera ya había equipado los navíos largos, que había conseguido sin tardanza, y había hablado con muchos hombres de la vecindad, los más jóvenes y pobres, que se sentirían encantados de viajar al Oeste. Al primer augurio inconfundible de buen tiempo, aunque las aguas siguiesen encrespadas, Orm condujo sus naves fuera del Limfjord. Y aquélla fue la última vez que Asmund le vio. Las tripulaciones remaron con energía, poniendo rumbo hacia Septentrión, hasta que a su izquierda quedaron los fondeaderos y bosques profundos, cubiertos por los despejados cielos de Himmerland. Al doblar el cabo Skagen encontraron viento favorable, por lo que izaron las velas. Con los codastes apuntando a su tierra natal, colocaron en las respectivas proas las cabezas de dragón. El viento silbaba entre las jarcias, las rachas de viento hacían espumear el mar y las gaviotas gañían, mientras volaban alrededor de los penoles. Contento de contemplar aquel espectáculo, Orm improvisó un poema: Caballos de blancas crines (¡escuchad cómo relinchan!), grises y de enjutos flancos, galopan hacia Poniente. Enfurecidos por los invernales vientos, resoplan y embisten, mientras transportan la carga que es mía. Como habían zarpado antes de lo acostumbrado, llegaron a Inglaterra antes que los demás vikingos, consiguiendo de tal suerte un rico botín. Cuando la estación estaba llegando a su término, Orm se dirigió a Irlanda. Ya no abandonaría las islas occidentales, sino que emplearía el verano para conseguir botín, reservando parte del mismo para venderlo durante el invierno y comprar más barcos. Pero, con el tiempo, sintió el deseo de tener una casa propia. Unió su pequeña flota a la enorme de Guthorm, a quien los ingleses llamaban Guthrum, 27 y muchas fueron sus ganancias al seguir por mar y tierra a aquel señor, aunque sólo comparables a sus pérdidas el día en que el rey Alfredo los venció en Ethandun. Orm y varios de sus hombres se encontraban entre los que consiguieron abrirse camino en la batalla perdida y escapar. No tardó mucho en enterarse de que Guthorm y el resto de los daneses que fueron rodeados habían salvado la vida a cambio de recibir el bautismo. Orm vio claramente que aquella medida podría suponer la paz entre su gente y la de Alfredo y que le impediría tomar nada de Inglaterra, en contra de su deseo. Así pues, se dirigió hacia lo que más tarde los ingleses llamarían el Danelaw, en busca de un hogar. Encontró un terreno bien orientado, de aspecto agradable y cubierto de vegetación, abierto a una pequeña bahía que ofrecía cierto abrigo a sus barcos. El inglés que lo ocupaba, un hombre rico y con cierto poder, no quiso vendérselo. Pero Orm regresó por la noche, rodeó la casa con sus hombres y la incendió. El propietario, sus hermanos y la mayor parte de sus allegados murieron. Se dice que la madre de aquel hombre, que era bruja, se salvó — porque los asaltantes dejaron salir a las mujeres, niños y siervos que quisieran irse— y lanzó una maldición a Orm: su primogénito se criaría lejos del mundo de los hombres, y él mismo daría cobijo a un lobo que, llegado el momento, le mataría. Con tantos daneses rondando y viviendo por los alrededores, los parientes supervivientes del inglés no se atrevieron a hacer nada y aceptaron el weregild y el precio de la propiedad que Orm les impuso, por lo que ésta pasó legalmente a ser suya. Entonces construyó una nueva casa, mayor que la anterior, y otros edificios, y gracias a su oro, a sus seguidores y a la fama que tenía, no tardó en ser reconocido como un gran jefe. Cuando ya llevaba un año asentado en aquella tierra, pensó que sería bueno tomar mujer. Cabalgó con muchos guerreros hasta los dominios de un conde inglés, Athelstane, y le pidió la mano de su hija Aelfrida, de quien se decía que era la doncella más hermosa de todo el reino. Athelstane dudó y tartamudeó, mientras Aelfrida se atrevía a decirle a Orm en la cara: —Jamás me casaré con un perro pagano, ni siquiera cuando estuviese en mi mano hacerlo. Puedes llevarme por la fuerza, pero poca alegría sacarás 28 de ello... ¡Te lo juro! Aelfrida era delgada y grácil, de suaves cabellos castaño-rojizos y brillantes ojos grises; mientras que Or m era un hombretón de piel curtida y cabellera casi blanca, por tantos años de sol y mar. Pero como sentía que, en cierto modo, ella era la más fuerte, después de pensárselo un momento, dijo: —Ahora que estoy en una tierra donde la gente adora al Cristo blanco, quizá me convendría hacer la paz con él y con los suyos. A decir verdad, es lo que han hecho la mayoría de los daneses. Me bautizaré si te casas conmigo, Aelfrida. —¡Ése no es motivo suficiente! —exclamó la joven. —Pero piensa —dijo astutamente Orm— que, si no te casas conmigo, yo no seré bautizado, y entonces, si hemos de creer a los sacerdotes, mi alma estará condenada —y susurró a Athelstane—: Además, incendiaré esta casa y te arrojaré desde lo alto de los acantilados. —Sí, hija, no es cuestión de perder un alma —dijo Athelstane, sin dudarlo. Aelfrida no se resistió durante mucho tiempo, pues, a pesar de su fuerte personalidad, Orm no era feo ni zafio; además, a la casa de Athelstane le venía bien un aliado tan rico y poderoso. Así pues, Orm fue bautizado y poco después se casó con Aelfrida y se la lle vó a su casa. Vivieron juntos con el suficiente contento, aunque no siempre en paz No se veía ninguna iglesia por las cercanías, ya que los vikingos habían quemado las que antaño hubiera. Por tanto, ya que así lo deseaba Aelfrida, Orm hizo que un sacerdote fuese a su casa, y para quedar libre de todos sus pecados, decidió que construiría para él una nueva iglesia. Pero, como era hombre prudente que no deseaba ofender a ningún poder celestial, continuó con sus ofrendas a Thor a mediados del invierno, y a Freyr en primavera, para conseguir paz y cosechas abundantes; así como a Odín y a Aegir para tener suerte en la mar. Durante aquel invierno, Orm y el sacerdote no dejaron de discutir por aquel motivo, hasta el punto de que en primavera, cuando a Aelfrida ya le faltaba muy poco para dar a luz, Orm perdió los estribos y echó a patadas al sacerdote, diciéndole que no volviera jamás. Aelfrida se lo reprochó duramente, hasta que Orm no resistió más y dijo, entre gritos, que ya estaba harto de tanto 29 parloteo mujeril y que se iba. Y no mentía, pues, acto seguido, zarpó con su flota antes de lo que había pensado y pasó el verano saqueando las costas de Escocia e Irlanda. Cuando apenas habían desaparecido las naves del horizonte, Aelfrida se reclinó en su lecho y dio a luz un niño grande y espléndido, al que, según el deseo de Orm, llamó Valgard, va que era un nombre utilizado desde siempre en su familia. Pero, como ya no había sacerdote que pudiese bautizarle, Aelfrida envió un siervo a la iglesia más cercana, que estaba a tres días de viaje, para que volviese con uno. Mientras tanto, como se sentía feliz y orgullosa de aquel hijo, se puso a cantarle la misma nana que su madre le había cantado a ella: ¡Ea, ea, ea, mi pajarito, de todos los pájaros el más bonito! Oye cómo balan los borreguitos. Ahora que el Sol ya está acostadito Llega la hora de dormir un poquito. ¡Ea, ea, ea, mi cariñito, duerme en mi regazo como un tronquito! La estrella vespertina, dando pasitos, ondea por la verde colina su sombrerito. Llega la hora de dormir un poquito. ¡Ea, ea, ea, mi pequeñito, tú y yo somos como los benditos! El buen Dios, María y también su Hijito velan por ti, dejando el camino expedito. Llega la hora de dormir un poquito. 30 CAPITULO 2 mric, Conde de los Elfos, cabalgaba de noche para ver qué ocurría en el mundo de los hombres. Era una noche fresca de primavera, casi de luna llena, con la escarcha reluciendo entre la hierba y las estrellas tan discantes y br illantes como en invierno. La noche era muy tranquila, excepto por los suspiros del viento entre las ramas ya cargadas de brotes, y el mundo era un remolino de sombras y de fría luz blanca. Los cascos del caballo de Imric estaban forjados con una aleación de plata, que suscitaba un sonido como de campanas en el lugar donde golpeaban. Se adentró en la floresta. Aunque la noche aún era más densa entre los árboles, pudo distinguir a lo lejos un débil resplandor rojizo. Cuando se acercó a él, vio que era el de un fuego, brillando a través de las rendijas de una choza de adobes y zarzas que se encontraba bajo una gran encina nudosa, que a Imric le trajo a la memoria una imagen de druidas cortando muérdago. Y, como podía sentir que en ella vivía una bruja, desmontó y llamó a la puerta. Una mujer que parecia tan vieja y encorvada como la encina acudió a abrirle y le vio allí plantado, con la desmayada luna que le caía sobre el yelmo y la cota de malla; y su caballo, del mism o color que la niebla pastando en la escarchada hierba que le rodeaba. —Buenas tardes, madre —dijo Imric. —Ninguno de vosotros, gente élfica, puede llamarme madre, ya que he dado a luz hijos muy altos, pero de hombre —refunfuñó la bruja, mientras le invitaba a entrar y se apresuraba a servirle un cuerno de cerveza. Los agricultores de los alrededores la proveían de alimentos y bebida 31 como pago de la poca magia que podía hacer para ellos. Si antes Imric había tenido que doblarse, literalmente en dos, para entrar en la choza, en aquel momento, para sentarse en la única banqueta que estaba a la vista, no tuvo más remedio que aligerarla de una gran confusión de huesos y demás desperdicios que la cubrían. Miró a la bruja con los extraños ojos de mandorla de los elfos, de un anublado color azul, sin blanco ni pupila. En los ojos de Imric relampagueaban pequeños destellos, como de luz de luna, que se recortaban contra las sombras del saber antiguo, ya que aquella tierra le conocía desde hacía mucho tiempo. Pero siempre había conservado un aspecto juvenil, con la frente amplia y los pómulos altos, la barbilla apuntada y la nariz recta y fina, signo inconfundible de los elfos de alta cuna. Su flotante cabellera de tonos plata y oro, más fina que la seda de la araña, cayéndole por debajo del yelmo adornado con cuernos, se derramaba sobre sus hombros, cubiertos con un manto rojo. —No ha sido frecuente, en estas últimas generaciones, que los elfos se mezclaran en las cosas de los hombres —dijo la bruja. —Es cierto, hemos estado demasiado ocupados en guerrear contra los trolls — contestó Imric, con una voz que era como el lejano susurro del viento entre los árboles—. Pero ahora que nos hemos concedido una tregua, tengo curiosidad por saber qué ha ocurrido durante los últimos cien años. —Muchas cosas, aunque pocas que puedan llamarse buenas —se apresuró a decir la mujer—. Los daneses llegaron de allende los mares, matando, saqueando y quemando, y se apropiaron de buena parte del este de Inglaterra y de otras regiones. —No me parece una cosa tan grave —dijo Imric, retorciéndose el bigote—. Antes que ellos, los anglos y los sajones hicieron lo mismo, y antes, los pictos y los escotos, y todavía antes los romanos, y mucho antes, los britanos y los goidelos y mucho, mucho an tes... Pero la lista es larguísima y no creo que se acabe con estos daneses. Yo, que he llevado esta tierra al día, casi desde que fue creada, no veo en ello nada malo porque me ayuda a pasar el rato. Me agradaría mucho echar un vistazo a los recién llegados. —Entonces, no necesitas cabalgar mucho —puntualizó la bruja—, pues Orm el Fuerte vive en la costa, que dista de aquí una noche, o menos, a 32 caballo, de los que usan los hombres. —Entonces, un paseo de nada para mi garañón. Me voy. — ¡Detente..., detente, elfo! Durante un momento, la bruja siguió sentada en su jergón, murmurando para sí, mientras sus ojos reflejaban la luz que provenía del pequeño fuego del hogar, de suerte que entre el humo y las sombras podían verse dos destellos rojizos. Después, súbitamente, esbozó una mueca de contento y exclamó: —¡Sí, cabalga, elfo, cabalga hasta la casa de Orm, que da al mar! Él se ha ido a hacer una incursión, pero su mujer te acogerá gustosa. Acaba de tener un hijo, que aún no ha tenido tiempo de bautizar. Al oír aquellas palabras, Imric echó hacia delante sus largas y puntiagudas orejas. —¿Estás diciendo la verdad, bruja? —preguntó, en voz baja y átona. —Sí, te lo juro por Satanás. Tengo mil maneras de saber lo que sucede en aquella maldita casa —la anciana se acunó hacia delante y hacia atrás, envolviéndose en sus harapos, cerca de las tibias brasas. Las sombras se perseguían unas a otras a lo largo de las paredes, inmensas y deformes—. Pero ve a observarlo por ti mismo. —No me agrada llevarme al hijo de un jefe danés. Podría estar bajo la protección de los Ases. —No. Orm es cristiano, aunque no practicante, y su hijo no ha sido consagrado hasta el momento a ningún dios. —Es peligroso que me mientas! -dijo Imric. —Yo no tengo nada que perder —respondió la bruja—. Orm quemo a mis hijos dentro de su casa, por lo que mi sangre morirá conmigo. No temo a dioses ni a demonios, ni tampoco a elfos, trolls u hombres. Pero digo la verdad. —Echare un vistazo —fue el comentario de Imric, y se levantó. Las mallas de su cota tintinearon. Se echó por encima su gran manto rojo, que ondeó unos instantes, salió de la choza y montó en su blanco garañón. Como una ráfaga de viento y un destello de luna, salió del bosque y atravesó los campos. A su alrededor se extendían profusamente la tierra, los umbríos árboles, las imponentes colinas, los pastos salpicados de blanco, dormidos bajo la luna. Aquí y allá se veía alguna que otra granja, agazapada en la oscuridad bajo el vasto cielo tachonado de estrellas. Había presencias 33 extrañas moviéndose en la noche, pero no se trataba de hombres... Imric distinguió el aullido de un lobo, el resplandor verde de los ojos de un gato montes, el roce de minúsculas zarpas entre las raíces de robles y encinas. Al advertir que el Conde de los Elfos pasaba a su lado, se ocultaron en lo más profundo de la oscuridad. Imric no tardó mucho en llegar a los dominios de Orm. Los graneros, cobertizos y demás construcciones menores estaban construidos con troncos apenas desbastados, que también cubrían tres de las cuatro paredes de una casa, mayor que las demás, que surgía de un terreno pavimentado de piedra. En la cuarta, el porche se terminaba en un frontón, en donde se habían esculpido unos dragones que servían de protección contra las estrellas que pudieran caerse del cielo. Imric buscó la pequeña casa de la dueña de todo aquello. Los perros le habían olfateado y gruñían, erizando su pelaje. Pero antes de que pudiesen ladrar, volvió hacia ellos su terrible mirada, que parecía la de un ciego, y les hizo una seña. Los perros se alejaron, arrastrándose a duras penas. Como el viento que vagabundea de noche, se acercó a la casita. Gracias a sus artes mágicas, abrió los postigos de una ventana y miró a su interior. La luz de la luna cayó oblicuamente sobre una cama, inundando con sus tonos plateados a Aelfrida, cuyo rostro se hallaba cubierto por la nube que formaba su cabello suelto. Pero Imric sólo tenía ojos para el niño recién nacido que ella mantenía a su lado. El Conde de los Elfos rió para sus adentros, tras la impenetrable máscara de su rostro. Cerró los postigos y montó a caballo, dirigiéndose hacia Septentrión. Aelfrida se movió, se despertó, y sintió a su pequeño. Tenía los ojos anublados de visiones inquietantes. 34 35 CAPITULO 3 or aquellos días, la gente de Faerie, la tierra encantada, aún vivía a nuestro lado, pero ya flotaba en sus moradas una atmósfera de irrealidad, como si se movieran entre el mundo de los mortales y otro que no conocemos; por otra parte, simples lugares que en un principio no parecían ser más que simples colinas en la lejanía, o lagos o florestas, relucían más tarde con esplendor arcano. Quizá así se explicara que aquellas tierras altas situadas hacia Septentrión, conocidas como Colinas de los Elfos, fueran evitadas por los hombres. Imric cabalgó hacia Elfheugh, que para él no era un tolmo, sino un imponente castillo de altos chapiteles, puertas de bronce y patios de mármol; en sus corredores y salas podían vers e preciosísimos tapices, mágicamente tejidos, de motivos cambiantes, y engastados con grandes gemas resplandecientes. A la luz de la luna, sus moradores bailaban en el césped que se extendía alrededor de la muralla. Imric penetró en ella, a través de la puerta norte. Los cascos de su caballo resonaron como si golpeasen sobre hueco, mientras los enanos de la servidumbre se dirigían corriendo a su encuentro. Descabalgó y se apresuró a entrar en el torreón. La luz de las innumerables velas producía un juego de colores cambiante y engañoso sobre los dorados mosaicos, engastados con joyas. La música de arpas ondulantes y de gaitas y flautas vehementes llenaba las escancias, sonando como el susurro de los arroyuelos en la montaña. Los motivos de alfombras y tapices se movían lentamente, como si estuviesen vivos. Incluso las paredes y el pavimento, y las 36 arcadas del techo, perdiéndose en el azul crepúsculo de las alturas, tenían algo de la cambiante mutabilidad de la plata viva; jamás eran iguales, aunque nadie pudiese decir en qué consistían exactamente aquellos cambios. Imric bajó por unas escaleras. Su cota de malla tintineaba en aquel silencio. De repente, todo fueron tinieblas a su alrededor, con excepción de la tímida luz de una antorcha, y el aire de las profundidades de la tierra impregnó de frialdad sus pulmones. De vez en cuando, un sonido metálico o un gemido resonaban entre aquellos corredores de factura tosca que rezumaban humedad. Imric no les prestó atención, pues, como todos los elfos, se movía a sus anchas en la oscuridad, tan ágil y silencioso como un gato, mientras seguía bajando hacia las mazmorras. Finalmente, se detuvo ante una puerta de madera de encina, reforzada con planchas de bronce, llena de verdín y oscurecida por los años, pues las llaves que abrían sus tres grandes cerraduras sólo obraban en poder de Imri c. Para abrirlas, manipuló en ellas, mientras murmuraba ciertas palabras, y em pujó la puerta hacia dentro, que se abrió con un gemido, ya que habían pasado trescientos años desde que entrara en ella por última vez Una hembra de troll estaba sentada en el suelo de la celda. Sólo llevaba encima una cadena de bronce, suficientemente gruesa para poder colgar de ella el ancla de un barco, que, terminándose en su cuello, iba a dar a la pared. La luz de la antorcha situada encima de la puerta caía oblicuamente sobre su enorme y rechoncha forma, tremendamente musculosa. Carecía de cabello, y su piel, verde, se le insinuaba sobre los huesos. Mientras volvía hacia Imric su repulsivo rostro, hizo una mueca que dejó al descubierto su dentadura lobuna. Pero sus ojos estaban vacíos, como si fueran dos abismos de negrura capaces de ahogar a cualquier alma que cayera en ellos. Imric la había encerrado hacía novecientos años y eso la había vuelto loca. El Conde de los Elfos la miró, aunque no a los ojos. Dijo en voz muy baja: —Tenemos que engendrar un niño para cambiarlo por otro, Gora. La voz de la hembra de troll sonó como un trueno que saliera lentamente de las entrañas de la tierra. — ¡Jo, jo! —dijo—. Ya estás de vuelta. Sé bien venido, quienquiera que seas, llegado de la noche y del caos. ¡Ah! ¿Es que nadie borrará jamás esa 37 sonrisa de la faz del cosmos? —Date prisa —dijo Imric—. Tenemos que terminarlo antes de que sea de día. —Apresúrate, apresúrate, como las hojas otoñales en el lluvioso viento, o como la nieve cayendo del cielo, o como la vida corriendo hacia la muerte, o como los dioses caminando hacia el olvido —la enloquecida voz de la hembra de troll resonó en las lóbregas soledades—. Todas las cosas no son más que cenizas y polvo, arrastradas por un viento insensato, y sólo los locos pueden tener un atisbo de la música de las esferas. ¡Ah, el gallo rojo en el estercolero! Imric tomó una fusta de la pared y la azotó con ella. Gora se agachó y así se quedó. Rápidamente, ya que no le agradaba el resbaladizo y frío contacto de aquella piel, hizo lo que debía. Acto seguido, Imric dio nueve vueltas seguidas alrededor de ella, en sentido contrario a las agujas del reloj, entonando una canción que ninguna garganta humana habría sido capaz de modular. Mientras cantaba, la hembra de troll temblaba, hinchándose y quejándose de dolor, de manera que cuando hubo completado la novena vuelta, lanzó un grito tan penetrante que atronó los oídos de Imric y dio a luz un niño. Ningún ojo humano habría podido distinguirlo del hijo del jefe danés Orm, salvo por sus aullidos de ira y porque mordía a su madre. Imric anudó el cordón umbilical y cogió a la criatura entre sus brazos, con lo que ésta se tranquilizó. —El mundo es como la carne que se pudre en una calavera —murmuró Gora. Hizo tintinear la cadena que la mantenía prisionera y retrocedió, temblando—. El nacimiento no es más que los gusanos brotando de la calavera. Los dientes no tardan mucho en encontrarse al aire, ya sin labios, ni los cuervos en dejar vacías las cuencas de los ojos. En seguida, el viento comenzará a soplar por las oquedades de los huesos —aulló cuando Imric cerró la puerta—. Me espera, me espera en la colina, donde la bruma se agita, lacerada. Lleva esperándome novecientos años. El gallo negro canta... Imric volvió a repetir, pero a la inversa, la operación que le había permitido entrar y subió apresuradamente por las escaleras. Engendrar hijos de aquella suerte, para cambiarlos después por aquellos de los que eran una imitación, no le proporcionaba ningún placer, pero la ocasión de hacerse con un niño humano era tan rara que no podía desaprovecharla. 38 Cuando salió al patio de armas vio que se avecinaba mal tiempo. Una horda de nubes cruzaba el cielo, mientras la luna parecía sustraerse a su negrura. Por Oriente, como una montaña, con relampagueantes runas que la recorrían, una tormenta se erguía en el horizonte. El viento vociferaba y aullaba. Imric montó en su caballo y lo espoleó, dirigiéndose hacia el Mediodía. Volaron sobre despeñaderos, colinas y valles, y pasaron entre los árboles que gemían bajo el ventarrón. La luna arrojaba sobre el mundo sus convulsos resplandores blancos, de suerte que Imric parecía un fantasma, rodeado de tanto portento. Cabalgaba con el manto ondeando alrededor de él como las alas de un murciélago. La luz de la luna caía sobre su malla y sus ojos. Mientras galopaba a lo largo de la zona más baja y plana del Danelaw, las olas morían a sus pies, salpicándole en las mejillas. De vez en cuando, el resplandor de un relámpago revelaba la vastedad de aquellas inquietas aguas. El trueno resonaba aún más estrepitosamente en la oscuridad que le seguía, tan estruendoso como el rechinar de grandes ruedas que cruzaran los cielos. Imric azuzó su caballo, lanzándolo a una carrera aún más salvaje. No le apetecía en absoluto encontrarse con Thor en mitad de la noche. Cuando llegó a los dominios de Orm, volvió a abrir la ventana de Aelfrida. Ella estaba despierta y mantenía a su hijo junto a su seno, susurrándole palabras de cariño. El viento agitó sus cabellos alrededor de su rostro, cegándola. Le pareció que alguien había abierto los postigos. El relámpago resultó cegador. Y el trueno que le siguió fue como un martillazo sobre una fr agua. Aelfrida sintió que el pequeño se le escapaba de los brazos. Intentó cogerlo y, de nuevo, sintió su dulce peso, como si jamás le hubiese faltado. «Gracias a Dios» —musitó—. «Había dejado de sentirte, pero ya te tengo de nuevo.» Riéndose con todas sus fuerzas, Imric cabalgó de regreso a su tierra. De improviso, oyó que al eco de su risa venía a sumarse un sonido muy diferente, por lo que tiró de las riendas, con el corazón helado. Un desgarrón aislado que apareció en las nubes dejó caer un rayo de luna sobre la figura montada a caballo que se atravesaba en el camino del elfo, de suerte que, montado en su 39 veloz corcel, Imric pudo tener un atisbo del imponente caballo de ocho patas, que corría más veloz que el viento, y de su jinete, de larga barba gris y rostro tapado por su sombrero. El rayo de luna brilló en la punta de su lanza y en su único ojo. —¡Ea, adelante...! —así animaba a su cortejo de guerreros muertos y de sabuesos que aullaban, a los que llamaba con su cuerno de caza; el sonido que hacían los cascos de su caballo era como el golpeteo del granizo en el tejado. Instantes después, la horda ya se había ido y la lluvia volvía a caer, furiosa, sobre el mundo. Imric apretó los labios. La Caza Salvaje no era de buen augurio para quienes la veían, por lo que no pensó que el Cazador Tuerto hubiese pasado tan cerca de él por simple casualidad ... Tenía que volver a su casa. A su alrededor hervían los relámpagos, y a Thor podía ocurrírsele descargar su martillo contra cualquiera que se encontra se en campo abierto. Así pues, Imric, cogiendo bien fuerte bajo su manto al hijo de Orm, espoleó a su garañón. En cuanto Aelfrida recobró la vista, atrajo hacia sí a su hijo. Y como no dejaba de gritar, pensó que no estaría mal darle el pecho, aunque sólo fuera para calmarle un poco. El pequeño lo aceptó, pero la mordió ferozmente, hasta hacerle daño. 40 CAPITULO 4 mric puso al niño que había raptad o el nombre de Skafloc, y lo entregó a su hermana Leea para que lo criara. Era tan hermosa como él, con facciones talladas en marfil, cabello de plata y oro, peinado en trenzas, bajo una enjoyada corona, y ojos azules como el crepúsculo, que chismeaban con reflejos de luna. Vestía su grácil figura con flotantes vestiduras de seda de araña, que, cuando bailaba a la luz de la luna, le daban la apariencia de una llama blanca. Sonreía a Skafloc con labios pálidos y plenos, y la leche que le daba, obtenida gracias a medios sobrenaturales, corría como un dulce fuego por su boca y sus venas. Muchos señores de Alfheim asistieron a los festejos con que se celebró la adopción de aquel nombre, trayendo riquísimos presentes: copas y anillos de espléndida hechura, armas forjadas por los enanos, cotas de malla, yelmos y escudos, vestidos de samita, de satén y de tejido de oro, conjuros y talismanes. Habrá que recordar que los elfos, lo mismo que los dioses, los gigantes, los trolls y los demás seres de la tierra encantada, no conocían la vejez y tenían una descendencia muy escasa, de suerte que entre la llegada de uno y otro hijo podían transcurrir varios siglos, lo que explica que el nacimiento de uno de ellos se convirtiese en un acontecimiento sensacional; pues bien, aún resultaba más portentosa la adopción de un ser humano. Mientras tenían lugar los festejos, pudo oírse el tremendo resonar de los cascos de un caballo que se acercaba a Elfheugh, hasta el punto de hacer temblar sus muros y hacer cantar a sus portones de bronce. Los guardias hicieron correr el viento por sus trompe tas, pero ninguno de ellos se habría 41 atrevido a impedirle el paso a aquel jin ete a quien el mismísimo Imric acudió a recibir a la puerta norte, con una profunda reverencia. Su figura era gigantesca y magnífica, revestida de cota de malla y rematada en un yelmo que no era tan refulgente, empero, como sus ojos. La tierra temblaba ante el paso de su caballo. —Salud, Skirnir —dijo Imric—. Nos sentimos honrados por tu visita. El mensajero de los Ases avanzó a caballo por el empedrado patio iluminado por los rayos de luna. A su costado, inquieta y saltarina en su vaina, tan deslumbrante como el mismísimo fuego del Sol, se veía la espada de Freyr, que el dios Van le había regalado al regresar de su expedición a Jötunheim en busca de Gerd. Entre sus manos llevaba otra espada, larga y poderosa, indemne de herrumbre, a pesar de hallarse aún ennegrecida de la tierra en que había estado enterrada; pero su hoja había sido partida en dos. —Imric, traigo un regalo para festejar la adopción de nombre de tu ahijado —explicó—. Guarda bien esta espada, hasta que sea capaz de blandiría. Entonces le dirás que el gigante Bolverk podrá repararla. Como llegará el día en que Skafloc tenga la necesidad imperiosa de empuñar una buena arma, los Ases le hacen este regalo, para que disponga de él cuando llegue ese momento. Arrojó al suelo la espada rota, que cayó con un estruendo de acero; volvió grupas y se perdió en la noche, entre el retumbar de los cascos de su caballo. Los elfos permanecieron inmóviles, porque sabían que los Ases, para obrar de tal suerte, debían de tener algún designio secreto que Imric debía acatar. Como ninguno de los elfos podía tocar el hierro, el Conde gritó a los enanos de su servidumbre que se encargaran de recoger los trozos de la espada. Guiados por él, que abría la marcha, los llevaron a la más recóndita de las mazmorras y los emparedaron en un nicho, cerca de la celda de Gora. Imric guardó el lugar con unas runas que trazó sobre la pared, y se fue, evitando durante largo tiempo volver a él. Mientras tanto, fueron pasando los años y nada volvió a oírse de los designios de los dioses. Skafloc crecía rápidamente: era un muchacho de buena presencia, alto y 42 alegre, con los ojos azules y el cabell o castaño. Era inquieto y vivaz, mucho más que los escasos hijos de los elfos, y, al ser de estirpe humana, crecía mucho más deprisa que ellos, que no parecían cambiar nunca. Aunque no estaba en la naturaleza de los elfos el demostrar un profundo afecto por sus hijos, Leea sí que lo sentía por Skafloc y, para que se durmiera, le cantaba lais, que eran como el mar y el viento y los murmullos de la fronda. Le enseñó las maneras corteses de los elfos nobles y los compases coribánticos que practicaban al aire libre, descalzos sobr e el rocío y ebrios de luz de luna. Una buena parte del saber mágico que aprendió Skafloc procedía de ella, como canciones que podían cegar, deslumbrar y fascinar, canciones capaces de mover rocas y árboles, canciones, en fin, sin sonido, que hacían bailar a las auroras boreales en las noches de invierno. Skafloc tuvo una infancia feliz, mien tras jugaba con los jóvenes elfos y sus compañeros. Había muchas presencias merodeando por aquellos valles y colinas, ya que en ellas se practicaba la brujería, de suerte que los mortales y animales que llegaban hasta allí a veces no regresaban. Como no todos los habitantes que vivían en las cercanías de Elfheugh eran indiferentes o amistosos, Imric designó a un miembro de su guardia para que acompañase permanentemente a Skafloc. Los espíritus acuáticos se arremolinaban en las brumas de las cascadas; sus voces repercutían entre las pare des rocosas mojadas por las aguas. Skafloc sólo podía verlos fugazmente. En las noches iluminadas por la luna, atraídos por la claridad, como los demás ciudadanos de Faerie, se dejaban ver y se sentaban en las riberas musgosas, completamente desnudos, a excepción de las algas y las guirnaldas de liri os acuáticos con que entrelazaban sus cabellos; los elfos pequeños iban a su encuentro, para charlar con ellos. Aquellos espíritus tenían muchas cosas de qué hablar: de ríos de corriente impetuosa y de los peces que nadan en ella, de ranas, de nutrias, de martines pescadores y de lo que se dicen unos a otros, de los fondos llenos de guijarros, iluminados por el sol, de pozas secretas , de aguas verdes e inmóviles... y del rápido correr hacia las cascadas, entre estruendos y arcos iris, para desplomarse y girar por el airo. Había otros dominios acuáticos, como pantanos traicioneros y pequeños lagos entre montañas, a los que no era aconsejable acercarse, así se lo decían 43 a Skafloc, ya que sus moradores no eran de fiar. Con mucha frecuencia se iba al bosque a charlar con la gente pequeña que vivía en él: gnomos humildes de ropajes grises y oscuros, sombreretes picudos y barbas grises que les llegaban a la cintura. Vivían con cierta comodidad ancestral bajo los árboles más gruesos y les encantaba contemplar a los elfos jóvenes. Pero sentían pavor de los elfos ya crecidos, por lo que se congratulaban de que ninguno pudiese ll egar a sus viviendas... a no ser, claro está, que menguasen hasta alcanzar las dimensiones de los gnomos, cosa que ninguno de los altaneros elfos de noble cuna se habría atrevido a hacer jamás. Por los alrededores siempre podía verse algún goblin. Antaño habían sido muy poderosos en aquella región, pero, después de que Imric entrase en ella a sangre y fuego, los que no habían muerto o huido habían perdido todo su poder. Aunque por aquel tiempo vivían furtivamente en cuevas, Skafloc consiguió hacerse amigo de uno de ellos y aprender no pocas de sus extrañas tradiciones. En cierta ocasión, el muchacho oyó el lejano sonido de una flauta que salía de la profundidad del bosque. Fascinado por lo raro que sonaba, se dio prisa para llegar a la pequeña depresión de donde parecía provenir. Había aprendido a moverse tan silenciosamente que se encontró al lado del desconocido antes de que éste percibiera su llegada. Era una criatura extraña, de apariencia humana pero con patas, orejas y cuernos de macho cabrío. Tocaba con ayuda de una serie de cañas una melodía que resultaba tan triste como su mirada. —¿Quién eres? —preguntó Skafloc, un tanto desconcertado. La criatura apartó el instrumento de su boca, como si se dispusiera a echar a correr; pero, tranquilizándose, se sentó en un tronco. Su acento resultaba curioso. —Soy un fauno —dijo. —Nunca había oído ese nombre —Skafloc se sentó sobre el césped, con las piernas cruzadas. El fauno sonrió melancólicamente en el crepúsculo. Sobre su cabeza acababa de encenderse la primera estrella. —Soy el único por estas latitudes. Estoy exiliado. —¿De dónde vienes, fauno? 44 —Del Sur. Vine aquí después de que el gran Pan muriese y el nuevo dios, cuyo nombre no puedo pronunciar, llegase á la Hélade. En nuestra tierra ya no queda sitio para los antiguos seres y los antiguos dioses. Los sacerdotes talan los bosques sagrados y construyen iglesias por doquier... ¡Oh, aún oigo cómo gritaban las dríades, sin que ellos pudiesen oírlas, con gritos que hacían temblar el tranquilo y cálido aire, como si fueran a permanecer anclados en él para siempre! —el fauno agitó su rizada cabeza—. Huí hacia el Norte; pero me pregunto si aquellos de mis camaradas que se quedaron y lucharon, muriendo a causa de los exorcismos, no fueron más sabios. Eso fue hace mucho tiempo, joven elfo, y la soledad lo hizo aún mayor —las lágrimas le brillaban en los ojos—. Las ninfas, los faunos y los mi smísimos dioses ya son menos que el polvo. Los templos se encuentran vacíos, blancos bajo el cielo, y, piedra a piedra, van convirtiéndose en ruinas. Y yo..., yo vago solitario en una tierra extranjera, despreciado por sus dioses y evitado por su gente: es una tierra de bruma y lluvia, y de férreos inviernos, de furiosos mares grises y pálidos rayos solares que despuntan entre las nubes. Ya no veré las aguas de zafiro y las dulcísimas ondas, ni las pequeñas islas rocosas donde nos aguardaban las ninfas, ni las vides ni las higueras, vencidas por el peso de sus frutos... Ya no veré a los majestuosos dioses del altísimo Olimpo... El fauno interrumpió su lamento, se envaró, echó las orejas hacia delante, se levantó y se internó en la espesura. Skafloc miró a su alrededor y vio que el guardia que le habían asignado se acercaba para llevarle de regreso al hogar. Pero a pesar de su tutela, salía a pasear solo con mucha frecuencia, sobre todo de día, ya que podía resistir su luz —que la gente de Faerie debía rehuir— y porque Imric suponía que ningún peligro podría sobrevenirle de parte de los seres mortales. Así se explica que Skafloc se desenvolviera mejor que los demás muchachos de Elfheugh y que llegara a conocer aquella tierra mucho mejor que cualquier ser humano que llevase viviendo en ella toda la vida. Los animales que mostraban más familiaridad con los elfos eran el zorro y la nutria, al punto de que se decía que existía entre ellos una especie de parentesco y que poseían un lenguaje que no resultaba desconocido para los elfos. Del zorro, Skafloc aprendió los senderos ocultos de bosques y prados, 45 las pistas y rastros que llegaban a distinguirse al incidir en ellas el sol de tal o cual manera, y la miríada de minúsculas señales que cuentan toda una historia a aquel que sea capaz de servirse de sus sentidos. La nutria le enseñó a conocer el mundo de los lagos y los ríos, a nadar con la misma agilidad que ella y a esconderse bajo abrigos que apenas habrían bastado para ocultar la mitad de su cuerpo. Pero también aprendió a conocer igual de bien a otros animales. El más tímido de los pajarillos acudía a posarse en su dedo cuando le llamaba en su propia lengua. El oso le saludaba con un gruñido cuando se aventuraba en su madriguera. Ciervos, alces, liebres y urogallos comenzaron a guardar las distancias cuando a Skafloc le dio por cazar, pero con algunos de ellos, muy especiales, consiguió llegar a un acuerdo. Dejemos aquí la semblanza de sus aventuras con los animales salvajes, ya que sería larguísima. Los años corrían veloces, y él con ellos. Salía en cuanto despuntaba el primer brote verde de la primavera, cuando se despierta la floresta y se llena del estruendo de los pájaros que vuelven, cuando los ríos resuenan con el fragor de los hielos que se funden, y las tímidas florecillas blancas del musgo hacen pensar en copos de nieve que se resisten a marcharse. El verano le encontraba desnudo y moreno, con los cabellos flotantes y blanqueados por el sol, persiguiendo colinas arriba a las mariposas, como si quisiera llegar al cielo, o revolcándose entre la hierba por puro placer; o, en las noches claras, que eran una ensoñadora semblanza del día, bajo las estrellas, con los grillos cantando y el rocío resplandeciendo a la luz de la luna. Las atronadoras lluvias del otoño le lavaban, mientras se mantenía erguido en el sutil aire, lleno de los reclamos de las aves migratorias, con una corona de flores del color de las llamas en la cabeza. En invierno correteaba entre los copos de nieve, o se guarecía bajo los troncos caídos, mientras soplaba la tormenta y los árboles gemían; a veces, le gustaba permanecer inmóvil a la luz de la luna en los campos nevados, escuchando cómo crujía el hielo del lago a causa del frío, con un trueno que resonaba entre las colinas. 46 47 CAPITULO 5 uando las piernas de Skafloc comenzaron a alargársele de manera más que evidente, Imric se ocupó personalmente de él; al principio, sólo un poco, pero después, con el andar del tiempo, cada vez más, hasta hacer de él un auténtico guerrero de Alfheim. Los seres humanos, siendo de vida efímera, podían aprender más deprisa que el pueblo de Faerie, por lo que los conocimientos de Skafloc crecieron con más rapidez que su cuerpo. Aprendió a cabalgar los caballos de Alfheim, yeguas y garañones blanquinegros, con la insólita elegancia de la plata viva, raudos e incansables como el viento, de forma que bien pronto sus galopadas nocturnas le llevaron desde Caithness a los Confines, con el aire, que hendía, cantándole en los oídos. Aprendió el uso de la espada y de la lanza, del arco y del hacha. Era menos ágil y grácil que los elfos, pero más fuerte que cualquiera de ellos, pudiendo llevar el equipo de combate durante tanto tiempo como fuera necesario; respecto a su elegancia debe decirse, no obstante, que cualquier otro Mortal habría parecido un zoquete a su lado. Iba a cazar mucho por aquellas tierras, solo o en compañía de Imric y de su séquito. El arco de Skafloc envió a la muerte a muchos ciervos de poblada cornamenta, su lanza detuvo a muchos jabalíes de largos colmillos. Había otro tipo de caza, mucho más astuta, que se perseguía, no sin riesgo, por bosques y riscos, compuesta por unicornios y grifos, traídos por Imric desde los Confines del Mundo para su propio placer. También aprendió Skafloc las costumbres de los elfos, su majestuosidad, 48 su impenitente gusto por la intriga y su sutil lenguaje. Podía bailar al son de las arpas y de las gaitas a la húmeda luz de la luna, desnudo y despreocupado, como el más desenfrenado de los elfos. También podía recitar y cantar los cadenciosos lais que eran más antiguos que el hombre. También aprendió las artes de los escaldos, que hablaban en verso con la misma facilidad que en prosa. Llegó a conocer todas las lenguas habladas en Faerie y tres de las humanas. Sabía elegir a la perfección las mejores viandas de los elfos y los fuegos líquidos que ardían sin llama en el interior de las botellas cubiertas de telarañas que yacían en las bodegas subterráneas del castillo; pero, por encima de todo, no olvidaba sus preferencias por el pan negro y la carne salada de los cazadores, el sabor a lluvia, sol y tierra de los frutos selváticos, y el agua de los manantiales. En cuanto brotó de sus mejillas la primera pelusa, asomo de barba, las hembras de la estirpe de los elfos comenzaron a interesarse por él. Como no temían a los dioses y tenían muy pocos hijos, los elfos ignoraban el matrimonio; pero era tal su naturaleza, que las hembras deseaban gozar del amor con mayor intensidad que los seres humanos, mientras que a los varones les ocurría lo contrario. Por esta razón, Skafloc pudo disfrutar de grandes favores, que aprovechó en más de una ocasión. La parte más difícil, y quizá la más peligrosa, de su aprendizaje fue la magia. Por eso, desde que estuvo en disposición de dejar atrás los simples encantamientos hechos a medida de los niños, Imric se encargó de enseñársela. Aunque Skafloc no pudo profundizar en la materia tanto como su padre adoptivo, a causa de su condición humana y de lo efímero de su existencia, llegó a conocer tanto de ella como la mayor parte de los jefes elfos. Lo primero que aprendió fue a mantenerse apartado y a eludir el hierro, que elfos, trolls y goblins no podían soportar; y lo hizo tan bien que, después de haberle dicho que el hierro no tendría efecto sobre él, y de tocar receloso el clavo que había visto en la casa de un agricultor, sin sufrir daño por ello, no consiguió perder aquel hábito. A continuación aprendió las runas que curan las heridas y las enfermedades, que expulsan la mala suerte o que llevan él mal a un enemigo. También estudió las canciones que pueden desencadenar o apaciguar tormentas, traer buenas o malas cosechas, o suscitar cólera o paz en un pecho humano. Aprendió cómo extraer de sus minerales los metales, 49 desconocidos para los humanos, que en Faerie sufren la aleación que viene a suplir al acero. También practicó el manejo del manto de invisibilidad, y de las pieles que le permitirían adoptar la forma de un animal. Ya cerca del final de su preparación, aprendió las runas, cánticos y hechizos que pueden infundir vida a los muertos y permiten leer el futuro. También aprendió el ritual que sirve para invocar a los dioses, a pesar de que nadie lo utilizase, salvo en caso de tremenda necesidad, ya que podía poner en peligro la propia esencia y desatar fuerzas que podrían aniquilar a quien lo practicase. Skafloc iba con mucha frecuencia a ver el mar y permanecía sentado frente a él hora tras hora, escrutando más allá de sus inquietas aguas la imprecisa línea en que se junta con el cielo, sin cansarse jamás de su voz profunda ni del aroma de sus honduras saladas, ni de sus ventosos dominios, ni de sus mil estados de ánimo. Descendía de una raza de navegantes y llevaba el flujo de las mareas en la sangre. Hablaba a las focas empleando su lenguaje de gruñidos y ladridos, y las gaviotas volaban en círculos a su alrededor para traerle noticias de los cuatro puntos cardinales. En ocasiones, cuando estaba en compañía de otros guerreros, las hijas del mar salían de la espuma, retorciendo sus largas cabelleras verdes según iban llegando a la playa, y entonces había gran regocijo. Eran frías y húmedas al tacto, y olían a alga; cuando todo había acabado, a Skafloc le quedaba en los labios un tenue sabor a pescado, que no conseguía eliminar el placer que sentía en su compañía. Al cumplir los quince años ya era ca si tan alto como Imric, con amplias espaldas y fuerte musculatura. Su larga y rubia cabellera, del color del lino, contrastaba con el tono moreno de su piel. Su rostro era franco y abierto, de huesos poderosos, con una amplia boca de sonrisa fácil y grandes ojos de intenso color azul, que eran un mundo ap arte. Cualquier mortal que no hubiera tenido su experiencia habría dicho que un misterio se cernía sobre él, velado incluso tras aquellos ojos que habían contemplado cosas fuera del alcance de la humanidad ordinaria, y que se ponía de manifiesto en su manera de moverse como un leopardo. Imric le dijo: —Ahora eres lo bastante mayor para tener tus propias armas y no las mías; como, además, he sido convocado por el Rey de los Elfos, haremos un 50 viaje por mar. Al oír aquellas palabras, Skafloc lanzó gritos de alegría, dio volteretas por el campo y galopó alocadamente en su caballo a través de las tierras habitadas por los hombres, haciendo gratuitamente todo tipo de magias a falta de otra cosa. Hizo bailar los pucheros puestos al fuego, repicar las campanas de las iglesias, y, a las hachas, ponerse a cortar leña por sí solas. Con sus cantos mágicos subió las vacas hasta el tejado de la casa de un labriego, desencadenando un viento que dispersó su heno por todo el condado y una lluvia de oro que cubrió totalmente su patio. Con el manto de invisibilidad echado sobre los hombros, besó a las muchachas que al atardecer aún trabajaban en el campo, despeinándolas y echando a sus amantes a un foso. En los días que siguieron, aquello ocasionó innumerables misas con el objeto de detener aquel brote de brujería; pero, por aquel entonces, Skafloc ya se había hecho a la mar. El navío largo de Imric, todo él de negro, surcaba las aguas con la vela hinchada por un viento provocado mágicamente. Su tripulación había sido reclutada entre los guerreros elfos más notorios, pues no había que echar en saco roto la posibilidad de un encuentro con los trolls o con el Kraken. Skafloc se mantenía de pie, junto al dragón de proa, escrutando ansiosamente lo que venía de frente; de pequeñito había recibido el don de la Vista Encantada, que le permitía ver tanto de día como de noche. Espiaba a las marsopas, que brillaban con tonos grises y plata bajo la luna, y saludó a una vieja foca que conocía. En una ocasión, emergió a su lado una ballena, con el agua espumeándole en los lomos. Muchas cosas, que los marinos mortales sólo vislumbran o ven en sueños, aparecían nítidas a los anublados y oblicuos ojos de los elfos y a los de Skafloc: las hija s del mar, retozando entre la espuma, mientras cantaban; la sumergida torre de Ys, un breve reflejo de blanco y oro, como el grito de desafío de un halcón; las Valkirias, apresurándose para llegar a alguna batalla en el continente. El viento cantaba entre el cordaje y las olas rugían contra la quilla. Antes de la aurora, el bajel había alcanzado la otra orilla: arrastrado sobre la playa, quedó oculto gracias a un encantamiento. Los elfos se acomodaron bajo un toldo en el puente, pero Skafloc estuvo recorriendo el lugar mientras fue de día. Se subió a un árbol y contempló, 51 maravillado, las tierras de labranza que se extendían hacia el sur. Los edificios no eran como los de Inglaterra. Entre ellos podía verse la mansión de un barón, tétrica y gris. Skafloc tuvo un fugaz sentimiento de piedad al pensar en la existencia tan mezquina que rezumaba de tanta lobreguez. No habría cambiado su modo de vida por nada en el mundo. Cuando se hizo de noche, los elfos montaron en los caballos que habían llevado consigo y cabalgaron hacia el interior con la rapidez de la tormenta. A medianoche, llegaron a una región montañosa, donde la claridad lunar arrojaba un sutil velo plateado y espesas sombras sobre riscos y precipicios, y sobre el lejano brillo verdoso de lo s glaciares. Los elfos cabal gaban a lo largo de un sendero estrecho, con las lorigas tintineand o, las lanzas en alto y las plumas y mantos ondeando al viento. El sonido de los cascos de sus caballos, al golpear en las piedras, suscitaba ecos en la inmensidad de la noches. En lo alto sonó, bronco, un cuerno, al que respondió otro más abajo. Los elfos escucharon sonidos metálicos y un rumor de pasos. Cuando llegaron al final del sendero, vieron un destacamento de enanos que montaba guardia ante la entrada de una cueva. Aunque aquellos hombrecillos de pier nas arqueadas escasamente le llegaran a Skafloc a la cintura, eran de hombros anchos y largos brazos. Sus rostros oscuros y barbados expresaban cólera, y sus ojos ardían sin fuego bajo sus hirsutas cejas. Estaban armados con espadas, hachas de combate y escudos de hierro, armas que, antaño, no habían podido prevalecer contra las lanzas y flechas de los elfos, ni contra su velocidad y agilidad, por no mencionar sus cuidadosas artimañas. —¿Qué queréis? —preguntó, con voz de trueno, el jefe de la partida—. ¿Acaso elfos y trolls no nos han hecho ya bastante daño, saqueando nuestras tierras y llevándose a nuestra gente para convertirlos en sus siervos? Esta vez nuestras fuerzas son mayo res que las vuestras, y si dais un paso más os mataremos. —Venimos en son de paz, Motsognir —replicó Imric—. Sólo queremos comprar vuestras mercancías. —Conozco tus artimañas, Imric el Astuto —dijo, rudamente, Motsognir—. Dices eso para que bajemos la guardia. —Os daré rehenes —ofreció el Conde de los Elfos, lo que aceptó, 52 aunque rezongando, el Rey de los Enanos. Y, dejando a la entrada a varios de los recién llegados, aunque desarmados y rodeados por sus guerreros, Motsognir condujo a los demás al interior de sus cavernas. Las paredes de roca estaban iluminadas por unas hogueras que arrojaban sobre ellas una penumbra sanguinolenta, cargada de sombras. Los enanos trabajaban incansables en sus forjas, golpeando tan fuerte con sus martillos en los yunq ues que a Skafloc comenzaron a zumbarle los oídos. En aquel lugar se hacían los objetos mejor trabajados del mundo: copas y cálices engastados de gemas; anillos y gargantillas de oro rojo, entrelazados de manera complicadísima; armas forjadas con los metales extraídos del corazón de la montaña, armas dignas de los dioses —y era bien cierto que los enanos habían trabajado para los dioses— y otras armas, estas cargadas de maldad. Potentes eran las runas y hechizos que los enanos podían grabar en ellas, tan desconcertantes como las artes que dominaban. —Desearía que armases a mi ahijado —dijo Imric. Los cegatos ojos de Motsognir estudiaron en aquella titubeante luz la alta figura de Skafloc. Su voz retumbó a través del repiqueteo de los martillos: —¡Vaya, Imric, veo que has vuelto a recaer en tu antiguo vicio de cambiar niños! Algún día acabarás pasándote de listo. Pero, como veo que éste es humano, supongo que querrás para él armas de acero. Skafloc dudó. Todavía no había conseguido superar los miedos de tantos años. Pero sabía lo que ocurriría con el tiempo. El bronce era demasiado blando y la curiosa aleación de los elfos demasiado ligera para poder desarrollar con ella la fuerza que veía crecer día a día. —Sí, de acero —dijo, convencido. —Muy bien, muy bien —rezongó Motsognir, y se dio la vuelta, dirigiéndose hacia su forja—. Déjame que te diga una cosa, muchacho: vosotros, los humanos, aunque débiles, de vida corta e inconscientes, sois indudablemente más fuertes que elfos y trolls, sí, y más que gigantes y dioses. Y el hecho de que podáis tocar el hierro sólo se debe a una razón. ¡Eh! — llamó—. ¡Eh, Sindri, Thekk, Draupnir, venid a ayudarme! El trabajo de forja se desarrolló sin prisa, mientras aquel lugar se llenaba de chispas cada vez que golpeaban el metal. Tan extraordinaria era la habilidad de aquellos herreros, que muy poco después Skafloc vestía un yelmo 53 alado y una resplandeciente loriga, de la que pendía un escudo que le cubría la espalda. A la cintura llevaba una espada y en la mano un hacha de combate. Todo su equipo relucía con el resplandor azulado del acero. Embargado de alegría, levantó en alto sus armas y emitió el grito de guerra de los elfos. —jAh! —exclamó, mientras devolvía la espada a su vaina—. ¡Que los trolls o los goblins, o incluso los gigantes, se atrevan a acercarse a Alfheim! ¡Los golpearemos como el rayo y prenderemos fuego a sus tierras! Y, acto seguido, improvisó un poema: Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, que resuena, incesante, en la montaña. Es buen reclamo el choque del acero para llegar, sonoro, hasta el azul; mientras, airadas, vuelan ya las flechas y se yerguen las hachas hacia el cielo, golpeando estrepitosas en lorigas, hendiendo escudos y quebrando yelmos. Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada: lluvia de lanzas cae sobre las huestes; la locura se ceba en muchos hombres, que segarán las filas del contrario; roja es la sangre que resuma el hacha, y el lobo gris y el presuroso cuervo sacian su sed en ella infatigables. —Bien dicho, aunque resulte una pizca juvenil —comentó fríamente Imric—. Pero no olvides que no debes tocar siquiera a los elfos con tus nuevos juguetes. Y ahora, vamonos —y entregó a Motsognir un saco de oro—. Éste es el pago por vuestro trabajo. —Preferiría que me pagaras liberando a los siervos que tienes de nuestra especie —dijo el enano. —Me resultan muy útiles —fue el escueto comentario de Imric, y se 54 marchó. Al amanecer, los elfos se resguardaron en una cueva y, a la noche siguiente, cabalgaron hacia la gran floresta en donde se levantaba el castillo del Rey de los Elfos. En el ambiente había una urdimbre de hechicerías que Skafloc no consiguió descifrar. Vislumbraba vagamente unas torres altas y esbeltas que se recortaban sobre la luna, en un crepúsculo de azur que vibraba con los vaivenes y las danzas de muchas es trellas, y escuchaba una música que calaba a través de la piel, la carne y los huesos, y conmovía el alma; pero hasta que no llegaron al salón del trono no fue capaz de distinguir nada con claridad. Rodeado de sus nobles, todos ellos de gran estatura, el Rey de los Elfos reposaba en un trono de sombras. Dorados eran corona y cetro, y púrpura sus ropajes, armonizando con la penumbra que le rodeaba. Tenía blancos barba y cabello, siendo el único de los elfos en mostrar sobre la frente y las mejillas las arrugas propias de la edad. Pero, aparte de aquello, su rostro parecía esculpido en mármol y los ojos le ardían como brasas. Imric hizo una reverencia, mientras los guerreros de su séquito doblaban la rodilla ante su rey. Cuando éste habló, fue como el canto del viento: —Salud, Imric, Conde de los Elfos de Britania.. —Salud a vos, señor —contestó Imric, mientras mantenía la sosegada e imponente mirada de su soberano. —Hemos llamado a Consejo a nuestros capitanes —explicó—, porque ha llegado hasta nosotros el rumor de que los trolls están dispuestos a ir de nuevo a la guerra. No hay duda de que se están armando para combatirnos, por lo que suponemos que en los próximos años se termine la tregua entre ellos y nosotros. —Me parece bien, señor. Nuestras espadas se enmohecen en sus vainas. —Quizá no esté tan bien, Imric. La última vez, los elfos rechazamos a los trolls, y habríamos entrado en sus territorios si ellos no hubieran firmado la paz. Illrede, el Rey de los Trolls, no es ningún loco. No se atrevería a ir a la guerra si no pensara que es más fuerte que antes. —Haré todos los preparativos necesarios en mis dominios, señor, y 55 enviaré espías. —De acuerdo. Quizá puedan informarnos de algo interesante, ya que los nuestros no han podido decirnos nada fuera de lo corriente —en aquel momento, el soberano volvió la vista hacia Skafloc, quien sintió cómo se le iba helando el corazón al contemplar su mirada llameante—. Imric, hemos oído hablar de tu ahijado —murmuró—. Podrías habernos consultado al respecto. —No había tiempo, señor —arguyó el Conde—. El infante habría sido bautizado antes de que hubiese podido acercarme a consultaros y volver de nuevo. Resulta bastante difícil robar un niño en los tiempos que corren. —Y peligroso, Imric. —Cierto, señor, pero vale la pena. No necesito recordaros que los humanos pueden hacer muchas cosas que están vedadas a elfos, trolls, goblins y demás seres afines. Pueden usar cualquier metal, tocar el agua bendita, caminar por tierra consagrada y pronunciar el nombre del nuevo dios. ¡Ay! Incluso los mismísimos dioses an tiguos tienen que huir ante ciertas cosas que resultan inocuas a los humanos. Por este motivo, nosotros, los elfos, necesitábamos uno de ellos. —La criatura que dejaste en su lugar también podría haber hecho las mismas cosas. —Por supuesto que sí, señor. Pero vos no conocéis la naturaleza selvática y maligna de esos seres mestizos. No se les puede revelar la magia como a los humanos. Si no fuera porque nos aseguramos de que los hombres jamás lleguen a saber que les robamos sus hijos, para que no invoquen a sus dioses contra nosotros, los elfos no engendraríamos nunca criaturas como esas. Hasta entonces, la conversación habí a tratado de materias conocidas por todos los presentes y se había desarrollado con el aplomo característico de los inmortales. Pero a partir de aquel momento, el tono del Rey de los Elfos se hizo más hiriente. —¿Podemos confiar en este humano? Bastará con que se pase al bando del nuevo dios para estar fuera de nues tro alcance. Quizá ya sea demasiado poderoso. — ¡No, señor! —Skafloc dio un paso hacia delante, inmiscuyéndose en aquella imponente asamblea y mirando de frente al Rey de los Elfos—. Estoy 56 profundamente agradecido a Imric por haberme rescatado de la opaca, ciega y triste vida de los mortales. Soy elfo en todo, menos en la sangre, pues, siendo pequeño, tomé leche de pechos élficos, ahora hablo élfico y yazgo al lado de las doncellas de la estirpe de los elfos —irguió la cabeza, casi con arrogancia— . Dadme la venia, señor, y seré el mejor de vuestros sabuesos..., pero no olvidéis que perro que se expulsa no tarda en convertirse en lobo que se alimenta con el rebaño de su patrón. Algunos de los elfos se sintieron espantados por tanta franqueza, pero su rey asintió, esbozando una sonrisa siniestra. —Te creemos —dijo—, ya que, ciertamente, los hombres que llevamos a Alfheim antes que a ti se comportaron como guerreros valientes. Lo que realmente nos preocupa de ti es el asunto del regalo que te hicieron los Ases. No son parte ajena en este asunto y no podemos asegurar que sus propósitos coincidan con los nuestros. Un escalofrío recorrió a todos los presentes, lo que motivó que alguno de ellos trazara en el aire signos rúnicos. Pero Imric comentó: —Señor, ni siquiera los dioses pueden cambiar lo que ya haya sido decidido por las Nornas. Para mí sería una vergüenza perder el más prometedor de los hombres a causa de los imprecisos miedos del mañana. —Y realmente lo sería —confirmó el Rey de los Elfos, pasando a exponer a los presentes otros pormenores. Antes de que terminara la reunión de tantos nobles elfos se preparó un rico festín. Skafloc tenía la cabeza tan llena de la magnificencia de la corte del Rey de los Elfos, que, cuando finalmente regresó a su hogar, su desprecio y piedad por los humanos fueron tan grandes que, durante cierto tiempo, no quiso tener nada que ver con ellos. Habían transcurrido media docena de años. Los elfos no mostraban cambio alguno, pero, en cambio, Skafloc había crecido tanto que los siervos enanos de Imric tuvieron que arreglarle el equipo de guerra. Ya era más alto y robusto que el Conde, y más fuerte que cualquiera del reino. Luchaba con osos y uros, venciendo con mucha frecuencia al ciervo en su carrera. Nadie en Alfheim habría podido tensar su arco o empuñar su hacha de combate, 57 independientemente del hecho de que fuera de hierro. Con los años se le fue adelgazando el rostro, que ocultó en parte con un bigote del mismo color trigueño que su larga cabellera. Pero era mucho más alegre y díscolo que antes, si puede decirse, y se complacía en las bromas más alocadas y en las empresas más temerarias; había llegado a ser un brujo malicioso, capaz de suscitar un remolino de viento que levantase lo justo las faldas de una joven, y un bebedor empedernido y pendenciero. Inquieto a causa de su propia fuerza, merodeaba por la región, cazando los animales más feroces que podía encontrar. Y siempre estaba dispuesto para una nueva aventura a pesar de que, tras buscar y matar en los pantanos a los monstruos de la progenie de Grendel, en más de una ocasión sufrió heridas espantosas que sólo podían curarse con la magia de Imric. Algunas veces también ocurría todo lo contrario: que estuviese sin hacer nada durante varias semanas, mirando con aire soñador las nubes en lo alto, casi sin moverse. O que adoptara la forma de algún animal y, entonces, con sentidos ajenos a los humanos, buscase florestas y aguas, para hacer cabriolas como una nutria, o corriese a pasos largos como un lobo, o volase con el orgullo del águila. —Hay tres cosas que aún no he conocido —se jacto en cierta ocasión—: el miedo, la derrota y el mal de amor. Imric le miró de forma extraña. —Eres demasiado joven —dijo— para haber conocido las tres cosas esenciales de la vida humana. —Soy más elfo que humano, padre adoptivo. —Sí... por ahora. Un año después, Imric mandó aprestar una docena de navíos largos y se fue a realizar correrías. La flota cruzó el Mar Oriental y saqueó las moradas que los goblins tenían establecidas a lo largo de la costa rocosa. Las tripulaciones desembarcaron a continuación y se adentraron tierra adentro, haciendo una incursión en un poblado de los trolls, quemándolo después de haber matado a sus habitantes y tomado sus tesoros. Aunque la guerra no había sido declarada, aquellos saqueos y tanteos de la fuerza del contrario iban siendo cada vez más frecuentes en ambos bandos. Imric, Skafloc y los demás guerreros pusieron vela al Septentrión y después al Oriente, atravesando una fantástica tierra blanca de brumas y fríos, rodeada de icebergs a la deriva; doblaron un cabo, pasaron por un estrecho, y finalmente se dirigieron al 58 Mediodía. Allí combatieron con dragones y saquearon a los demonios que vivían en aquella tierra. De nuevo siguieron la costa hacia Poniente, hasta que llegaron al Mediodía y volvieron a dirigirse nuevamente al Septentrión. Su batalla más dura tuvo lugar en una playa desierta contra una tropa de dioses exiliados, quienes, a pesar de encontrarse enflaquecidos y mermados y haber enloquecido en su soledad, aún disponían de tremendos poderes. Después de la confrontación hubo que quemar tres de los barcos, ya que no había hombres suficientes para tripularlos, pero Imric resultó victorioso. Divisaron fugazmente a unos humanos, pero no les hicieron gran caso, ya que todo su interés se centraba en Faerie. Los mortales jamás los espiaban, a no ser con miradas sobrecogidas. No tuvieron que guerrear con nadie; muchos reinos los acogieron y estuvieron dispuestos a intercambiar sus mercancías, lo que hizo que sus escalas no fuesen breves. Tres años después de su partida, los navíos regresaron con un gran cargamento de riquezas y esclavos. Había sido un viaje glorioso, del que mucho se habló en Alfheim y en las tierras circundantes; y la fama de Imric y Skafloc fue grande. 59 CAPITULO 6 a bruja vivía sola en el bosque, con sus recuerdos como única compañía; y sucedió que éstos, con el paso de los años, se fueron alimentando de su alma, dejando en ella la impronta del odio y la sed de venganza. Después de muchos intentos, aprendió el modo de aumentar sus poderes y fue capaz de invocar a los espíritus que no son de este mundo y de hablar con los demonios de las capas superiores de la atmósfera, que increm entaron su saber. Y acudió al Sabbath Negro, que se celebra en el Brocken, volando alto en el cielo a lomos de una escoba, con sus harapos flotando en el viento. Fue un festín monstruoso, donde hórridas y antiguas formas canturreaban en torno al negro altar, mientras bebían, ávidas, de los calderos repletos de sangre; pero, quizá, lo peor de todo fuera encontrar en él a las mujeres jóvenes que tomaban parte en los ritos y en los espeluznantes acoplamientos. La bruja volvió a su choza con más sabiduría que antes Y con una rata como familiar, que tomaba sangre de uno de sus marchitos pechos al morderlo con sus minúsculos y aguzados dientes y que, por la noche, se acostaba con ella en su catre, susurrándole cosas al oído mientras dormía. Así pues, llegó el 60 momento en que la bruja creyó poseer el poder suficiente para invocar a aquel a quien tanto llevaba esperando. Sobre su cabaña se desataron rayos y truenos, mientras un resplandor azulado y el hedor de las simas infernales se iban insinuando en el ambiente. Pero la oscura presencia, ante la cual se postró, le pareció bellísima, pues todo pecado parece bello al pecador que consiente en él. —¡Oh, tú, el de los muchos nombres, Príncipe de las Tinieblas, Compañero Maligno! —exclamó la bruja—. ¡Quiero que realices mi deseo, que estoy dispuesta a pagarte de la manera establecida desde antaño! Entonces fue el momento de hablar de aquel a quien había invocado, y su voz fue pausada, acariciante y paciente: —Llevas recorrido largo trecho en el camino que te conduce hacia mí, aunque aún no me pertenezcas del todo. La misericordia del de arriba es infinita, y sólo si la rechazas estarás realmente perdida. —¿Qué me importa a mí la misericordia? —exclamó la bruja—. No me servirá para vengar a mis hijos. Estoy dispuesta a concederte mi alma con tal que me entregues a mis enemigos. —Eso no puedo hacerlo —respondió su invitado—, pero puedo darte los medios que te permitirán hacerlos caer en tu trampa, siempre que tu astucia sea mayor que la de ellos. —Con eso bastara!. —Pero, antes, piénsatelo. ¿No te has vengado ya de Orm? ¿No eres tú la responsable de que tenga como primogénito a un hijo cambiado, y de que el mal que éste puede hacerle sea inmenso? —Sí, pero el auténtico hijo de Orm prospera en Alfheim, y el resto de sus hijos crecen en paz. Quiero borrar de la faz de la tierra a su odiosa progenie, como él hizo con la mía. Los dioses paganos no me ayudarán y, posiblemente, tampoco Aquel cuyo nombre preferiría no pronunciar. Por eso, tú, Negra Majestad, tienes que ser mi amigo. En sus ojos se insinuó durante un largo momento una mirada que albergaba unas diminutas y cambiantes llamas, más frías que el invierno. —Como habrás podido conocer, los dioses no son totalmente ajenos a este asunto —dijo, casi en un susurro, aquella voz tranquila—. Odín, que prevé los destinos asignados a los hombres, hace planes que tardan mucho en 61 realizarse... Pero tendrás mi ayuda. Te daré poder y conocimiento, hasta que llegues a convertirte en una bruja poderosa. Entonces te diré cómo has de atacar de una manera infalible, a no ser que tus enemigos sean más listos de lo que pienso. »En el mundo hay tres Potencias contra las que nada pueden hacer dioses, demonios, ni hombres, y contra las que ninguna magia ni poder alguno prevalece: el Cristo Blanco, el Tiempo y el Amor. »De la primera de estas Potencias sólo puedes esperar obstáculos a tus deseos, y has de impedir que Él y los Suyos tomen parte en la contienda. Lo conseguirás mientras no olvides que el Cielo deja a los seres sublunares hacer su voluntad, sin obligarles a seguir su camino; incluso los milagros siempre han dejado abierta una posibilidad a los hombres. »A la segunda Potencia, que recibe tantos nombres como yo —Hado, Destino, Ley, Wyrd, las Nornas, Necesidad, Brahmán, y muchos más— es inútil invocarla, porque no escucha. Ni siquiera puedes saber si existe al mismo tiempo que la libertad de que te hablé, del mismo modo que tampoco puedes comprender por qué coexisten los antiguos dioses con el nuevo. Pero cuando estés realizando tus encantamientos más importantes, habrás de pensar en ello, hasta que conozcas en lo más profundo de tu ser que la verdad es algo que reviste formas tan diferentes como las mentes que intentan comprenderla. »La tercera Potencia es de esencia mortal, por lo que te puede resultar tan favorable como todo lo contrario, siendo de este modo como habrás de usarla. Tras aquellas palabras, la bruja pronunció el juramento, y entonces le fue revelado el modo de obtener el conocimiento que precisaba, con lo que finalizó aquel encuentro. Pero quizá haya que señalar un he cho curioso: cuando aquel que había sido convocado salió de la choza, la bruja le siguió con la mirada, por lo que pudo comprobar que quien se iba no tenía el mismo aspecto que quien había entrado. Adoptaba la apariencia de un hombre muy alto, que caminaba rápidamente a grandes zancadas y que tenía una barba muy larga y del mismo color gris que el pelaje de los lobos. Se cubría con un manto y llevaba una lanza; bajo su sombrero de ala ancha le pareció ver un único ojo. La bruja se acordó de que también era muy astuto, de retorcidos propósitos, las más de las 62 veces, y muy dado a disfrazarse en sus vagabundeos por todo lo largo y ancho del mundo. Por eso no pudo reprimir un escalofrío. Pero cuando desapareció de su vista, sin que hubiera conseguido verlo claramente —podría haber sido una ilusión creada por la escasa luz de las estrellas—, no se quebró la cabeza con conjeturas, sino sólo con el constante dolor de lo que había perdido y de lo próxima que estaba su venganza. Aparte del hecho de que el niño cambiado era de mal carácter y llorón, nada permitía distinguirlo del auténtico, y aunque Aelfrida se sintiese perpleja por el comportamiento de su hijito, no había llegado a poner en duda que fuese suyo. Bautizó al niño con el nombre de Valgard, como Orm quería, y le cantaba y jugaba con él, sintiéndose feliz por ello. Pero la criatura mordía tan fuerte que darle el pecho era un suplicio. Orm se sintió complacido cuando lle gó a su casa y se encontró con un niño tan espléndido. —Será un gran guerrero —comentó—, manejará bien la espada y cabalgará navíos y caballos —y miró al patio—. Pero, ¿dónde están los perros? ¿Dónde está mi viejo y fiel Gram? —Gram ha muerto —dijo Aelfrida con voz átona—. Intentó saltar sobre Valgard y destrozarle... Tuve que matar al pobre animal, porque se había vuelto loco. Y eso debió de alterar al resto de los perros, que ahora enseñan los dientes y huyen cada vez que salgo afuera con el niño. —Es extraño —dijo Orm, en tono de reflexión—. Todos los de mi familia siempre les caímos bien a perros y caballos. Pero cuando Valgard creció, resultó evidente que ningún animal quería estar cerca de él: el ganado salía huy endo, los caballos relinchaban y se apartaban, los gatos bufaban y se subían a los árboles, por lo que el muchacho tuvo que aprender a usar la lanza antes de lo debido, para defenderse de los perros. A cambio, no se mostraba nunca amigo de los animales, a los que propinaba patadas e insultos, llegando a convertirse en un cazador incansable. Era taciturno y parco en el hablar, muy dado a chanzas de mal gusto y a la desobediencia. Los siervos le odiaban por su malevolencia y las crueles bromas que les gastaba. Y poco a poco, Aelfrida, a pesar de esforzarse en lo 63 contrario, dejó de amarle. Pero Orm estaba prendado de Valgar d, aunque, en más de una ocasión, ambos no estuviesen de acuerdo. Cuando tuvo que azotar al muchacho, jamás consiguió arrancarle un grito de dolor, por fuerte que cayera su mano. Y cuando practicaba la esgrima y su espada se abatía sobre él, como si fuese a henderle el cráneo, Valgard nunca parpadeaba. Creció fuerte y ágil, y aprendió a manejar las armas como si hubiese nacido para ello, sin dar jamás muestras de miedo o de debilidad, pasara lo que pasase. Y aunque no tuviera propiamente amigos, no eran pocos los que le seguían. Orm tuvo más hijos de Aelfrida: dos varones, el pelirrojo Ketil y el moreno Asmund, que eran dos muchachos que prometían, y dos hembras, Asgerd y Freda, esta última el vivo retrato de su madre. Todos eran como cualquier niño, encantadores en ocasiones y tristes en otras; al principio jugaban alrededor de su madre, pero más tarde lo hicieron por todas sus tierras. Aelfrida los quería con un amor constante y profundo. Orm también los quería, pero su preferido era Valgard. Extraño, taciturno y silencioso, Valgar d estaba a punto de convertirse en hombre. Por fuera no era diferente de Skafloc, salvo, quizá, porque su cabello era una pizca más oscuro y su piel un poco más blanca, y porque en sus ojos brillaba una especie de ruda frivolidad. Pero había tristeza en su boca, porque casi nunca reía, excepto cuando hacía manar la sangre o causaba algún tipo de dolor, y aun entonces aquella risa no era sino un mero enseñar los dientes. Más alto y más fuerte que la mayoría de los jóvenes de su edad, se relacionaba poco con ellos, excepto cuando los organizaba en bandas para hacer alguna bribonería. Raramente ayudaba en la granja, a no ser en la época de la matanza, por lo que acostumbraba a dar largas caminatas. Como Orm todavía no se había decidido a levantar la iglesia que antaño prometiera al sacerdote, a los labradores de las cercanías les dio tiempo de ponerse de acuerdo y construirla. Aque llo no le importó a Orm, quien dio permiso a su gente para que acudiese a visitarla. Aelfrida rogó al sacerdote que fuese a ver a Valgard y a hablar con él. El muchacho se burló de el en la cara: —Jamás me inclinaré ante vuestro di os llorón —dijo—, ni ante ningún otro. Por lo demás, si es que los sacrificios a los dioses tienen algún sentido, los que mi padre hace a los Ases le son más útiles que cualquiera de las 64 plegarias que él o tú podáis hacer a Cris to. Pues si yo fuese un dios recibiría con agrado las ofrendas en sangre que se me hicieran para que dispensara buena suerte, y a un hombre tan avaro que no hiciera más que aburrirme con tantos rezos melosos, le estamparía mi marca... ¡así! —y pesadamente, calzado como estaba, dio un pisotón al sacerdote. Orm se rió muchísimo cuando se enteró de lo ocurrido, sin que las lágrimas de Aelfrída sirvieran de nada ni el sacerdote obtuviera consuelo. A Valgard le gustaba la noche sobre todo, y era muy frecuente que se levantara de la cama y saliese afuera. Podía estar corriendo hasta la aurora con su largo paso de lobo, impulsado por algún destello de magia lunar oculta en su mente. No sabía lo que estaba buscando, salvo que sentía una tristeza y un anhelo que no podía describir, y una alegría inexplicable cuando mataba, mutilaba o destruía algo. ¡Sólo entonces era capaz de reír, con la sangre de los trolls golpeándole en las sienes! Pero después de que, cierto día, al contemplar a las jóvenes que trabajaban en el campo, observara que el sudor dulzón de sus cuerpos se adhería a sus vestidos, se dedicó a otros pasatiempos. A su fortaleza y agradable aspecto había que añadir una desenvuelta lengua de elfo, que sacaba a relucir cuando quería. Orm no tardó en pagar las indemnizaciones que tanto jóvenes como siervos exigían por los malos tratos de Valgard. No dio mucha importancia a aquello, pero no sucedió lo mismo cuando el joven, que tenía unas copas de más, discutió con Olaf Sigmundsson y le mató. Orm pagó el werejild y comprendió que su hijo no estaba seguro en aquel sitio. Durante los últimos años había pasado en casa la mayor parte del tiempo, realizando viajes pacíficos de índole comercial. Aquel verano, sin embargo, Orm se llevaría consigo a Valgard, en calidad de vikingo. Aquello fue la gloria para el muchacho, ya que supo ganarse rápidamente el respeto de la tripulación, por su destreza y valentía en la batalla, a pesar de las innecesarias muertes de quienes se hallaban indefensos. Poco después comenzó a entrarle a Valgard la berserkirgangr, que le hacía temblar, echar espuma por la boca y morder el borde de su escudo, mientras se arrojaba en medio del combate, aullando y matando. Su espada era una cosa roja sin contornos precisos, por lo deprisa que se movía; no sentía la mordedura de las armas en su cuerpo, y el tremendo 65 terror que producía su distorsionado rostro helaba de pavor a los hombres, haciéndoles perecer bajo sus golpes. Cuando pasaban aquellas crisis, se sentía cansado durante un tiempo; mientras tanto, los cadáveres se amontonaban a su alrededor. Sólo los hombres más toscos y sin ley aceptaban tener que habérselas con un berserkr, y, recíprocamente, aquel tipo de gente era la única a la que a Valgard le gustaba mandar. Cada verano salía en busca de botín, solo o en compañía de Orm, que no tardó en desistir. Al llegar a la plenitud de su fuerza de hombre, Valgard ya se había labrado una siniestra reputación. Le gustaba conseguir oro para comprar barcos, tripulados con la hez de los mares, hasta el punto de que Orm le prohibió desembarcar en sus tierras. Los demás hijos eran queridos por la mayoría de la gente. Ketil era parecido a su padre, grande y alegre, siempre dispuesto a una pelea o a una travesura, y, cuando tuvo edad para ello, se hizo a la mar con frecuencia. Pero la única vez que salió como vikingo, discutió profundamente con Valgard, por lo que, a partir de entonces, decidió seguir su propio camino como comerciante. Asmund era esbelto y de carácter tranquilo, buen arquero, pero en absoluto amante de la batalla, por lo que acabó encargándose de la granja. Asgerd era una joven grande, de manos fuertes y frescas, ojos azules y cabellos de oro, y Freda, según crecía, se iba haciendo tan hermosa como su madres. Así estaban las cosas cuando la bruja decidió que ya era tiempo de tirar de todos los hilos de su telaraña. 66 CAPITULO 7 n un ventoso día de otoño, con el aroma de la lluvia en el aire punzante y las hojas de los árboles que tomaban los colores del oro, del cobre y del bronce, Ketil y un pequeño grupo de camaradas se fueron de caza. Cuando aún no se habían adentrado en el bosque vieron un ciervo blanco, tan enorme y de tan noble apariencia, que casi no daban crédito a sus ojos. —¡Vaya, es una presa digna de un rey! —exclamó Ketil, espoleando a su caballo, mientras los demás le seguían, saltando sobre troncos y piedras, esquivando los tocones y los árboles caídos, abriéndose paso entre los arbustos y pisoteando las hojas caídas, con el viento rugiendo en sus oídos y el bosque convirtiéndose en una confusión de colores. Curiosamente, los sabuesos no se mostraban muy ansiosos de proseguir la caza, y aunque Ketil no montase un caballo excepcional, fue dejándolos atrás, lo mismo que al resto de los cazadores. Ante él, en la débil luz del atardecer, el ciervo blanco seguía dando brincos, con sus arbóreas astas apuntando al cielo, durante algún tiempo, la 67 lluvia se derramó, gélida, a través de las desnudas ramas; en la ceguera de la persecución, Ketil apenas la sintió, pues no parecía preocuparse del tiempo ni del espacio recorrido, sino sólo de la excitación del galope y de la caza. Finalmente llegó a un pequeño claro, y poco le faltó para atrapar al ciervo, pues aunque la luz era escasa disparó su lanza a la forma blanca. En aquel instante el ciervo pareció menguar y desvanecerse, como la bruma tras un golpe de viento. Cuando desapareció, sólo quedó en su lugar una rata que se apresuró a esconderse entre las hojas muertas. De repente, Ketil se dio cuenta de que se había distanciado tanto de sus compañeros, que los había perdido. A través de la penumbra soplaba un viento desapacible y cortante. Su caballo temblaba de cansancio. Todo aquello significaba que había llegado a una parte del bosque que le era desconocida, lo que quería decir que estaba muy al oeste de los dominios de Orm. No podía comprender qué era lo que había espoleado al animal de aquella forma, impidiéndole caer exhausto. Y la singularidad de todo lo sucedido hizo que un escalofrío le recorriera la espalda. Pero justo al borde del claro, bajo una inmensa encina, se levantaba una casa. Ketil se preguntó qué tipo de personas podrían vivir en ella, tan apartadas de los demás, y de qué podrían mantenerse, pues no vio signo alguno de animales ni cultivos. Al menos, pensó, en aquella casita de madera y techo de paja, en cuyas ventanas brillaba la plácida luz de un fuego, podrían abrigarse él y su caballo. Así que desmontó, cogió su lanza y llamó a la puerta.,. Al abrirse ésta, pudo divisar una habitación profusamente amueblada, con un establo vacío al fondo. Pero donde, sobre todo, Ketil posó su mirada, fue en la mujer que había en ella, de suerte que ya no pudo mirar a ninguna otra parte. Sintió que el corazón le daba un vuelco y le golpeaba en las costillas, como haría un gato montes con la jaula que le mantuviera prisionero. Era alta, y su vestido escotado se adhería admirablemente a cada curva de su maravilloso cuerpo. Su oscura cabellera, que llevaba suelta, le llegaba a las rodillas, resaltando el óvalo perfecto de un rostro tan blanco como la espuma del mar. Sus labios, carnosos y grandes, eran del color de la sangre; su nariz, delicadamente arqueada; sus ojos, de largas pestañas, bajo unas finísimas cejas, verdes. Aquel insondable color verde de sus ojos, de destellos dorados, parecía mirar dentro de la mismísima alma de Ketil, que, a pesar de la 68 extraña sensación que sentía, pensó que nunca antes había conocido a una mujer semejantes. —¿Quién eres? —preguntó ella, con voz suave y cantarina—. ¿Qué quieres? Ketil sentía la boca seca, y los latidos de sus sienes comenzaban a ensordecerle, pero respondió con rapidez. —Soy... Ketil Ormsson... Me he perdido mientras cazaba, por eso te pido que nos acojas durante una noche, a mi caballo y... a mí. —Sé bienvenido, Ketil Ormsson —dijo ella, con una sonrisa que a punto estuvo de hacerle perder el corazón—. Bien pocas son las personas que llegan hasta aquí, y siempre me agrada saludarlas. —¿Vives... sola? —preguntó. —Sí... pero no esta noche —dijo, riéndose, y Ketil la tomó entre sus brazos. Orm envió a sus hombres a preguntar a todos los vecinos, pero nadie supo decirle nada del paradero de su hijo. Así pues, tres días más tarde, ya no tuvo duda alguna de que algo malo le había sucedido a Ketil. —Ha podido romperse una pierna, o encontrarse con ladrones, o tener cualquier incidente —comentó—. Asmund, mañana iremos a buscarle. Valgard se sentaba derrengado en una banqueta, asiendo con la mano un cuerno de hidromiel. Dos días antes había terminado una de sus veraniegas correrías de vikingo, dejando barcos y hombres en unas tierras que había comprado a pocos días de viaje de las de Orm, y había vuelto a casa por unos días, más que para saludar a la familia para probar la buena comida y bebida de su padres. —¿Por qué te diriges sólo a Asmund? —preguntó—. Yo también estoy aquí. —No se me había ocurrido que tú y tu hermano Ketil os profesarais un gran afecto —dijo Orm. Valgard enseñó los dientes y vació el cuerno. —Es cierto —contestó—. Sin embargo, iré a buscarle, y espero ser yo quien lo encuentre y lo traiga a casa. Pocas cosas le disgustarían más que 69 tener que deberme un favor. Orm se encogió de hombros, mientras a Aelfrida le brillaban los ojos y estaba a punto de llorar. Partieron al alba del día siguiente, entre los ladridos de los perros, que se helaban nada más salir de sus bocas: eran muchos hombres a caballo, que se dispersaron por los bosques de acuerdo con un plan. Valgard iba solo y a pie, según su costumbre. Llevaba un hacha de combate como única arma y cubría su cabellera castaña con un yelmo; pero, por lo demás, con las prendas de pelo que le cubrían, podrían haberle tomado por un animal de presa. Olfateó el aire vigorizante y se movió en círculos, buscando algún rastro, ya que en ese arte tenía una habilidad inhumana. Al poco tiempo encontró lo poco que quedaba de uno. Enseñó los dientes una vez más y no tocó el cuerno, sino que avanzó con largos pasos, tan característicos en él. Según pasaba el día iba progresando hacia Poniente, sin salir de un bosque cuya espesura aumentaba según iba acercándose a su parte más antigua, y que jamás había recorrido en ninguna de sus correrías. El cielo se hizo gris y las nubes parecieron descender sobre los esqueléticos árboles. El viento hacía girar las hojas muertas en torbellinos, que se movían por el aire como fantasmas que tuvieran prisa de llegar al infierno, con un silbido que a Valgard le ponía en tensión todos los nervios. Podía olfatear que algo andaba mal en aquel lugar, pero, como nadie le había instruido en la magia, no podía saber qué era lo que erizaba los cabellos de su nuca. Cuando comenzaron a caer las sombras, ya había llegado muy lejos. Estaba tan cansado y hambriento que se sintió enfurecido contra Ketil por causarle tantas molestias. Aquella noche tendría que dormir al sereno, y eso que el invierno estaba ya en camino, por lo que se prometió que se cobraría cumplida venganza. Pero... un momento... Vagamente, a través del crepúsculo que va haciéndose cada vez más oscuro, percibe un resplandor. No se trata de ningún fuego fatuo. Es un fuego..., un posible refugio, a no ser que se trate de la madriguera de gente sin ley. Pero, si tal es el caso, se dice Valgard con un gruñido, será un placer acabar con ellos. Se hizo de noche antes de que llegara a la casa. Una fina nevisca impulsada por el viento le golpeaba en el rostro. Precavidamente, Valgard se 70 aproximó a una ventana y espió a través de la hendidura que había en las impostas. Ketil estaba sentado en una banqueta, cerca de un generoso fuego. Con una mano asía un cuerno lleno de cervez a, mientras que con la otra acariciaba a la mujer que tenía sentada encima de las rodillas. La mujer..., ¡dioses todopoderosos!, era espléndida. Valgard se relamió mientras tomaba aire. Nunca había imaginado que pudiera existir una mujer como la que se reía encima de las rodillas de su hermano. Valgard se dirigió hacia la puerta y golpeó en ella de plano con su hacha. Pasó un tiempo hasta que Ketil se decidió a abrir, lanza en ristre para ver quién había llegado. Por aquel entonces, la nevisca caía con mayor intensidad. Imponente y furibundo, Valgard obstruyó la entrada con sus hombros. Ketil echó una maldición, pero se hizo a un lado y le dejó pasar. Valgard cruzó lentamente el umbral, goteando por la nevisca que le cubría y que comenzaba a fundirse. Sus ojos refulgieron al ver a la mujer, sentada de lado en la banqueta-?. —No eres muy generoso con los huéspedes, hermano —dijo, en tono de chanza, que al otro le sonó como un ladrido—. Después de recorrer afanosamente tantas milla s buscándote, me dejas af uera, en plena tormenta, mientras te diviertes con tu enamorada. —No te pedí que vinieras —replicó Ketil, incómodo. —¿De veras? —Valgard seguía mirando a la mujer, quien aguantaba su mirada esbozando una sonrisa en la roja boca. —Eres un huésped bienvenido —musitó—. Hasta ahora jamás había acogido a un hombre tan grande como tú. Valgard lanzó una risotada y se volvió para mirar la turbación de Ketil, reflejada en su rostro. —Aunque no me hayas invitado, querido hermano, pasaré aquí la noche —dijo—. Y ya que veo que sólo caben dos en la cama, y como el camino recorrido ha sido largo y fatigoso, me temo que habrás de dormir en el establo. —¡No lo des por hecho! —exclamó Ketil, cogiendo tan fuerte su lanza que los nudillos se le quedaron blancos—. Si hubieses sido padre o Asmund, o cualquier otro de los nuestros, habrías sido bien recibido. Por eso tú, berserkr pendenciero, serás el único que duerma entre la paja. 71 Valgard hizo su mueca característica y agitó su hacha, enviando la lanza de su hermano hacia el dintel y partiendo en dos su punta. —Vete, hermanito —ordenó—. ¿O prefieres que yo te saque afuera? Ciego de rabia, Ketil le golpeó con el asta de la lanza. Los ojos de Valgard llamearon de furia. Se apartó. Su hacha cayó, hendiendo el aire, y se enterró en el cráneo de Ketil. Todavía fuera de sí, se acercó a la mujer. Ella le recibió con los brazos abiertos. Valgard la abrazó y besó sus labios hasta hacerlos sangrar. Ella se rió sonoramente. Pero a la mañana siguiente, cuando Valgard se despertó, vio a Ketil yaciendo en un amasijo de sangre y sesos, mientras parecía mirarle con sus ojos muertos; y entonces fue presa de un súbito remordimiento. —¿Qué he hecho? —musitó—. He matado a alguien de mi propia familia. —Mataste a un hombre débil —dijo la mujer con indiferencia. Pero Valgard no se apartó del cadáver de su hermano, mientras seguía cavilando. —A pesar de nuestras disputas, Ketil, pasamos juntos buenos momentos —murmuró—. Recuerdo lo divertido que nos pareció a los dos un ternerillo que se obstinaba en apoyarse en sus endebles extremidades, y también recuerdo el viento sobre nuestros rostros y el sol, rompiéndose en las olas, cuando nos hacíamos a la mar, y las bebidas fuertes, en la época del Yule, cuando las tormentas aullaban alrededor de la casa de nuestro padre... y cuando nadábamos, corríamos y gritábamos juntos, hermano. Ahora todo ha terminado, tú eres un cadáver que ya está tieso, mientras yo me preparo a recorrer una senda tenebrosa... Descansa en paz. Buenas noches, Ketil, buenas noches. —Si les hablas a los demás de esto, te matarán —dijo la mujer—. Y eso no le devolverá la vida. En la tumba no hay besos ni pasión. Valgard asintió. Levantó el cadáver y lo llevó al bosque. No quería volver a tocar el hacha, por lo que la dejó clavada en el cráneo, cuando sepultó al muerto bajo un túmulo de piedras. Pero cuando regresó a la casa, la mujer le estaba esperando y pronto olvidó todos sus males. Su belleza empequeñecía el sol y no había nada que 72 ignorase en el arte del amor. El tiempo fue haciéndose cada vez más frío, hasta que despuntaron las primeras nieves. Aquel invierno prometía ser largo. Una semana después, Valgard pensó si no sería mejor regresar al hogar. No quería que los demás fuesen a buscarle ni que pudiesen surgir desavenencias con los hombres de su flota. Pero la mujer no quiso irse con él. —Aquí está mi sitio y no quiero abandonarlo —dijo—. Pero tú puedes venir cuando quieras. Valgard, cariño, siempre será un placer recibirte. —Volveré pronto —prometió. No quería llevársela por la fuerza, como había hecho con muchas otras mujeres. El hecho de que se le entregase libremente le resultaba algo inapreciables. Ya en casa, su padre le acogió con alegría, pues había llegado a pensar que también iba a perderle. Nadie más pareció alegrarse abiertamente de volver a verles. —He buscado hasta muy lejos, hacia Septentrión y Poniente —explicó Valgard—, y no encontré a Ketil. —No —dijo Orm, sintiendo que la pena volvía a su corazón—, debe de estar muerto. Le buscamos durante días y al final encontramos su caballo vagando sin su jinete. Dispondré los preparativos para el banquete fúnebre. Valgard sólo permaneció en compañía de aquellos hombres unos pocos días, al término de los cuales se aventuró nuevamente en los bosques, prometiendo llegar a tiempo de participar en el banquete fúnebre en honor de Ketil. Asmund, un tanto pensativo, le siguió con la mirada. Al hermano menor le resultaba extraño que Valgard no hiciera comentario alguno sobre la supuesta muerte de Ketil, y más extraño aún que saliera a cazar —como había dicho—, justamente por entonces, cuando el invierno estaba a la vuelta de la esquina. Como los osos ya se habían aletargado y el resto de la caza era muy escasa, los hombres no se preocupaban de salir a buscarla entre la nieve. ¿Por qué había estado Valgard ausente tanto tiempo, y por qué se marchaba tan deprisa? Y puesto que Asmund no dejaba de hacerse aquellas preguntas, dos días después de que se fuera Valgard, se decidió a seguirle. Como, mientras tanto, no había nevado ni hecho viento, aún sería visible su rastro en la 73 crujiente blancura, por lo que Asmund se fue solo; provisto de esquíes atravesó grandes extensiones silenciosas, donde no se movía animal alguno, y el frío mordió una y otra vez su carne. Tres días después, regresó Valgard. Mucha gente de los alrededores había llegado a la casa de Orm para el banquete fúnebre, que no había hecho más que comenzar. El berserkr se paseó, taciturno y parco en el hablar, por el patio lleno de gentes. Aelfrida le tiró de la manga. —¿Has visto a Asmund? —preguntó tímidamente—. Se fue al bosque y todavía no ha regresado a casa. —No —fue el escueto comentario de Valgard. —Sería una lástima perder dos hijos mayores el mismo mes y quedarse sólo con el peor —dijo Aelfrida, dándole la espalda. Al atardecer, los invitados se reunieron en el salón para beber. Orm se sentó en su sitial, con Valgard a su derecha. Los hombres hicieron lo propio en los taburetes colocados junto a las paredes, a izquierda y derecha, levantando sus cuernos repletos de bebida para brindar a la salud los unos de los otros, y todos a la del muerto, a través de las llamas y del humo del fuego del hogar central. Las mujeres iban y venían a llenar los cuernos. Con excepción de la familia del anfitrión, los hombres estaba n muy alegres por la cerveza, y más de uno no perdía de ojo a las dos hijas de Orm, a través de la cambiante y confusa luz rojiza. Orm mostraba un talante sereno, como cuadraba a un guerrero que se ríe de la muerte; pero nadie habría imaginado lo que se ocultaba tras su rostro. Aelfrida no podía dejar de llorar de manera intermitente, con la desesperación del silencio. Valgard se sentó, sin decir ni palabra, bebiendo cuerno tras cuerno, hasta que la cabeza le empezó a dar vueltas y sólo consiguió ahondar en su tristeza. Lejos de las mujeres y de los trajines de la guerra no tenía nada que hacer, salvo dar una y mil vueltas a lo que había realizado, de suerte que el rostro de Ketil pareció dibujarse en la penumbra que se encontraba ante él. La cerveza siguió corriendo hasta que todos estuvieron ebrios y la sala retumbó con su alboroto. Entonces, el sonido de alguien que llamaba a la puerta de la sala cortó como una espada tanto estrépito. El picaporte no estaba echado, por lo que aquel sonido atrajo la atención de los presentes. Era 74 Asmund, que tras pasar por la antecámara, llegaba a la sala. La luz que despedía el fuego hacía que su figura se recortase contra la oscuridad. Se detuvo, pálido y a punto de derrumbarse. Entre los brazos, envuelto en una capa, llevaba un pesado fardo. Su mirada vacía escrutó la sala, buscando a alguien; y poco a poco, fue cayendo un gran silencio. —¡Bienvenido, Asmund! —exclamó Orm en aquella quietud—. Comenzábamos a temer por ti... Asmund seguía mirando, inmóvil, hacia delante, y aquellos que habían seguido su mirada vieron que se detenía en Valgard. Finalmente habló, con voz átonas —He traído un invitado al banquete fúnebre. Orm permaneció sentado, inmóvil, aunque bajo la barba podía apreciarse la palidez de su rostro. Asmund dejó su carga en el suelo: estaba lo suficientemente helada para quedarse de pie, mientras él la sostenía con su brazo. —El túmulo donde lo encontré estaba terriblemente frío —dijo Asmund, mientras las lágrimas le corrían por el rostro—. Como no era un lugar apropiado para él, he pensado que sería una vergüenza que celebráramos este festín en su honor, mientras él se quedaba allí, sin más compañía que el viento y las estrellas. Por eso he traído a casa a Ketil... ¡Sí, Ketil, ved que aún tiene clavada en la cabeza el hacha de Valgard! Y tiró de la capa, de suerte que el resplandor del fuego cayó como sangre recién derramada sobre lo que estaba arrebujado alrededor del hacha. El cabello de Ketil se hallaba cubierto de escarcha. Su rostro muerto le hacía una mueca a Valgard. Su mirada fija estaba llena del fulgor de las llamas. Asmund lo mantenía apoyado junto a sí, de suerte que mirase a Valgard. Orm se volvió lentamente, para observar al berserkr, que aguantaba aquella mirada ciega con la boca abierta, como la del muerto. Pero la rabia no tardó en sobrevenirle. Valgard se puso en pie de un salto, mientras decía a Asmund con un rugido: —¡Mientes! —Todos conocen tu hacha —dijo Asmund, dejando caer las palabras—. Ahora, buena gente, apresad al fratricida y atadlo para colgarlo. —Reclamo mis derechos —exclamó Valgard—. Dejadme ver el arma. 75 Ninguno se movió. Todos estaban anonadados. Valgard atravesó la sala hasta la puerta de la antecámara, en un silencio donde no se oía ni respirar y sólo las llamas tenían voz. Allí se habían apilado las armas. Al pasar, cogió una lanza y echó a correr. —¡No escaparás! —gritó Asmund, mientras intentaba desenvainar la espada y cortarle el paso. Pero Valgard se le adelantó. Su lanza atravesó el desprotegido pecho de Asmund, clavándole en la pared, donde quedó colgado, con el cuerpo de Ketil apoyado aún en él, como si ambos hermanos se hubiesen puesto de acuerdo para mirar boquiabiertos a su asesino. Valgard aulló cuando la berserkirgangr hizo presa en él. Sus ojos refulgían con el color verde de la mirada del gato montes, mientras la baba caía de sus labios. Orm, que le había seguido, rugió, tomó una espada y le atacó. Valgard sacó muy a tiempo el cuchillo que usaba para comer, desvió la hoja de Orm, golpeándola de plano con su brazo izquierdo, y plantó la suya en la garganta de su padrea. La sangre le salpicó. Orm cayó al suelo. Valgard cogió la espada. Llegaba más gente. Le bloqueaban la salida. Valgard abatió al que estaba más cerca. Su aullido resonaba entre las vigas. La sala hervía de hombres. Algunos intentaron resguardarse en un sitio seguro, mientras otros optaban por capturar al demente. La espada de Valgard cantó. Otros tres campesinos cayeron al suelo. Entonces unos cuantos utilizaron de escudo la parte superi or de una mesa, consiguiendo alejar a Valgard del montón de las armas y armándose ellos mismos. Pero en aquel espacio tan reducido, las cosas no se podían hacer deprisa. Valgard no hacía más que lanzar cuchilladas a los que se encontraban entre él y la puerta, ya que no estaban armados. Se hicieron a un lado, algunos de ellos heridos, con lo que Valgard consiguió pasar. Un guerrero, que había conseguido un escudo ribeteado de hierro y una espada, le aguardaba en la antecámara. Valgard le golpeó. Su acero dio en el borde de hierro y se rompió. —¡Tu espada es demasiado endeble, Orm! —exclamó Valgard. Y mientras el hombre se precipitaba hacia su encuentro, echó la mano hacia atrás y arrancó el hacha del cráneo de Ketil. En su precipitación, su 76 contendiente no se preocupó de cubrirse. El primer golpe de Valgard destrozó su escudo. El segundo le cortó el brazo derecho a la altura del hombro. Valgard salió corriendo por la puerta. Las lanzas silbaron tras él. Huyó al bosque. La sangre de su padre goteó de su rostro durante un tiempo, hasta que se heló y ya no sirvió de ayuda a los sabuesos enviados tras su pista. Incluso mucho después de haberlos dejado atrás, siguió corriendo para no morir congelado. Tiritando y sollozando, huyó hacia el Oeste. 77 CAPITULO 8 a bruja estaba sentada, esperando, sola en la oscuridad. Algo se deslizó en la estancia, a través del agujero de la puerta. Al bajar la mirada hacia el piso en penumbra vio a su familiar. Enflaquecido y cansado, no habló hasta que no hubo trepado hasta su seno y bebido, ávido, de él. Entonces descansó en su regazo y la miró con sus despiadados y relucientes ojillos. —Bueno —dijo ella—. ¿Cómo fue el viaje? —Largo y frío —le contestó—. En forma de murciélago, viajé hasta Elfheugh llevado por el viento. En más de una ocasión, mientras reptaba por las salas de Imric, poco faltó para que me mataran. Esos elfos son endiabladamente despiertos Y sabían que yo no era una rata corriente. Pero, a pesar de todos sus desvelos, conseguí espiar sus conciliábulos. —¿Y su plan es el que yo había pensado? —En efecto. Skafloc irá a Trollheim pa ra efectuar una violenta incursión en los dominios de Illrede, intentando matar al Rey o, al menos, detener sus preparativos de guerra... ahora que se ha declarado abiertamente el fin de la 78 tregua. Mientras tanto, Imric se queda en Elfheugh para preparar las defensas. —Bien. El viejo Conde de los Elfos es demasiado astuto, pero Skafloc, yendo solo, difícilmente podrá evitar la trampa. ¿Cuándo se marcha? —Dentro de nueve días. Llevará consigo unos cincuenta navíos. —Los elfos viajan deprisa, de modo que pueden llegar a Trollheim el mismo día por la noche. Con el viento que yo le enseñaré a suscitar, Valgard podrá llegar en tres días, y puedo permitirle otros tres para que se prepare. De tal suerte, si tiene que encontrarse con Illrede sólo un poco antes de que llegue Skafloc, habré de mantenerle aquí... hum, necesitará tiempo para reunir a sus hombres. Bien, tenerlo bajo control no será tarea difícil, ya que ahora es un proscrito que se dirige hacia aquí, desesperado. —Tratas a Valgard con dureza. —No siendo de la estirpe de Orm, nada tengo contra él; pero es el peón que muevo en un juego despiadado y peligroso. Causar la ruina de Skafloc y de sus dos hermanas no será tan fácil como matar a Orm y a sus dos hijos. Él se reiría de mi magia y de mi fuerza —la bruja hizo una mueca en la luz crepuscular—, sin lugar a dudas; pero Valgard es el peón que debo mover para traspasar el corazón de Skafloc. Y en lo que se refiere al propio Valgard, le doy una oportunidad de llegar alto entre los trolls, muy alto, si llegan a vencer a los elfos. Espero conseguir que la caída de Skafloc sea doblemente amarga, haciendo de él la causa de la ruina de Alfheim. Y la bruja permaneció sentada, esperando; un arte que había aprendido pacientemente a lo largo de los años. Poco antes del amanecer, cuando una luz gris y desesperanzada pareció reptar sobre la nieve y las hojas cubiertas de hielo de los árboles, Valgard llamó a la puerta de la mujer. Ella abrió al momento y el proscrito cayó entre sus brazos. Estaba casi muerto de frío y de cansancio. Por toda la piel tenía costras de sangre helada, que no contrastaban con la expresión salvaje de sus ojos y de su maltratado rostro. Ella le dio carne, cerveza y unas hierbas extrañas, de suerte que, poco después, Valgard pudo estrecharla entre sus brazos. —Eres lo único que me queda —murmuró—. Mujer, tu belleza y tu lascivia han sido las causantes de todos mis males. Debería matarte y arrojarme después sobre mi propia espada. 79 —¿Por qué dices eso? —sonreía—. ¿A qué males te refieres? Él sepultó su rostro en la fragancia de sus cabellos. —He matado a mi padre y a mis hermanos —dijo—, y ahora seré un proscrito para siempre. —El que los mataras —dijo la mujer— sólo prueba que eras más fuerte que ellos; además, te habían amenazado. ¿Qué importa quiénes fueran? —sus ardientes ojos verdes se fijaron en los de él—. Pero, si el pensamiento de haber acabado con tus familiares te entristece, entonces te diré que estás confundido. —¿Eh? —parpadeó mientras la miraba, sin comprender lo que decían. —No eres hijo de Orm, Valgard Berserkr. Yo, que poseo la Segunda Vista, puedo decirte que incluso no has nacido de mujer, sino que provienes de tan antigua y noble progenie que te resultará difícil imaginar tu verdadero origen. La enorme figura de Valgard se puso tan rígida como una barra de acero. La tomó de las muñecas, con tanta fuerza que le marcó los dedos, mientras su voz resonaba en la casa. —¿Cómo has dicho? —Imric, el Conde de los Elfos, te dejó a cambio del primogénito de Orm —explicó la mujer—. Eres el hijo que Imric tuvo con una esclava, la hija de Illrede, el Rey de los Trolls. Valgard la empujó a un lado. El sudor perlaba su frente. —¡Mentira! —musitó—. ¡Mentira! —Es cierto —respondió tranquilamente la mujer. Se acercó a Valgard, quien retrocedió unos pasos, con la respiración agitada. Ella bajó el tono de su voz, que sonaba inexorable—. ¿Por qué eres tan diferente de los hijos de Orm o de los de cualquier otro? ¿Por qué desprecias por igual a dioses y a hombres, y vagas en una tristeza perpetua que sólo puedes olvidar en el tumulto de la matanza? ¿Por qué, de todas las mujeres con las que has yacido, ninguna te ha dado hijos? ¿Por qué te temen los animales y los niños pequeños? —le había acorralado en un rincón, reteniéndole con la mirada—. ¿Por qué otro motivo iba a ser, sino porque no eres humano? —Pero yo he crecido como los demás hombres, puedo tocar el acero y las cosas consagradas, no soy un ser de Faerie... 80 —Ello es debido a las malas artes de Imric, quien te sustrajo a tu destino, en favor del hijo de Orm. Te engendró igual que el niño que se llevó. Como fuiste criado entre las mezquindades de los hombres resulta imposible suscitar los poderes mágicos latentes en ti. Para que pudieras crecer, envejecer y morir en el curso de la corta vida de los seres humanos, y que las cosas sagradas y terrenales que espantan a los elfos no pudieran afectarte, Imric te desposeyó de una vida que dura siglos. Pero no consiguió darte un alma humana, Valgard. Al igual que él, cuando mueras serás como la vela que se apaga al soplar, sin esperanza de cielo o infierno, o de la morada de los antiguos dioses, y no vivirás más que los hombres. Al oír aquello, Valgard emitió un grito sofocado, la empujó a un lado y salió corriendo de la casa. La mujer rió. Y aunque la tormenta arreció, fría y ruidosa, Valgard, pesaroso, no volvió a la casa hasta que hubo anochecido. A pesar de estar encorvado por el cansancio, sus ojos ardían con un fuego sin llama cuando miraba a su amante. —Ahora te creo —musitó—, pues ya no me queda nada en que creer. He visto fantasmas y demonios cabalgando la tempestad, volando en la nieve y riéndose de mí mientras pasaban —fijó la mirada en un oscuro rincón de la habitación—. La noche se acerca, ya terminó el triste juego de mi vida... he perdido casa, familia e incluso mi propia alma, aunque jamás la tuviera, porque ahora comprendo que sólo era una sombra proyectada por los grandes poderes, que ahora se disponen a soplar la vela. Buenas noches, Valgard, buenas noches... —y se dejó caer, sollozando, encima de la cama. La mujer se rió por lo bajo y permaneció a su lado, besándole con sus labios que sabían a vino y a fuego. Y cuando él, sin decir palabra, fijó sus azorados ojos en los suyos, ella susurró: —Este lenguaje no es digno de Valgard Berserkr, el guerrero más poderoso, cuyo nombre suscita pavor desde Irlanda a Gardharíki. Pensaba que habrías recibido mis palabras con alegría, forjándote un futuro mejor con ayuda de tu gran hacha. Te cobraste revanchas espeluznantes por cosas menores que ésta, ni más ni menos que el secuestro de tu verdadera identidad y la condena de por vida a esa cárcel que es la vida de los hombres. Valgard sintió que iba recobrando poco a poco las fuerzas y que, mientras acariciaba a la mujer, crecían en intensidad, junto con el odio hacia 81 todo lo que no fuera ella. Al final, dijo: —¿Qué puedo hacer? ¿Cómo podré vengarme? Ni siquiera puedo ver a los elfos y a los trolls, a no ser que ellos lo deseen. —Eso puedo enseñártelo yo. No es difícil otorgar el don de la Vista Encantada a los súbditos de Faerie que nacen con él. Respecto a lo otro, te diré que, si lo deseas, puedes destruir a quienes te causaron tanto mal y reírte de los que te convirtieron en un proscrito, pues serás más poderoso que los reyes de los hombres. Valgard la miró con los ojos entornados. —¿Y cómo? —preguntó, arrastrando las palabras. —Los trolls están listos para hacer la guerra a sus antiguos enemigos, los elfos —explicó la mujer—. Dentro de poco, Illrede, el Rey de los Trolls, conducirá una hueste contra Alfheim, que posiblemente ataque antes a Imric, aquí en Inglaterra, de modo que el flan co y la retaguardia estén a salvo cuando más tarde se mueva hacia el Sur. Entre los mejores guerreros de Imric, ya que el hierro y las cosas consagradas no le afectan, y también debido a su fortaleza y a su saber de brujo, se encuentra Skafloc, su ahijado, o sea, el hijo de Orm que ha usurpado tu puesto. Si ahora te hicieras a la mar sin perder tiempo, fueses a ver a Illrede y le ofrecieses ricos presentes y los servicios de tus poderes de hombre, sin olvidar mencionar el hecho de que eres su descendiente, lograrías un puesto importante en su ejército. Durante el saqueo de Elfheugh podrás matar a Imric y a Skafloc, con lo que probablemente Illrede te nombrará Conde de Britania. Después, cuando hayas aprendido las artes de la brujería, podrás ser aún más grande, no te quepa duda, y conseguir anular lo que hizo Imric y convertirte en un elfo, o en un troll, auténticos, sin edad, y vivir lo que le queda de vida al mundo. Valgard se rió, y pareció el aullido del lobo cuando caza. —¡Eso estaría bien! —exclamó—. Criminal, proscrito e inhumano. Nada tengo que perder, y mucho que ganar. Si me uno a las huestes del frío y la tiniebla lo haré de corazón y ahogaré mi infelicidad en batallas que ningún hombre jamás haya soñado ¡Oh, mujer, mujer, poderoso y malvado es tu regalo, pero te lo agradezco sinceramente! Y la amó ardientemente; pero, cuando más tarde habló, venciendo al sonido de la tormenta, su voz sonó gélida y tranquila. 82 —¿Cómo podré llegar a Trollheim? —preguntó. La mujer abrió un arcón y extrajo de él un saquito de piel, atado por uno de sus extremos. —Partirás el día que te indique —le dijo—. Cuando las tripulaciones de tu flota estén a bordo, ábrelo. Contiene un viento que te llevará hasta allí y que te permitirá tener la Vista Encantada y ver las tierras de los trolls. —¿Pero qué hay de mis hombres? —Serán parte de los presentes que llevas para Illrede. Los trolls se divierten cazando hombres por las montañas y comprobarán que los tuyos son malvados al ver que ningún dios acude a socorrerlos. Valgard se encogió de hombros. —Si voy a ser un troll, tendré que hacer honor a mi sangre hasta en la traición —dijo—. ¿Pero, qué podré llevarle que le resulte de agrado? Debe de tener hartazgo de oro y joyas, por no decir de objetos caros. —Llévale lo que más le guala —comentó la mujer—. Orm tenía dos hermosas hijas..., los trolls son lujuriosos. Si las atas y amordazas, de manera que no puedan esgrimir ninguna cruz ni nombrar a Jesús... —¡Esas dos no! —exclamó Valgard, horrorizado—. He crecido a su lado. Y ya les he hecho demasiado mal. —Precisamente esas dos —dijo la mujer—. Pues si Illrede ha de tomarte a su servicio, habrá de estar seguro de que has roto todos los vínculos que te ataban a la humanidad. Valgard siguió negándose. Entonces ella se acercó estrechamente a él y le besó, desgranando la historia de los sombríos esplendores que le aguardaban, hasta que finalmente asintió. —Pero me pregunto quién eres tú, lo más malvado y hermoso del mundo —confesó. Ella se rió plácidamente, acunada entre sus brazos. —Me olvidarás en seguida, en cuanto tengas a tu disposición un puñado de hembras élficas. —No... nunca te olvidaré, amada mía, que has hecho de mí todo lo que has querido. La mujer retuvo a Valgard en su casa el tiempo que estimó oportuno, con el pretexto de que tenía que preparar tal o cual ensalmo que le devolviera la Vista Encantada, mientras proseguía con sus particulares versiones de lo que 83 era el mundo de Faerie. Pero ello no habría sido necesario, ya que sus encantos y destreza en el amor eran más efectivos que cualquier ligadura. La nieve llenaba el crepúsculo cuando, al fin, le dijo: —Vete ya. —Los dos — respondió—. Tienes que venir conmigo, porque no puedo vivir sin ti —la acarició con sus grandes manos—. Si no vienes por tu propia voluntad, te llevaré; pero creo que tendrías que acompañarme de buen grado. —Muy bien —dijo ella, con un suspiro—. Pero estoy segura de que pensarás de otra manera cuando te haya concedido la Vista. Se levantó, acercándose hasta donde él se sentaba, y pasó suavemente la mano por las líneas y ángulos de su rostro. Su boca se curvó en una sonrisa tristes. —El odio es un amo terrible —musitó—. Jamás había pensado volver a sentir alegría, Valgard, por eso me despido de ti con gran pesar. Te deseo la mejor fortuna del mundo, queridísimo mío. Y ahora —le rozó los ojos con las yemas de sus dedos—. ¡Mira! Y Valgard vio. Como humo en el viento, la primorosa casita y la mujer alta de piel blanca vacilaron ante su vista. Presa de súbito terror, quiso verlas no a través de ojos mortales, engañados por la magia, sino como realmente eran... Estaba sentado dentro de un cobertizo de adobe y zarza, donde un minúsculo fuego de estiércol alumbraba con débil resplandor osamentas y harapos, toscos utensilios de metal y re torcidos instrumentos de brujería. Se encontró mirando los opacos ojos de una repugnante vieja, cuyo rostro era una máscara de piel arrugada mal puesta encima de un cráneo desdentado y de mandíbula caída, de cuyo flácido seno colgaba una rata. Enloquecido de terror, se puso de pie. La bruja le miró de soslayo. —¡Querido, amor! —cloqueó—. ¿Por qué no vamos a tu barco? Juraste que no te irías sin mí. — ¡Y por ti me convertí en un proscrito! —aulló Valgard. Empuñó su hacha y la lanzó contra ella. Pero en el preciso momento en que iba a alcanzarla, su cuerpo se encogió y aparecieron dos ratas en el suelo, donde fue a dar el hacha en el mismo momento en que ambas desaparecían por un agujero. 84 Espumeando de ira, cogió un madero largo y lo metió en el fuego. Cuando se hubo inflamado, tocó con él los harapos y la paja. Salió afuera y se quedó mirando mientras ardía la cabaña, dispuesto a golpear cualquier cosa que se le apareciera. Pero encontró só lo las inquietas llamas, el silbido del viento y la nieve que siseaba, mientras se hundía al caer en el fuego. Cuando no quedaban más que las cenizas, Valgard gritó a pleno pulmón: —¡Por ti perdí hogar, familia y esperanza; por ti me decidí a no aceptar el plazo de vida que se me había concedido y a aliarme con el reino de las tinieblas; por ti me he convertido en un troll! ¡Pero óyeme, bruja, si aún sigues con vida! ¡Haré lo que me dijiste! ¡Me convertiré en Conde de los Trolls de Inglaterra (quizá alguna noche en rey de todo Trollheim), y acudiré a darte caza con todas las fuerzas de que disponga! ¡También tú, al igual que los hombres, los elfos y cualquiera que se interponga en mi camino, sentirás mi ira, y jamás descansaré hasta que no haya despellejado viva a quien me partió el corazón con una sombra! Giró sobre sí mismo y, dando grandes zancadas, se dirigió hacia el Este, perdiéndose al poco tiempo entre el temporal de nieve. Agazapadas bajo tierra, la bruja y su familiar intercambiaron una mueca. Aquello era, justamente, lo que habían planeado. Las tripulaciones de la flota de Valgard estaban compuestas por lo peor de los vikingos, proscritos de sus tierras la mayor parte y todos mal acogidos adondequiera que fueran. Por este motivo, Valgard había comprado una tierra en donde pasar el invierno con ellos. Vivían bien, con siervos que les atendían, pero tantas eran las disputas y litigios que sólo su jefe era capaz de mantenerlos unidos. Cuando llegó hasta ellos la noticia de sus crímenes, supieron que no pasaría mucho tiempo antes de que los hombres del Da nelaw les cayesen encima, por lo que aprestaron sus navíos, y también sus personas, para hacerse a la mar. Pero fueron incapaces de ponerse de acuerdo respecto a dónde debían ir en pleno invierno, por lo que las disputas, e incluso las peleas, comenzaron de nuevo. Y así habrían seguido, esperando sentados a sus enemigos, si no hubiese regresado Valgard. 85 Entró en la sala tras la puesta de sol. Aquellos robustos hombretones de pelo en pecho seguían sentados, despachándose cuernos de cerveza, uno tras otro, mientras los gritos comenzaban a ser ensordecedores. Muchos roncaban en el suelo, junto a los perros; otros aullaban y discutían, rodeados de espectadores, más dispuestos a azuzarlo s que a tranquilizarlos. Aquí y allá, entre el cambiante resplandor del fuego, corrían aterrorizados siervos y mujeres que ya habían agotado desde hacía mucho el caudal de sus lágrimas. Valgard subió los peldaños que le conducían a su sitial vacío. Era una figura alta y terrible, con la boca fruncida en una mueca aún más siniestra que la que recordaban sus hombres, con la gran hacha, a la que ya todos habían comenzado a llamar Fratricida, colgada a la espalda. El silencio fue propagándose como en ondas, a medida que se daban cuenta de su presencia, hasta que finalmente la única voz de la sala fue la del fuego que ardía en ella. Y Valgard dijo: —No podemos seguir aquí. Aunque nunca invadisteis las tierras de Orm, la gente tomará como pretexto lo ocurrido para desembarazarse de vosotros. Pero no importa. Conozco un lugar donde podremos ganar grandes riquezas y fama, y hacia el que zarparemos pasado mañana, al alba. —¿Qué lugar es ése, y por qué no nos vamos a él mañana mismo? — preguntó uno de sus capitanes, un viejo camarada cosido de cicatrices, llamado Steingrim. —Respecto a lo último, porque tengo un asunto, aquí en Inglaterra, que debo resolver mañana —dijo Valgard—. Y, en cuanto a lo primero, os diré que nuestro destino es Finmark. El rugido fue unánime. La voz de Steingrim se elevó por encima de él: —Es la cosa más tonta que jamás ha ya oído. Finmark es pobre y está muy lejos; además, para llegar a ella hay que cruzar un mar que resulta peligroso incluso en verano. ¿Qué podernos ganar allí, sino la muerte, ya sea porque nos ahoguemos o por obra de lo s hechiceros que allí moran... o, en el mejor de los casos, unas cuantas chozas de adobe en las que resguardarse? Al alcance de nuestra mano se encuentran Inglaterra, Escocia, Irlanda, las Orcadas o Valland, al sur del Canal, donde podremos conseguir un buen botín. —Ya habéis recibido mis órdenes, y habréis de obedecerlas —dijo Valgard. 86 —Yo no —replicó Steingrim—. Me parece que el vagar por los bosques te ha hecho enloquecer. Como un gato montes, Valgard saltó hacia su capitán. Su hacha se estrelló contra el cráneo de Steingrim. Un hombre gritó, aferró una lanza y acometió con ella a Valgard. El berserkr se echó hacia un lado, tiró del asta que el otro tenía sujeta con las manos y le tiró al suelo. Valgard extr ajo el hacha de la cabeza de Steingrim y se quedó inmóvil, amenazante en la luz llena de humo, con los ojos que parecían copos de hielo glaciar. Preguntó en voz baja: —¿Alguno más de vosotros desea co ntradecirme? Nadie habló ni se movió. Valgard retrocedió hasta su sitial y dijo: —He actuado tan duramente porque no podemos seguir con la indisciplina de siempre. Nuestras vidas no valen nada si no somos capaces de comportarnos como un solo hombre, cuya cabeza he de ser yo, por ser el único que está preparado para ello. Ya sé que, a primera vista, mi plan suena descabellado, pero Steingrim hubiera debido oírme hasta el final. El hecho es que me ha llegado la noticia de que durante el verano pasado un hombre muy rico se construyó una casa en Finmark que encierra todo lo que podamos desear. Como no se esperarán que en pleno invierno vayan a atacarlos unos vikingos, podremos reducirlos con suma facilidad. Tampoco temo que pueda hacer mal tiempo durante el viaje, porque habéis de saber que tengo cierta habilidad en predecirlo y noto el tufillo de un viento favorable que está al caer. Los hombres recordaron que el liderazgo de Valgard siempre les había supuesto grandes ventajas. En cuanto a Steingrim, carecía de allegados, ya fueran familiares o ligados a él por pacto de sangre. Así pues, todos declararon a gritos que seguirían a Valgard adondequiera que fuese. Cuando el cadáver fue llevado afuera y siguió corriendo la bebida, convocó a sus capitanes. —Hay un lugar, aquí cerca, que hemos de saquear antes de abandonar Inglaterra —les dijo—. No será difícil y nos proporcionará un buen botín. —¿Qué lugar es ese? —preguntó uno de los hombres. —La casa de Orm el Fuerte, quien ahora está muerto y ya no puede defenderla. Incluso unos saqueadores como ellos pensaron que se trataba de un acto infame, pero no se atrevieron a contradecir a su jefe. 87 88 CAPITULO 9 l banquete fúnebre en honor de Ketil también sirvió para Asmund y Orm Los hombres bebían en silencio, embargados por la angustia, pues Orm había sido un jefe muy sabio y el y sus hijos eran apreciados en la región, a pesar de no ir a la iglesia Como el terreno aun no había llegado a helarse, la fosa ya estaba excavada el día después de que ocurrieran los crímenes El mejor navío de Orm fue llevado desde su casa hasta la fosa En el fueron depositados tesoros, carne y bebida para el largo viaje, así como perros y caballos, sacrificados al efecto, aquellos que habían resultado muertos luchando contra Valgard también subieron a el, vestidos con sus mejores galas y armas así era como Orm había querido ser enterrado, tal y como le hiciera prometer a su mujer Cuando todo estuvo a punto, algunos días después Aelfrida salió de la casa Permaneció de pie, mirando a Orm, Ketil y Asmund en la mortecina y gris luz invernal. Su cabello suelto le caía sobre el pecho, escondiendo su rostro de aquellos a quienes contemplaba. —Si no fuera porque el sacerdote dice que es pecado, ahora mismo me 89 mataría para seguir a tu lado —susurró—. La vida será muy triste. Vosotros, Ketil y Asmund, erais buenos chicos, y vuestra madre siente la ausencia de vuestras risas. Me parece como si fuera ayer cuando cantaba para que os durmieseis en mi regazo, cuando erais unos pequeñines, y, sin darme cuenta, os habíais convertido en unos muchacho s de largas piernas, que daba gusto mirar y todo un orgullo para Orm y para mí... y ahora yacéis tan inmóviles, mientras unos pocos copos de nieve caen sobre vuestros rostros. Es extraño —asintió con la cabeza— que no consiga acostumbrarme al pensamiento de que habéis muerto. Es como si no quisiera creerlo. Le sonrió a Orm. —Hemos discutido muchas veces —murmuró—, pero jamás nos guardamos resentimiento alguno porque tú me amabas y... yo a ti. Fuiste bueno conmigo, Orm, y ahora que has muerto, el mundo me parece frío, muy frío. Sólo le pido a Dios Todomisericordioso que perdone todo lo que hiciste en contra de Su ley. Pues ignorabas muchas cosas, aunque fueses muy entendido en barcos y muy habilidoso con las manos para hacerme anaqueles y baúles, o para tallarles juguetes a los niños. Y si Dios no puede acogerte en su Cielo, entonces le pido que me deje bajar a lo s Infiernos contigo... Claro que sí, y si vienen a recogerte tus dioses paganos, entonces te seguiré. Y ahora, adiós, Orm, a quien amé y amo. Hasta siempre. Se inclinó a besarlo. —Qué fríos tienes los labios —dijo, y miró, como extrañada, a su alrededor— Ya sé por qué no quieres besarme. El que está muerto en el barco no eres tú... Entonces, ¿dónde estás, Orm? La llevaron fuera del casco del navío y los hombres trabajaron arduamente para cubrirlo y también en la cámara mortuoria que levantaron sobre él. Cuando hubieron acabado, el túmulo se elevaba, imponente, muy cerca del mar y las olas llegaban a la playa para cantar a sus pies una oda fúnebres. El sacerdote, que no había aprobado aquel sepelio pagano, no quiso consagrar el túmulo, pero hizo lo que pudo: rezar, y Asgerd le pagó muchas misas a intención de las almas de los difuntos. Entre los presentes, había un joven, Erlend Thorkelsson, que estaba prometido a Asgerd. 90 —La casa está vacía, ahora que ya no hay hombres en ella— dijo. —Así es —asintió la joven. El frío viento que llegaba del mar, transportando minúsculos copos de nieve, despeinaba su abundante cabellera. —Será mejor que me quede cerca con unos cuantos amigos hasta que todo esté en orden —dijo—. Después me gustaría que nos casáramos, Asgerd. Tu madre y tu hermana podrían venir a vivir con nosotros. —No me casaré contigo hasta que Valgard no haya sido colgado y sus hombres quemados vivos dentro de su casa —le contestó con amargura. Erlend sonrió, pero sin alegría... —Entonces no habrá que esperar mucho —comentó—. La flecha de la guerra no hace más que pasar de mano en mano. A no ser que huyan antes de lo que creo, esta tierra no tardará en verse liberada de su pestilencia. —Que así sea —asintió Asgerd. La mayor parte de los que habían acudido a la fiesta regresaron a sus hogares, excepto los colonos de Orm y Erlend y su media docena de amigos. Cuando se hizo de noche, un fuerte viento que llevaba nieve prendida en las alas comenzó a aullar en torno a la casa. Después llegó el granizo, como si los espíritus de la noche pisotearan con sus pezuñas el tejado. La sala principal parecía larguísima, oscura y triste. Todos se habían sentado, muy juntos, en uno de sus extremos. Hablaban poco, mientras menudeaban los cuernos llenos de cerveza. Aelfrida rompió de improviso su silencio. —Me ha parecido oír algo fuera —dijo. —Yo no —le replicó Asgerd—. Nadie se atrevería a aventurarse a salir con una noche como ésta. Freda, espantada por la mirada fija, y como ida, de la madre, la tocó, mientras decía tímidamente: —No te has quedado sola. Tus hijas jamás se olvidarán de ti. —Sí, sí —la sonrisa de Aelfrida era amarga—. La semilla de Orm vive en vosotras, pues aquellas noches tan dulces no fueron en vano —miró a Erlend— . Sé bueno con tu mujer. Lleva la sangre de los jefes. —Creo que me resultaría imposible no ser bueno con ella —comentó. De repente, oyeron que alguien golpeaba en la puerta. Podía escucharse un grito que conseguía imponerse sobre el sonido del viento: 91 —¡Abrid! ¡Abrid la puerta o la echaremos abajo! Los hombres empuñaron sus armas mientras un siervo corría el cerrojo de la puerta y era abatido, al instante, por un hacha. Alto y amenazador, protegido por los escudos que dos hombres alzaban ante él, con un manto de nieve sobre sus hombros, Valgard penetró en la antecámara. Y dijo así: —Las mujeres y los niños que salgan afuera vivirán. Esta casa está rodeada por mis hombres y voy a quemarla. Una lanza, arrojada por alguien, golpeó uno de los escudos guarnecidos de hierro. El olor a humo era más fuerte de lo normal. —¿Acaso no has hecho bastante daño ya? —dijo Freda, con voz quebrada—. Quema esta casa si quieres; pero prefiero quedarme dentro antes que vivir gracias a ti. —¡Adelante! —gritó Valgard, y antes de que nadie pudiera detenerle estaba dentro, con una docena de sus vikingos. —¡No mientras me quede vida! —exclamó Erlend. Desenvainó su espada y cargó contra él. El hacha fratricida ondeó en la mano de Valgard, chocó contra la espada con metálico estruendo, desviándola, y penetró en las costillas de Erlend, quien cayó al suelo. Valgard saltó por encima de él y cogió a Freda de una muñeca. Otro de sus hombres apresó a Asgerd. Los demás los protegieron con sus escudos, adoptando la formación de la tortuga. Cubiertos de casco y loriga, pudieron abrirse camino hasta la puerta, matando a dos o tres que les presentaron combate. Cuando los atacantes hubieron salido, los que quedaban dentro se juntaron, se armaron mejor e intentaron una salida. Pero fueron rechazados o se vieron forzados a retroceder por guerreros que les cortaban cualquier vía de escape. Aelfrida gritó y corrió hacia la puerta; a ella sí la dejaron pasar los vikingos. Valgard acababa de atar las muñecas de Asgerd y Freda con cuerdas bastante largas, de las que tirar, si llegaba el caso de que se negaran a caminar. El tejado del edificio alargado estaba ardiendo con llamas que desprendían mucha luz. Aelfrida aferró el brazo de Valgard y gritó, a través del rugido de las llamas: —¡Eres peor que un lobo! ¿Qué nuevos males deparas a los últimos de 92 tu linaje? ¿Qué te empuja a tratar así a tus hermanas, que sólo te hicieron el bien, y cómo puedes pisotear el corazón de tu madre? ¡Deja que se vayan! ¡Déjalas! Valgard la escrutó con mirada fría y pálida, sin mover ni un músculo del rostro. —Tú no eres mi madre —acabó por decir, y la golpeó. Ella cayó desvanecida en la nieve, mientras él se daba media vuelta y hacía una seña a sus hombres para que llevaran por la fuerza a las dos jóvenes cautivas hacia la bahía donde estaban anclados sus navíos. —¿Adonde nos llevas? —gimió Freda, mientras Asgerd escupía a Valgard. Éste sonrió, un mero fruncir de labios, y dijo: —No os preocupéis. Además, estoy a vuestro servicio, pues vais a ser entregadas a un rey —suspiró—. Os env idio. Mientras tanto, conociendo a mis hombres, mejor será que os vigile. Las mujeres que no habían querido morir quemadas vivas salieron afuera, junto con sus hijos. Los saqueadores abusaron de ellas y después las dejaron marchar. Otras mujeres prefirieron quedarse dentro con sus hombres. Las llamas iluminaron buena parte de la heredad de Orm, pues el resto de los edificios no tardaron en ser incendiados, aunque no sin antes ser saqueados. Valgard se fue en cuanto tuvo la certeza de que los que se habían quedado en la casa habían muerto, pues sabía que, cuando la gente de los alrededores viera el incendio, acudiría armada. Los vikingos levaron anclas y salieron a mar abierto, remando contra un viento que lanzaba sobre cubierta la fría agua de las olas. —Así nunca llegaremos a Finmark —rezongó el timonel de Valgard. —Yo no opino lo mismo —contestó él. Y al amanecer, tal y como le había dicho la bruja, desató los nudos que mantenían cerrado el saquito de cuero. Al momento el viento cambió de rumbo, comenzando a soplar de popa, hasta que se convirtió en un viento constante de nordeste. Con las velas izadas, los navíos progresaron fácilmente a buena marcha. Cuando la gente de los alrededores llegó a la heredad de Orm, sólo halló vigas carbonizadas y montones de cenizas humeantes. No muy lejos 93 encontraron a algunas mujeres y niños que sollozaban en la cruda luz de la mañana. Aelfrida era la única que no lloraba ni hablaba. Se sentaba encima del túmulo, con el cabello y el vestido ondula ntes en el salvaje viento, inmóvil, con los ojos vitreos, mirando fijamente el mar. Durante tres días y tres noches los navíos de Valgard fueron impulsados por un ventarrón constante. Uno se hundió en las furiosas ondas, aunque la mayor parte de su tripulación pudo salvarse; las de los demás no dejaban de achicar agua todo el tiempo, de modo que los guerreros comenzaron a murmurar entre sus barbas. Pero el temor a Valgard impidió que se concretasen en franco motín. Él permanecía casi todo el tiempo a proa de su embarcación, bien abrigado con su largo manto de cuero, cubierto de sal y escarcha, mirando por encima de las aguas. En una ocasión, un hombre se atrevió a contrariarle y fue muerto por él al momento, tras lo cual arrojó su cuerpo por la borda. Hablaba poco, pero eso le gustaba a su tripulación, ya que así no tenían que aguantar, clavada en ellos, su desconcertante mirada. Tampoco contestó a las súplicas de Freda y Asgerd para que les dijera adonde iban, pero les dio bien de comer y de beber y las mantuvo resguardadas en el puente anterior, sin dejar que sus hombres las molestasen. Al principio, Freda no quiso comer. —No puedo aceptar nada de ese ladrón y criminal —dijo. Y no toda la sal que manchaba sus mejillas provenía del mar. —Come para mantenerte con fuerzas —le aconsejó Asgerd—. No es él quien te lo da, porque se lo ha robado a otros. Además, si rezo a Dios para que nos ayude, podríamos tener una posibilidad de escapar. —Eso te lo prohíbo —dijo Valgard, que había estado escuchando—, y si te vuelvo a oír pronunciar de nuevo esa palabra, te amordazo. —Como tú digas —le contestó Freda—, aunque las oraciones nacen más del corazón que de los labios. —Pero no resultan de gran ayuda en lugares como éstos —se mofó Valgard— Muchas mujeres se quejaban a su Dios cuando yo les ponía las manos encima, y de bien poco les sirvió. Pero ya está bien de hablar de dioses 94 a bordo de mi nave. Valgard, aunque no esperaba que el cielo fuese a ayudarlas, no quería correr riesgos, ni menos aún recordar lo que le había sido negado para siempre —la gente sin alma de Faerie muy leída en magia, había llegado a conocer la existencia de un Poder mayor que todos, que, no obstante, jamás podrían comprender— y por eso sentía un terror ciego por los simples nombres y signos a Él asociados. Así pues, él volvió a sus pensamientos y las dos hermanas a su silencio. Tampoco los hombres hablaban mucho, de suerte que los únicos sonidos que se oían eran el ulular del viento entre las jarcias, el bramido del mar contra la proa y el crujido del maderamen al quejarse. En lo alto volaban nubes grises, de las que con frecuencia, entre remolinos, caía nieve o granizo, mientras los bajeles cabeceaban y se balanceaban, perdidos entre las tumultuosas ondas. Al tercer día, a la caída de la tarde, bajo un cielo tan bajo y espeso que bastaba por sí solo para evocar el crepúsculo, avistaron Finmark. Los acantilados surgían lívidos de la resaca que los golpeaba con sonido atronador. Sus cumbres habrían estado desnudas, si no hubiera sido por la nieve, el hielo y un puñado de árboles sacudidos por el viento. —Es un lugar horrible —dijo, escalofriado, el timonel de Valgard—, y no veo nada de esas tierras de las que nos hablaste. —Dirígete hacia aquel fiordo que está delante de nosotros —le ordenó su jefe. El viento los empujó hacia el fiordo, hasta que los tristes acantilados calmaron su ardor. Entonces arriaron los mástiles y sacaron los remos, de forma que, espumeantes, los navíos avanzaron en el crepúsculo hacia una playa sembrada de rocas. Tras aguzar la mirada, Valgard vio a los trolls. No eran tan altos como él, pero sí el doble de anchos, con brazos como troncos de árbol que les llegaban a las rodillas, piernas cort as y arqueadas, y pies planos y unguiculados, su piel era verde, fría y viscosa, y parecía moverse encima de su carne, dura como las piedras. Bien pocos de ellos tenían cabello, por lo que sus grandes cabezas redondas, de nariz plana, con bocas llenas de grandes dientes, orejas puntiagudas y ojos distantes, hundidos en órbitas de huesos salientes, parecían repelentes calaveras. Los ojos carecían de esclerótica y eran como pozos de negrura. 95 Por lo general, y a pesar de lo gélido del viento, no llevaban ropa alguna, con excepción de algunas pieles. Sus ar mas consistían sobre todo en mazas, hachas, lanzas, arcos y hondas que lanzaban proyectiles de piedra; todas ellas demasiado pesadas para ser manejadas por los hombres o los elfos. Pero algunos de ellos vestían yelmo y loriga, y empuñaban armas de bronce o de aleación élfica. Valgard no pudo reprimir un escalofrío al verlos. —¿Has cogido frío? —le preguntó uno de sus hombres. —No..., no... es nada —musitó. Pero pensaba para sus adentros: «Espero que la bruja no me mintiese y que las hembras élficas no sean tan espantosas como esta gente: deben de ser unos guerreros formidables.» Los vikingos encallaron sus navíos y los arrastraron tierra adentro. Después se quedaron inmóviles, esperando en el atardecer, mientras Valgard veía cómo los trolls iban llegando a la playas. La lucha fue breve y horrible, pues los hombres no podían ver a sus atacantes. Aquí y allá, sucedía que un troll llegaba a tocar el acero y perecía carbonizado, pero la mayor parte de ello s sabían como evitar el metal. Sus risotadas resonaban entre los acantilados mientras esparcían los sesos de los hombres, les abrían en canal o les daban caza por las montañas. El timonel de Valgard vio morir a sus amigos, mientras su jefe permanecía apoyado en el hacha, sin hacer nada. El vikingo rugió y se lanzó contra el berserkr. —¡Esto es obra tuya! —exclamó. —En efecto, lo es —respondió Valgard, y le recibió con un clamor de acero. Cuando acabó con el timonel, que fue cosa de poco, ya había terminado la batalla. El capitán de los trolls se acercó a él. Las piedras quedaban trituradas a su paso. —Fuimos informados de tu llegada por un murciélago que también era una rata —dijo, con voz sonora, en la lengua de Valgard—. Te damos nuestras más efusivas gracias por tan excelente distracción. Ven con nosotros, nuestro Rey te aguarda. —Al momento —asintió Valgard. Ya había amordazado a las dos hermanas, atándoles los brazos a la 96 espalda. Atónitas por lo que habían presenciado, fueron dando tumbos, casi a ciegas, a lo largo de una profunda garganta y de la ladera yerma de una montaña; pasaron ante guardias invisibles y entraron en la gruta donde se sentaba Illrede. Era una sala colosal, excavada en la roca y amueblada con una magnificencia que provenía de elfos, enanos, goblins y de otros pueblos, entre ellos el de los hombres. Grandes gemas resplandecían en las paredes, entre finísimos tapices, mientras copas y te jidos costosos guarnecían mesas de ébano y marfil a la luz de las antorchas que ardían a todo lo largo de la vasta sala, iluminando los ricos atavíos de los nobles trolls y de sus damas. Gran número de siervos de las ra zas de los elfos, los enanos o los goblins iban y venían con trincheros de carne y copas de bebida. Todo aquello formaba parte de un festín por todo lo alto, para el que habían robado niños humanos y de Faerie, así como vacas, caballos, cerdos y vinos del sur. La música hecha de gruñidos, que tanto gusta a los trolls, resoplaba por el aire lleno de humo. A lo largo de las paredes se apostaban los centinelas, tan inmóviles como ídolos paganos, con la rojiza luz reluciendo en la punta de sus lanzas. Los trolls que se habían sentado a la mesa bebían y se emborrachaban, discutiendo entre ellos con estruendosa algarabía. Pero los nobles de Trollheim mantenían la calma, sentados en sus tronos esculpidos. La mirada de Valgard se posó en Illrede. El rey era ancho de cintura, con un rostro enorme y una barba, larga y rizada, de color verde. Cuando sus ojos, negros como la pez, divisaron a los recién llegados, Valgard sintió el miedo deslizarse a lo largo de su columna vertebral y tuvo que hacer esfuerzos para ocultarlo. —Salud, Gran Rey —dijo—. Soy Valgard Berserkr, llegado de Inglaterra para solicitar un lugar entre tu hueste. Me han dicho que eres el padre de mi madre, lo que me obliga a reclamar mi herencia. Illrede asintió con su cabeza, coronada de oro. —Ya lo sabía —dijo—. Bienvenido, Valgard, a Trollheim, tu patria — volvió la mirada hacia las jóvenes, que, exhaustas y llenas de desesperación, se habían dejado caer al suelo, una al lado de la otra—. Pero ¿quiénes son ésas? 97 —Un pequeño regalo —aclaró Valgard, con aplomo—, las hijas de mi padre adoptivo. Espero que te agraden. —¡Jo... jo, jo... jo, jo... jo! —la risa de Illrede rompió el silencio que había caído de repente—. ¡Un regalo buenísimo! ¡Hacía muchísimo que no tenía entre mis brazos a una jovencita humana!... ¡De veras! ¡Bienvenido, bienvenido, Valgard! Se puso en pie de un salto, que hizo vibrar el suelo bajo su peso y fue a contemplar de cerca a las muchachas. Freda y Asgerd miraron angustiadas a su alrededor. Era fácil leer sus pensamientos: «¿Dónde estamos? Parece una cueva oscura, pero Valgard habla a las paredes y el eco que responde no reproduce sus palabras...» —Contemplad vuestro nuevo hogar —dijo Illrede, con malicia, y rozó sus ojos. De repente, ambas tuvieron la Vista Encantada y pudieron verle, inclinado sobre ellas. Aquello les impresionó tanto que, a pesar de hallarse amordazadas, pudieron oírse sus gritos. Illrede se rió una vez más. 98 99 CAPITULO 10 a incursión que los elfos iban a hacer sobre Trollheim tenía que ser importante. ¡Se emplearía en ella cincuenta navíos largos tripulados por los mejores guerreros de entre los elfos de Britania, que ocultarían su forma y estarían protegidos por las hechicerías de Imric y de sus brujos más sabios! Se pensaba que, gracias a los encantamientos, podrían llegar sin ser vistos hasta los mismísimos fiordos del reino troll de Finmark; pero el alcance de su penetración en el interior tras su desembarco dependía de la resistencia que encontraran. Skafloc esperaba llegar hasta los mismísimos aposentos del rey Illrede y volver con su cabeza. Estaba ansioso de emprender el viaje. —No seas demasiado atolondrado —le aconsejó Imric—. Mata e incendia, pero no malgastes guerreros en inútiles aventuras. Lo importante no es que despaches a mil trolls, sino que consigas una estimación de sus fuerzas. —Haré ambas cosas —dijo Skafloc, con una mueca, Estaba tan inquieto como un joven garañón, con los ojos encendidos y el cabello castaño 100 cayéndole a ambos lados de la diadema que ceñía su frente. —No se... no sé — Imric parecía preocupado—. Siento, sin que pueda precisar cómo ni por qué, que de este viaje no saldrá nada bueno; por eso me gustaría detenerlo todo, así por las buenas. —Aunque lo hicieras, nos iríamos de todas las maneras —aseguró Skafloc. —Sí, lo sé. Y quizá esté equivocado . Ve, entonces, y que la suerte sea contigo. Una noche, justo después del crepúsculo, los guerreros se embarcaron. La luna, que acababa de salir, arrojaba plata y sombras sobre los riscos y las Colinas de los Elfos, sobre la playa que abandonaban y sobre las nubes que corrían hacia el Este, en alas de un viento que llenaba el cielo con su clamor. La claridad lunar, formando líneas rotas y arabescos, caía sobre las olas, que se precipitaban entre rugidos sobre las rocas, orladas de blanco; refulgía sobre las armas y lorigas de los guerreros elfos, mientras los blanquinegros navíos largos que descansaban sobre la arena de la playa no parecían más que sombras y rayos de luz lunar. Skafloc estaba de pie, envuelto en un manto, con el cabello ondeando al viento, mientras esperaba que se incorporasen los guerreros más rezagados. Hasta él, pálida a la luz de la luna, con los bucles de su cabellera como una nube y los ojos que le ardían, llegó Leea. —¡Me alegro de verte! —gritó Skafloc—. Despídete de mí y cántame una canción para que me dé buena suerte. —No puedo saludarte como quisiera, porque no puedo acercarme a esa loriga de hierro que llevas — contestó ella, con una voz que era como la música del viento en los brezales, el murmullo de las aguas y el tintineo de miríadas de campanillas sonando a lo lejos—. Además, tengo el presentimiento de que mis hechizos de poco servirían contra el desuno que te ha sido asignado —y su mirada buscó la de él—. Sé, con certidumbre que se halla más allá de lo racional, que te diriges a una trampa; por eso, y por la leche que te di cuando eras niño y los besos que te prodigué ya de hombre, esta vez te pido que te quedes. —Sería una bella proeza para un jefe elfo al frente de una incursión que bien puede volver con la cabeza de su enemigo —dijo, airado, Skafloc—. Ni por 101 nada ni por nadie podría cometer acción tan deshonrosa. —Sí... tienes razón —súbitamente, los ojos de Leea se perlaron de lágrimas—. Los hombres, de vida tan br eve que resulta cruel, corren en su juventud hacia la muerte como si fueran al encuentro de una muchacha. Hace sólo unos años que te acuné, Skafloc, y hace sólo unos meses que yací contigo, en las claras noches del verano; y ambos recuerdos son igual de nítidos, pues para mí, siendo inmortal, el tiempo es siempre inmutable. Y pasarán a fundirse, en ese abrir y cerrar de ojos que para mí son los años, con el recuerdo de ese día en que tu cadáver, lleno de mil heridas, espere a los cuervos. Jamás te olvidaré, Skafloc, pero me temo que te he besado por última vez. Y, entonces, cantó así: Hacia el mar sopla el viento esta noche, y los hombres del mar, incansables, salen de casa y emprenden el vuelo buscando el rocío con las gaviotas. Brazos de mujer, y hogares encendidos parientes y amigos, nada les retiene cuando un viento, allende su tierra les habla de favorables corrientes. La espuma y las algas los cubrirán. Viento, ah, viento, viejo vagabundo, gris y de raudos pies, siempre quejoso, la mujer maldice a quien le roba el hombre, llamándolo a su destino y a la muerte. Los hombres del mar, besados por las rientes ondas, frías y con el sinsabor de la sal, que engañan los corazones, serán llevados a tumbas sin sosiego, cuando el mar arrebate sus vidas. Y para sus mujeres será el llanto. A Skafloc no le agradó la canción, que tenía un regusto de mala suerte. Se volvió y dijo a gritos a sus guerreros que pusieran las naves a flote y 102 embarcasen en ellas. Pero en cuanto estuvo en el agua, dejó atrás todos sus malos presentimientos, en aras de una renovada ansiedad. —Este ventarrón viene soplando así desde hace tres días —dijo Goltan, uno de sus amigos—. Noto en él el hedor de un mago. Quizá alguno de ellos ponga proa en estos momentos hacia el Este. —Entonces se ha mostrado muy amable al ahorrarnos las molestias de suscitar los vientos —rió Skafloc—. Sin embargo, si lleva tres días navegando hacia el Este, su navío ha sido hecho por los hombres. ¡Nosotros navegamos más deprisa! Los mástiles y velas fueron alzados y los estilizados mascarones de proa, con la figura del dragón, colocados en su sitio. Corrieron como impulsados por una tormenta, como la volante nieve y el blanco rocío a punto de helarse, blanco bajo la luna. Las ol as se agitaban a su paso, mientras dejaban una amplia estela en las rugientes aguas. Y como los elfos eran los más veloces de Faerie, ya fuera a pie, a caballo o en barco, antes de medianoche los acantilados de Finmark estaban a su vista. Los dientes de Skafloc brillaron al sonreír. Y, entonces, improvisó: Raudos llegaron los elfos, por el Este, hasta Trollheim, para hacer sonar las lanzas, y a la espada hacer cantar, con magníficos regalos que a los trolls van a entregar: cráneos partidos en dos y vísceras bien trinchadas. Tumbaremos a los trolls (en el ardor del tumulto), cuando, por miedo a las llamas, se les aflojen las tripas. Camaradas, sed gentiles con los trolls que clamorean: si la cabeza les duele 103 ¡decapitémoslos, ea! Los elfos que ocupaban las dos bordas del barco que cabeceaba sonrieron torvamente, recogieron vela y mástil y empuñaron los remos. La flota penetró en el fiordo, dispuesta para el combate, pero no vieron ni rastro de los guardias del enemigo. En cambio, divisaron otros bajeles descansando en la arena de la playa... tres letales navíos largos, cuyas tripulaciones aparecían descuartizadas entre las rocas. Skafloc saltó a tierra, con la espada desenvainada y el manto ondeando tras de sí. —¡Qué extraño es esto! —dijo, inquieto. —Parece como si se hubieran refugiado aquí, huyendo de la tormenta, para acabar siendo atacados por los trolls —comentó Goltan—. Además, no hace mucho... Mira, toca, la sangre aún está fresca, los cuerpos calientes... Quizá los criminales hayan ido a ver a Illrede para informarle de lo ocurrido. —Entonces... ¡tenemos una suerte incr eíble! —exclamó Skafloc, que no había pensado en realizar un ataque por sorpresa. Por eso, en vez de sonar el cuerno, hizo una señal con la espada. Ni él ni los elfos se preocuparon de los muertos, que no eran más que hombres. Las tripulaciones saltaron a los bajíos y arrastraron los navíos hasta bien adentro de la playa. Unos pocos elfos se quedaron de guardia, mientras Skafloc conducía al grueso de sus fuerzas por el sendero que llevaba hacia el interior. Atravesaron una garganta, invisible a los ojos humanos, y salieron por la ladera de una montaña, cubierta de nieve de cegador brillo, cuyos picos arañaban el cielo. El viento chillaba y los abofeteaba con sus frías manos. Unas nubes deshilachadas surcaban la faz de la luna, que parecía mirarlos con ojos entornados. Ágiles como gatos, los elfos se abrieron paso por la montaña, entre riscos y despeñaderos, hasta llegar a la entrada de la cueva que se abría en la ladera. Al acercarse, vieron salir de ella una banda de trolls, como si fueran los guardias costeros que regresaban a sus puestos. El grito de Skafloc se elevó por encima del sonido del viento: —¡Deprisa, podemos cortarles la retirada! 104 Y saltó como una pantera, rodeado y seguido de los elfos. Antes de que los trolls se diesen cuenta de lo que se les venía encima, el metal aulló en sus oídos y fue lo último que oyeron. Pero, como era de esperar, el ruido había llegado dentro, de manera que, cuando entraron, los guerreros de Skafloc se encontraron con una oposición cada vez mayor. El estruendo de las armas aumentaba en el túnel que iba en descenso. Los gritos de guerra de los elfos y los atronadores alaridos de los trolls se confundían y ocasionaban ecos espantosos. Skafloc y Goltan abrían la marcha, escudo contra escudo, lanzando golpes a su alrededor. Los trolls, que se movían lentamente y que por lo general carecían de protección, iban cayendo, uno tras otro, bajo el filo de sus armas. Un guerrero lanzó a Skafloc una lanza tan gruesa como el tronco de un árbol joven. La paró con su escudo, echó el asta a un lado, se acercó a su atacante y le golpeó. Su hoja de acero penetró, ardiente, en su hombro, hasta llegar al corazón. Con el rabillo del ojo vio una maza que le llegaba desde la izquierda, capaz de aplastar yelmo y cráneo al mismo tiempo. Adelantó el escudo en aquella dirección. El golpe resonó en su borde de hierro y le hizo retroceder, titubeando. Cayó sobre una rodilla, pero pudo extraer su espada del cadáver y cortarle al troll una pierna. Levantándose, imprimió a su arma una trayectoria curva y sibilante y otra cabeza de troll abandonó su cuello dando saltos. Finalmente, los defensores, ya en retirada, llegaron a una cueva más espaciosa. Los elfos gritaron de alegría al disponer del espacio suficiente para utilizar su arma preferida. Cogieron los largos arcos que llevaban a la espalda, y las flechas de plumas grises arreciaron como la tormenta desde la retaguardia de Skafloc, cayendo sobre los trolls. Cuando los defensores, rotas ya sus filas, salieron huyendo, tuvo lu gar a todo lo largo de la caverna el comienzo de los combates individuales. Pero un troll sin cota de malla no era enemigo para esos remolinos en que se habían convertido los elfos, brincando, esquivando y lanzando tajos y estocadas. Algunos de los asaltantes murieron, co n el cráneo partido o eviscerados, y no pocos sufrieron heridas. Pero para los trolls fue una carnicería. Sin embargo, la guardia del Rey se mantenía a pie firme en el pasaje abovedado que conducía al salón de los banquetes de su señor. Cuando los elfos, 105 habiendo dado buena cuenta de los demás, cargaron contra ella, muy pocos pudieron llegar hasta sus inflexibles posiciones, pues el espacio era tan menguado que de bien poco les servía su agilidad y destreza en combatir. Se replegaron en confusión, dejando cierto número de muertos y heridos. Ningún proyectil serviría de ayuda contra aquella barrera de escudos, que cubría a los trolls desde los ojos hasta justo debajo de la rodilla. Pero Skafloc observó la altura de la arcada bajo la que se habían parapetado los trolls. — ¡Os mostraré el camino! —gritó a sus guerreros. Cubierto de la sangre verde de los trolls y también de la suya propia, con el yelmo abollado y la espada y el escudo mellados, lanzó una risotada mientras envainaba su arma y cogía una lanza. Arrojándose hacia delante, clavó su punta en el suelo y cargó todo su peso en el otro extremo de su astil, pasando por encima de las cabezas de sus enemigos y aterrizando en el interior de la sala. Al caer, desenvainó de nuevo la espada. El impacto de la caída, debido al peso de su armadura, hizo que le temblaran las piernas y cayera al suelo. Pero se levantó de un salto. Los guardias estaban bien armados, por encontrarse de servicio, pero llevaban al descubierto las piernas y parte de los brazos. Con sólo tres golpes, la hoja de acero acabó con otros tantos trolls. Los demás se volvieron para atacarle. Entonces, los elfos se lanzaron contra la línea que acababa de romperse..., abrieron en ella una brecha y penetraron en la sala del Rey de los trolls. Skafloc vio a lo lejos a Illrede, con una lanza en las manos, pero inmóvil como una piedra en su alto sitial; y corrió hacia él. Dos trolls que intentaron detenerle cayeron bajo sus golpes. Entonces, un hombre se le cruzó en el camino. Durante un momento, Skafloc se quedó inmóvil, atónito al ver su propio rostro que le miraba amenazante, desde detrás del hacha que caía. Apenas tuvo tiempo de levantar el escudo. Pero el hacha no era de blando bronce o de aleación élfica, sino de auténtico acero, y no había sufrido la mella del combate, lo que no podía decirse del escudo. El hacha golpeó en su borde, hendió la madera y la chapa fina de hierro y no se detuvo hasta abrir una herida en su brazo izquierdo. 106 Skafloc intentó bloquear el hacha con un golpe descendente, pero el desconocido se echó hacia atrás, liberando su arma con tanta fuerza que le hizo vacilar. Entonces pasó al ataque . Skafloc echó a un lado el escudo, ya inservible. El hierro repicó y despidió chispas al chocar contra el hierro. Ambos hombres llevaban yelmo y loriga; pero, sin su escudo, el espadachín llevaba las de perder contra el gran peso del hacha. A pesar de que Skafloc conociera el arte élfico de la esgrima, consistente en tirar a fondo, parar y rodear, la espada que llevaba aquella noche no estaba lo suficientemente equilibrada para permitirle ejercitarlo. Así pues, tuvo que permanecer a la defensiva y se vio obligado a retroceder. Entonces la marca de la batalla los separó. Skatloc se encontró de repente frente a un troll, que combatió duramente antes de caer. Momentos después, el extranjero estaba rodeado de elfos. Se abrió paso a través de ellos y regresó al lado de Illrede, mientras los trolls que quedaban se agrupaban alrededor de ellos dos. Con furioso empuje, se abrieron camino hasta una puerta que había al fondo y desaparecieron por ella. —¡Perseguidlos! —exclamó Skafloc en el fragor de la batalla. Goltan y los demás capitanes elfos le dijeron a gritos que retrocediesen. —Sería una locura —dijeron—. Fíjate que la puerta conduce a unas cavernas sin luz que se hunden en la tierra, en las que fácilmente podrían estar emboscados. Mejor será que la cerremos por este lado, no sea que Illrede vaya a azuzar contra nosotros a los monstruos del interior. —Sí, tenéis razón —dijo Skafloc, a regañadientes. Su mirada recorrió toda la sala, escrutando ávidamente, antes que nada, sus riquezas, para después sentir angustia al contemplar los cuerpos de los elfos desperdigados por el suelo, resbaladizo por la sangre derramada. Pero comprendió que debía alegrarse al pensar en lo reducido de su número, frente a las elevadas pérdidas del enemigo. Los trolls heridos estaban siendo rematados —y el clamor de sus gruñidos y lamentos se terminó pronto—, mientras que los elfos que habían sufr ido algún daño recibían los primeros auxilios, en espera de la magia que los curaría ya de vuelta a la patria. De improviso, los ojos de Skafloc quedaron inmóviles, no menos extrañado que cuando viera su propio rostro en el de un enemigo. Dos mujeres yacían juntas, atadas y amordazadas, cerca del trono. 107 Se les acercó, pero ellas se echaron a un lado cuando le vieron empuñar un cuchillo. —Pero... si sólo quiero liberaros —dijo en la lengua del Norte, y cortó sus ligaduras. Ellas se levantaron, temblorosas y abrazándose mutuamente. Su sorpresa no hizo sino aumentar cuando la más alta, de cabello rubio, balbució entre lágrimas: —Trai... dor y criminal, ¿cuál es la nueva infamia que preparas? —Pero... —Skafloc reprimió su extrañeza. Aunque había aprendido varias de las lenguas de los hombres, las había usado muy raramente, por lo que las hablaba con la entonación cantarina del élfico—. Pero ¿qué he hecho? —esbozó una sonrisa—. No creo que dijerais eso porque os gustara estar atadas. —No te rías de nosotras, Valgard, después de todo lo que nos has hecho —dijo la muchacha de cabellos dorados. —Yo no soy Valgard —explicó Skafloc—, ni le conozco, a no ser que se trate del hombre con quien he combatido... Pero quizá no lo hayáis visto entre tanta confusión. Soy Skafloc de Alfheim, y no soy amigo de los trolls. —¡Es verdad, Asgerd! —exclamó la muchacha más joven—. No puede ser Valgard. Fíjate, no lleva barba, va vestido de manera diferente, habla de manera extraña. —No sé —murmuró Asgerd—. ¿La muerte que planea alrededor de nosotros es otro truco? ¿No habrá hecho otro de sus encantamientos para engañarnos? ¡Oh, sólo sé que Erlend y nuestros allegados están muertos! —y comenzó a sollozar, terminando con un violento acceso de tos. —¡No, no! —la más joven se agarró a los hombros de Skafloc, buscando su rostro, y sonriendo acto seguido a través de las lágrimas, como los rayos del sol primaveral entre la lluvia—. No, extr anjero, tú no eres Valgard, aunque te pareces mucho a él. Tus ojos son cálidos y tu boca sabe muy bien cómo reír... Gracias a D... Él le cubrió los labios con la palma de su mano antes de que hubiera podido acabar. —No pronuncies aún ese nombre —dijo, apresurado—. Aquí hay gente de Faerie que no soporta escucharlo. Pero nadie os hará ningún daño. Yo mismo velaré para que seáis llevadas adonde queráis. 108 Ella asintió, con los ojos muy abiert os. Skafloc soltó su mano y la miró durante largo tiempo. Era de estatura media, pero todo en ella era suavidad, esbeltez, juventud y belleza resplandeciendo a través de los jirones de sus ropas. Su cabello era largo y lustroso , de color bronce oscuro, con mechas rojizas; su rostro estaba modelado con dulz ura, tenía la frente amplia, la nariz suavemente respingona y la boca grande y de labios suaves. Bajo sus negras cejas, sus ojos de largas pestañas eran grandes, despiertos, brillantes y de un color gris que suscitó en la bien entrenada mente de elfo de Skafloc la vaga memoria de un recuerdo. Pero como no conseguía comprender de qué se trataba, dejó que se desvaneciera del todo. —¿Quién eres? —preguntó, sin brusquedad. —Soy Freda, hija de Orm, del Danelaw de Inglaterra; y ésta es mi hermana Asgerd —le contestó—. ¿Y tú, guerrero... ? —Skafloc, ahijado de Imric, del encl ave en Inglaterra de Alfheim —dijo. Ella retrocedió, consiguiendo reprimir a duras penas las ganas de santiguarse—. Ya te he dicho que no tengas miedo de mí —prosiguió, dejándose vencer por un impulso incontrolado—. Esperadme aquí mientras me hago cargo de la situación. Los elfos estaban ocupados en saquear la sala de Illrede. Al buscar en las salas laterales encontraron esclavos de su propia especie, a los que liberaron. Finalmente, salieron de la cu eva. Cerca de su entrada encontraron casas, graneros y cobertizos, que incendiaron. Aunque aún soplara un fuerte viento, el tiempo había aclarado casi del todo, por lo que las llamas rugían, resplandecientes, bajo un cielo cuajado de estrellas. —Me parece que Trollheim ya no ofrece ningún peligro —dijo Skafloc. —No estés tan seguro —le previno Valka el Sabio—. Los hemos cogido desprevenidos. Me gustaría saber la cuantía de su ejército y la distancia a la que se encuentra acampado. —Ya nos enteraremos de eso en otra ocasión —dijo Skafloc—. Ahora volvamos a las naves y así podremos estar en casa antes del amanecer. Asgerd y Freda seguían juntas, observando, casi sin darse cuenta y gracias a su Vista Encantada, lo que hac ían los elfos. Les resultaban extraños aquellos guerreros tan altos, que se movían como el agua y el humo, sin hacer ruido al andar, y cuyas lorigas emitían tintineos de plata en medio de la noche. 109 Pálidos como el marfil, con rostros de pómulos altos, orejas apuntadas de animal y ojos vacuos y relucientes, infundían terror a las miradas mortales. Entre ellos se movía Skafloc, casi co n tanta gracia y sigilo como ellos, viendo de noche como los gatos y hablando su extrañísima lengua. Sin embargo, tenía aspecto humano, y Freda, al recordar el color de su mano, tan distinto al de la piel de los elfos, suave como la seda, que había tocado accidentalmente, ya no dudó de que fuera humano. —Debe de ser pagano para vivir entre esas criaturas —comentó Asgerd en cierto momento. —Bueno..., supongo que lo será..., pero es amable y nos ha salvado de... —Freda tuvo un escalofrío y se arrebujó aún más en el manto que Skafloc le había entregado. Éste hizo sonar su cuerno para indicar retirada, y la larga y silenciosa fila bajó por la montaña, desandando el camino que antes hiciera. Skafloc caminaba junto a Freda, sin decir apenas nada, pero poniendo frecuentemente su mirada en ella. Era mucho más joven que él, y aún le quedaba un resto de encantadora e infantil torpeza que se podía apreciar en sus largas piernas y lo delgado de su talle. Llevaba la cabeza alta, con lo que sus resplandecientes cabellos parecían crepitar en la helada claridad lunar... au nque Skafloc no albergaba duda alguna de su suave tacto. Mientras bajaban por la accidentada pendiente, él la cogía, y entonces su pequeña mano quedaba escondida entre la suya, encallecida. De repente, entre las escarpaduras resonó el bramido de un cuerno troll, al que respondieron otros dos, cuyos ecos llegaron hasta los acantilados y fueron devueltos, lacerados, por el viento. Los elfos se pararon en seco, con las orejas prestas, olfateando en el aire, mientras escrutaban la noche en busca de sus enemigos. —Creo que han debido de adelantarse para cortarnos la retirada —dijo Goltan. —Mal asunto —comentó Skafloc—, pero peor sería bajar a ciegas por la oscura garganta y recibir las piedras que nos podrían tirar desde arriba. Así que daremos un rodeo, en vez de atravesarla. Y dio la llamada de combate con el lur que le llevaron. Los elfos eran los 110 inventores del lur, grande y retorcido, que aun utilizaban, aunque los hombres hubieran olvidado su uso desde los tiempos de la Edad del Bronce Nórdico. Dirigiéndose a Freda y a Asgerd, dijo: —Me temo que nuevamente tendremos que luchar. Mi gente os defenderá mientras no pronunciéis los nombres que tanto les afectan. Si olvidáis mi advertencia, entonces se irán de vuestro lado y los trolls que no hayan oído vuestros rezos podrán mataros con sus flechas. —No sería bueno morir sin invocar a ... Al que está arriba — replicó Asgerd—. Sin embargo, te obedeceremos en esto. Skafloc se rió y pasó una mano por el hombro de Freda. —¿Cómo no vamos a vencer cuando luchamos por semejantes bellezas? —comentó, alegre. Llamó a dos elfos para que llevaran en brazos a las jóvenes, que no podrían seguir el paso cuando se hiciera más vivo, y otros más formaron en posición de tortuga a su alrededor. Acto seguido, Skafloc, a la cabeza de una formación en cuña, bajó desde los riscos hacia el mar. Los elfos marchaban ligeros, saltando de roca en roca, entre el canto de las mallas de sus cotas y el resplandor de la luna sobre sus armas. Cuando vieron a los trolls, una masa negra recortándose sobre el pálido puente nocturno de los dioses, lanzaron alaridos, golpearon los escudos con sus armas y se aprestaron a la batalla. Skafloc contuvo la respiración al obse rvar lo cuantiosa que era la fuerza troll. Calculó que los elfos se veían superados en proporción de seis a uno. Si Illrede había podido reunir semejante horda en tan poco tiempo, su ejército debía de ser numerosísimo. —Bueno —dijo—. Cada uno de nosotros tendrá que matar a seis trolls. Los arqueros elfos lanzaron sus flechas. Los poco ágiles trolls no consiguieron evitar aquellas nubes de flechas que oscurecían la luna, y que caían, silbando sobre ellos, una y otra vez. Muchas dieron en el blanco, pero, como siempre, la mayor parte fueron a parar inútilmente en las rocas o se clavaron en los escudos; en poco tiempo a los elfos se les acabaron los proyectiles. Entonces cargaron, desencadenando en la noche la batalla. Los mugidos de los cuernos de los trolls y el retumbar de los lures de los elfos; los aullidos 111 lupinos de los trolls y el grito de los el fos, parecido al reclamo del halcón; el atronar de las hachas de los trolls sobre los escudos de los elfos y el martillear de las espadas de los elfos sobre los yelmos de los trolls, llegaban, tempestuosos, hasta las estrellas. ¡Hacha y espada! ¡Lanza y maza! ¡Escudo hendido y yelmo desfondado y malla rota! ¡Roja efusión de sangre élfica que sale al paso del frío y verde raudal de sangre troll! ¡Auroras bailando la danza de la muerte sobre las cabezas de todos! Dos figuras imponentes —cada una de ellas hubiera podido ser tomada por la otra— destacaban en la refriega. El hacha de Valgard y la espada de Skafloc abrían sangrientas brechas en la agolpada muchedumbre de vacilantes guerreros. El berserkr, espumeando de la furia que le poseía, aullaba y golpeaba. Skafloc se mantenía en silencio, solamente roto por su jadeante respiración, pero sin mostrarse por ello menos furioso. Los trolls habían rodeado a los elfos por los dos flancos, y como en aquella maniobra de tenaza poco contaban la rapidez y agilidad, su fuerza física acabó por imponerse. Le parecía a Skafloc que por cada rostro horriblemente boquiabierto que abatía, surgían otros dos de la nieve manchada de sangre. Debía quedarse donde estaba, mientras el sudor que corría por su cuerpo se le helaba al bajar por la cintura, y mantener asido su nuevo escudo y golpear sin descanso. Entonces fue cuando Valgard acudió a su encuentro, presa de la berserkirgangr y del odio que sentía por todo lo relacionado con los elfos... y más aún por el ahijado de Imric. Lucharon cuerpo a cuerpo, mirándose enfurecidos a los ojos, bajo la engañosa claridad lunar. La hoja de Skafloc golpeó con estruendo metálico el yelmo de Valgard, abollándolo. El hacha de Valgard hizo volar astillas del escudo de Skafloc. Entonces, Skafloc lanzó un golpe oblicuo que alcanzó a Valgard en una mejilla, dejando sus dientes al descubierto en una mueca espantosa. El berserkr aulló nuevamente y desencadenó una atronadora lluvia de golpes, desviando la espada de Skafloc y alcanzando su escudo, hasta que el brazo izquierdo de éste estuvo a punto de ceder, mientras la sangre se embebía en la venda que protegía su anterior herida. 112 Sin embargo, Skafloc aún seguía aguardando el momento propicio; y cuando su contendiente adelantó excesivamente una de sus piernas, le clavó profundamente su espada en la pantor rilla. Y le habría dejado cojo para siempre si el filo no hubiese estado desgastado por la batalla. De cualquier modo, Valgard dio un alarido y cayó de espaldas. Skafloc se lanzó sobre él. El impacto de algo parecido a una piedra repercutió en el yelmo de Skafloc, haciéndole caer de rodillas. I llrede, el rey de los Trolls, estaba inclinado sobre él y acababa de golpearle con la pétrea cabeza de una maza. Valgard se levantó, aprestando su hacha. Aunque los oídos le zumbaran y el dolor fuera como una banda de hierro que le oprimiera las sienes, Skafloc se echó a un lado. El hacha dio en el suelo. Enloquecido por la batalla, uno de los elfos que formaban la tortuga avanzó para golpear al berserkr antes de que pudiese liberar su hacha. Pero la maza de Illrede le alcanzó, partiéndole el cuello. Valgard levantó su hacha y golpeó con ella en dirección a la brecha abierta por el elfo que había abandonado la formación, para alcanzar a quien estaba a su lado. Pero no le hirió a él, sino a la persona que llevaba en brazos. La tortuga se cerró, avanzando contra el hombre y el troll, que se retiraron ante tantas espadas. Skafloc, adelantándose, la guió. Iba arrastrando la pierna izquierda. Illrede recobró el contado con sus guardias. Valgard se quedó donde estaba, solo, sin ninguna secuela de su furor. Apoyándose en la pierna sana, cubierto de sangre, se detuvo a mirar el cadáver de Asgerd. —No quise hacerlo —dijo—. ¿Acaso mi hacha está maldita? ¿No seré yo...? —y se pasó una mano por los ojos , perplejo—. Y, sin embargo, ellas no son de mi sangre... ¿no es cierto? Debilitado tras tanta furia, se sentó al lado de Asgerd. La batalla se iba alejando de él. —Ahora sólo me queda matar a Skafloc y a Freda para que toda la sangre, que una vez pensé que fuera la mía, se derrame de una vez — murmuró, acariciando las muy doradas trenzas de la joven muerta—. No estaría mal servirme de ti, hacha fratricida. Y también puedo matar a Aelfrida, si es que todavía vive... ¿Por qué no? Ella no es mi madre. Mi madre es una cosa grande y horrible encadenada en las mazmorras de Imric. Aelfrida, quien me cantaba para que me durmiera, no es mi madre. 113 La situación iba mal para los elfos, por muy valientemente que combatieran. Desde la vanguardia, Skafloc les daba a gritos sus órdenes, reagrupándolos, ordenándolos y dirigiéndolos. Su espada cantaba la muerte, de suerte que ningún troll podía permanecer cerca de aquel remolino de acero; y así, secundado por sus guerreros, fue abriéndose camino, lentamente, hacia el mar. Titubeó durante un instante, al ver caer a Goltan atravesado por una lanza. —Ahora tengo un amigo menos —dijo—; se trata de un bien que jamás podré recuperar —y su voz recobró la energía cuando exclamó—: ¡Valor, Alfheim! ¡Adelante! ¡Adelante! Y de tal suerte, lo que quedaba de los elfos rompió la línea de los trolls y se retiró hacia la playa. Valka el Sabio, Flam de las Orcadas, Hlokkan Lanzarroja y otros grandes guerreros elfos cayeron en la retaguardia. Pero los demás consiguieron llegar hasta sus naves. Algunos, para llamar la atención de los trolls, se dirigieron a las pendientes que ceñían la playa y dispersaron por ellas el botín que les quedaba. Aquello consiguió frenar el ataque, ya que Illrede prefirió recuperar sus tesoros que seguir perdiendo guerreros. Había quedado el suficiente número de elfos para arrastrar hasta la orilla del mar, y tripular, cerca de la mitad de los navíos. Los que no pudieron utilizarse fueron incendiados con ayuda de encantamientos. Acto seguido los bajaron al agua, subieron a bordo y remaron desesperadamente, hasta salir del fiordo. Freda, acurrucada en el fondo del navío dragón de Skafloc, pudo contemplarle cuando de pie, alto y cubierto de sangre, recortándose contra la luna, trazaba runas en el aire y murmuraba palabras que le resultaban desconocidas. El viento giró, soplando de popa, se convirtió en ventarrón, en tempestad, y con las velas tensas como el acero, los mástiles inclinados hacia proa, y las jarcias vibrantes por el esfuerzo, los navíos brincaron hacia delante. Y cada vez avanzaban más rápido, como el rocío marino, como las nubes, como el sueño, como los encantamientos, o como la luz de la luna sobre las aguas. Skafloc seguía a proa, bañado por las salpicaduras del agua y cantando sus ensalmos de brujo, sin yelmo, con el cabello flotando al viento y la desgarrada loriga tintineando, como una figura salida de las sagas antiguas y 114 de mundos ajenos al hombre. Freda se abismó en la negrura. 115 CAPITULO 11 e despertó en un lecho de marfil tallado, cubierto de pieles y seda. La habían bañado y vestido con una túnica de sarnita blanca. A su lado había una mesita, extrañamente trabajada, con vino, agua, racimos de uvas y otros frutos de las regiones meridionales. Aparte de aquello, sólo conseguía ver un interminable crepúsculo de tonalidad azul oscura. Durante cierto tiempo no pudo recordar lo que le había sucedido ni imaginarse dónde podría estar. Después, los recuerdos fluyeron de improviso y comenzó a sollozar desesperadamente. Lloró durante largo tiempo, hasta que cayó en la cuenta de que en aquella atmósfera que la rodeaba se respiraba paz; entonces, cuando hubo dejado de llorar, tomó un poco de vino, que tenía alguna extraña cualidad, aparte de la de ser espiritoso, y fue como si una mano reconfortante se hubiese posado sobre su corazón, pues se quedó profundamente dormida, sin soñar. Cuando despertó de nuevo, sintió que había descansado maravillosamente. Apenas se había sentado en el lecho, Skafloc salió del inconmensurable atardecer azulado y se acercó a ella. 116 No se apreciaba en él ni rastro de sus heridas. La sonrisa que enarbolaba tenía algo de apresurada. Estaba vestido con una corta túnica, ricamente recamada y un kilt que permitía apreciar bajo su piel una fuerte musculatura. Se sentó a su lado y tomó sus manos, mirándola a los ojos. —¿Te sientes mejor? —preguntó—. Eché en el vino una droga que sirve para curar la mente. —Me encuentro bien, sólo... sólo que no sé dónde estoy —le contestó. —En el castillo de Imric, en Elfheug, entre las Colinas de los Elfos, al norte —dijo Skafloc, mientras ella abría desmesuradamente los ojos, asustada—. Nadie te hará daño alguno y todo será según tus deseos. —Te estoy agradecida —susurró ella—. Lo siguiente, después de Dios... —No, no vuelvas a pronunciar ese nombre mientras estés aquí —la amonestó Skafloc—, porque los elfos salen huyendo al oírlo y tú eres su invitada. Por lo demás, eres libre de hacer lo que quieras. —Pero tú no eres un elfo —dijo Freda, ya calmada. —No, soy humano, pero he crecido entre ellos. Soy el ahijado de Imric el Astuto, y me siento más cerca de él que de mi padre, quienquiera que fuese. —¿A qué fue debido que vinieras a salvarnos? Nuestra situación era desesperada... Skafloc le habló brevemente de la guerra y de su incursión. Cuando hubo acabado, esbozó una sonrisa franca y dijo: —Será mejor que hablemos de ti. ¿Quién es el mortal capaz de engendrar una hija tan bella? Freda mudó la color y comenzó a narrar su historia. Él prestó atención, sin llegar a comprender su alcance. El nombre de Orm no le decía nada, porque Imric, para cortar todos los lazos humanos de su ahijado, le había dado a entender que su intercambio con la criatura que ocupó su puesto había tenido lugar en las alejadas regiones del oeste; más aun, mediante artes que conocía muy bien, al educar a Skafloc había apagado en él cualquier curiosidad que pudiese sentir por sus progenitores. En cuanto a Valgard, Freda desconocía todo de él, excepto que era su hermano y que estaba loco. Skafloc había percibido la falta de humanidad que flotaba alrededor del berserkr, pero como tenía tantas cosas en que pensar —especialmente en Freda—, no profundizó en la materia y decidió por las buenas que debía de estar poseído por algún 117 demonio. Y el que se pareciera a él lo atribuyó a algún encantamiento de tipo especular, que Illrede podía haberle hecho a Valgard por una docena de razones. Por lo demás, ninguno de los elfos con los que Skafloc se había aventurado a hablar de la cuestión había reparado en ello. ¿Era debido a que habían estado demasiado ocupados en sobrevivir, mientras luchaban, o a que la supuesta semejanza sólo estaba en su mente? El ahijado de Imric decidió no preocuparse más por aquel asunto y se olvidó de él. Ni siquiera Freda dio mayor importancia al parecido de ambos hombres, porque jamás habría podido confundirlos . Sus ojos, sus labios, sus gestos, la manera de andar, de comportarse, de cogerla o de pensar, eran tan diferentes en ambos que casi no llegaba a darse cu enta de la similitud de estatura y complexión, así como de rostro. Sólo se preguntó, de pasada, si no tendrían un antepasado común —algún danés que hubiese pasado un verano en Inglaterra cien años antes—, y ya no volvió a acordarse de la cuestión. Había mucho en qué pensar. La droga que había ingerido podía teñir de bruma su situación, pero jamás ocultar lo terrible de la misma. Mientras hablaba, la turbación y el subsiguiente estupor, que hasta aquel momento la angustia había mantenido a buen recaudo, se apoderaron de ella, y acabó su narración de los hechos llorando sobre el hombro de Skafloc. —¡Muertos! —exclamó—. Muertos, todos muertos, salvo Valgard y yo. Yo... le vi matar a padre y a Asmund cuando Ketil ya estaba muerto, y vi a madre caída a sus pies. Y el hacha en el cuerpo de Asgerd... Y ahora estoy sola y quisiera estar muerta en vez de ellos... ¡Oh, madre, madre! —Cálmate —dijo Skafloc, con evidente falta de tacto. Los elfos no le habían dicho que alguien pudiera sufrir de aquella manera.—. Al menos estás ilesa. Yo buscaré a Valgard y vengaré a tu familia. —De bien poco servirá. La casa de Orm es un montón de cenizas y su sangre se ha derramado y perdido, excepto lo poco que queda en un loco y en una muchacha sin hogar —se cogió a él, temblando—. ¡Ayúdame, Skafloc! Me desprecio a mí misma... por sentir miedo... pero lo tengo. Tengo miedo de estar sola en este lugar... El acarició sus cabellos con una mano, mientras que con la otra levantaba su barbilla para que pudiera mirarle a los ojos. —No estas sola —murmuró, y la besó con la delicadeza de una 118 mariposa. Los labios de Freda se estr emecieron bajo los suyos, suaves y cálidos, con el sabor salado de las lágrimas. —Bebe —dijo él, y le ofreció la copa de vino. Tomó un sorbo y después otro, y poco le faltó para quedarse, hecha un ovillo, entre los brazos de Skafloc, quien la reconfortó lo mejor que pudo, ya que le parecía una gran injusticia que ella siempre hubiera conocido la infelicidad; por eso mismo, susurró cier tos ensalmos que la libraron de su angustia con mayor rapidez de lo que lo habría hecho la propia naturaleza. Y Freda recordó que era hija de Orm el Fuerte, quien bajo su tempestuosa alegría siempre había si do severo consigo mismo, educando a sus hijos para que fueran como él. Por eso se hizo la siguiente reflexión: «Nadie puede escapar a su destino; pero tampoco nadie puede quitarnos el valor con que debemos afrontarlo.» Y así, ya más tranquila, deseosa incl uso de contemplar las maravillas de las que le hablara Skafloc, se incorporó en el lecho y dijo: —Gracias por ser tan bueno conmigo. Ya me siento recuperada. Él se rió. —Entonces ya es hora de que tomes algo —comentó. Le habían traído un vestido, de la flotante y tenue seda de araña que llevaban las hembras de los elfos. A pesar de que Skafloc obedeciera a su petición de darse la vuelta mientras se lo ponía, se le subieron los colores al rostro, ya que ocultaba bien poco. Apar te de eso, no pudo dejar de sentir agrado cuando él le puso en los brazos unos pesados brazaletes de oro, y una diadema cuajada de rutilantes diamantes en la cabeza. Pisando un suelo invisible llegaron a un largo corredor que no se apreciaba totalmente como tal en un principio, sino que parecía como si una especie de bruma se fuese haciendo más densa a medida que avanzaban, alcanzando así la solidez. Las resplandecientes columnatas se alineaban a lo largo de las paredes de mármol y los motivos ricamente coloreados de alfombras y tapices se movían en lentas e irreales danzas. Aquí y allá se veía pasar a los siervos goblins, una especie que se encuentra a mitad de camino entre elfos y trolls, de piel verde y de aspecto tosco, pero en absoluto desagradable. Freda se cogió a Skafloc con un leve chillido cuando una forma amarilla, con aspecto de demonio, pasó a su lado, 119 llevando un candelabro, precedido por un enano provisto de un gran escudo. —¿Qué es eso? —susurró Freda. Skafloc sonrió con una mueca. —Es un shen, y procede de Cathay. Le cogimos prisionero en una de nuestras incursiones. Es fuerte, y muy valioso como esclavo. Sin embargo, al igual que todos los de su especie, sólo puede moverse en línea recta, a no ser que sea desviado por una pared. Así se explica que el enano lleve continuamente el escudo delante de él para ponerlo oblicuamente en las esquinas, de suerte que el shen salga en la dirección adecuada, como haría un rayo de luz en un espejo. Ella se rió, y él escuchó, maravilla do, la musicalidad de su risa. En la hilaridad de las hembras de los elfos siempre había un tenue matiz de ironía y malicia; por eso, la de Freda le pareció como la mañana de un día florido. Comieron viandas inusuales, sentados en una mesa para ellos solos, mientras salía una suave música del aire que los rodeaba. Y Skafloc dijo: Bueno es el comer para, la amistad hermosa, y también las copas de vino buenas son para alegrar el gaznate a los hombres que ven amanecer. Pero mis ojos, ya desconcertados por la brillante mirada de Freda, se quedan saciados de la belleza de la esplendente doncella del Sur. Freda bajó la mirada, sintiendo que se ruborizaba de nuevo, y no pudo impedir una sonrisa. Pero fue presa de remordimientos y comenzó a decir: —¿Cómo puedo sentirme tan alegre cuando hace tan poco que todos los míos han muerto? Ha sido abatido el árbol que Protegía con sus ramas la tierra, y el viento sopla gélido sobre los campos yermos... —interrumpió su discurso y concluyó, diciendo—: Cuando los buenos se van, nos quedamos más pobres que antes. —Pero si fueron buenos no debes compadecerlos —dijo Skafloc con desparpajo—, pues ya están a salvo de las penas de este mundo, al lado de 120 Aquel que está ahí arriba. Más bien pienso, a decir verdad, que sólo el sonido de tu llanto puede turbar su bienaventuranza. Freda le cogió del brazo cuando salieron de la estancia. —El sacerdote dijo que los que mueren sin confesión... —se cubrió los ojos con la mano libre—. Los amo, y ellos se han ido y sigo llorando, sola. Los labios de Skafloc le rozaron la mejilla. —No mientras yo viva —murmuró—. Y no hagas mucho caso de lo que cualquier patán de sacerdote te haya dicho. ¿Qué sabe él? Llegaron a otra sala, cuyo cielo abovedado se iba oscureciendo a medida que se hacía más alto. En ella había una mujer cuya belleza no procedía de carne mortal. A su lado, la joven se sintió pequeña y casi vulgar, y tuvo miedo. —Ya ves, Leea, que he vuelto —saludó Skafloc en élfico. —Sí —replicó ella—, pero sin botín y tras haber dejado atrás más de la mitad de tus guerreros. ¡Una incursión inútil! —No del todo —dijo Skafloc—. Cayeron más trolls que elfos y el enemigo quedó desorganizado. Además, los cautivos que liberamos podrán informarnos ampliamente de lo que traman —pasó un brazo alrededor de la cintura de Freda, atrayéndola hacia sí; ella cedió de buena gana, atemorizada por la presencia de la bruja de blanco que la miraba airada—. Y fíjate qué joya me he traído. —¿Qué piensas hacer con ella? —le elijo Leea, tanteándole—. A no ser que tu sangre deje oír su voz. —Podría ser —contestó él, sin inmutarse. Leea se le acercó y tocó uno de sus brazos, escrutando su rostro con ojos de penumbra azulada y luz de luna. —Skafloc — dijo, con premura—, deshazte de esa jovencita. Envíala a su casa si no quieres matarla. —No tiene casa —respondió Skafloc—, y no voy a condenarla a la pobreza, porque ya ha sufrido demasiado —y añadió, mordaz—: ¿Por qué te interesa lo que hagan dos mortales? —Me interesa —dijo Leea, muy apenada—, y veo que mi presentimiento era acertado. Lo semejante llama a lo semejante... pero no en este caso, Skafloc. Toma a cualquier otra mortal, pero no a ésta. Te traerá el infortunio; 121 puedo presentirlo, como un escalofrío que me llegara hasta el tuétano. No la encontraste por casualidad... Acabará causándote un gran daño. —Freda no —dijo Skafloc, de manera rotunda; y para cambiar de tema le hizo una pregunta—: ¿Cuando regresará Imric? Había sido convocado al Consejo del Rey de los Elfos nada más regresar yo de Trollheim. —Pronto estará de vuelta. Aguarda hasta entonces, Skafloc, y quizá él pueda hacer que veas claramente el infortunio que yo sólo soy capaz de presentir, y ponerte sobre aviso. —¿Acaso yo, que he luchado contra trolls y demonios, debo temer a una joven? —dijo Skafloc, con un bufido—. No oigo aquí el croar del cuervo, sino el cacareo de una gallina —y salió, llevándose a Freda. Leea, sintiéndose herida, le siguió con la mirada; después echó a correr por los amplios corredores, con las lágrimas brillándole en los ojos. Skafloc y Freda vagabundearon por el castillo. En un principio, Freda se mostró parca en palabras y el tono que utilizó en ellas fue grave. Pero los filtros que había bebido y los conjuros que Skafloc le había echado consiguieron que una nueva animosidad le recorriera la mente y el corazón. Cada vez con más frecuencia, sonreía, most raba sorpresa, charlaba y le miraba. Hasta que, finalmente, Skafloc dijo: —Sal fuera y te enseñaré algo que he hecho para ti. —¿Para mí? —preguntó. —Y quizá, si las Nornas se muestras gentiles, también para mí —y se rió. Cruzaron el patio y pasaron a través de las altas puertas de bronce. Fuera, la luz del sol brillaba cegadora sobre la blancura matizada de sombras azuladas y no se veía ningún elfo. Entraron en el bosque que resplandecía por el hielo, cubiertos por el manto de Skafloc. El aliento se condensaba por el frío, bajo un cielo sin nubes, que producía un dolor agudo al respirar profundamente. Las olas murmuraban, monótonas, y a través de los sombríos abetos suspiraba la brisa. — ¡Qué frío! —dijo Freda, estremeci éndose. El bronce rojizo de su cabello era lo único cálido de aquel paisaje—. Fuera de tu manto hace mucho frío. —Demasiado para que vayas por ahí pidiendo limosna. 122 —Alguien me recogería. Teníamos muchos amigos; y nuestras tierras, ahora mías, supongo, serían una buena dote —pareció dudar al decirlo. —¿Para qué ir a ver a los amigos cuando los tienes al alcance de la mano? Y en lo que se refiere a tierras... mira. Habían llegado a la cima de una colina, que formaba parte de un grupo de otras que rodeaban un pequeño valle. Allí abajo, Skafloc había conseguido que fuera verano. Los árboles estaban cubiertos de hojas verdes, cerca de una pequeña cascada que animaba a bailar con su sonido, y las flores se mecían en la hierba alta y aromática. Los pájaros cantaban, los peces saltaban en el agua, y una cierva y su cría se pararon a mirarlos, totalmente confiados. Freda aplaudió y dio gritos de alegría. Skafloc sonrió. —Lo hice para ti —dijo—, porque perteneces al verano, a la vida y a la alegría. Olvida la muerte y los rigores del invierno, Freda. Aquí estamos en tu estación del año. Descendieron al pequeño valle, sin taparse con el manto, y se sentaron cerca de la cascada. La brisa ondulaba sus cabellos y, a su alrededor, abundaban los racimos de frutos silvestres. A una orden de Skafloc, las margaritas que Freda estaba cogiendo formaron por sí solas una guirnalda, que él colocó alrededor de su cuello. La joven no podía tener miedo de Skafloc ni de sus artes. Estaba echada de espaldas, con expresión soñadora, comiéndose una manzana que él le había ofrecido —y que tenía el mismo sabor que su vino noble y, al parecer, sus mismos efectos—, mientras escuchaba cómo cantaba. La sonrisa de tus labios, amada, me atrae como un grito de batalla. Tus rizos bronce y rojo me aprisionan: grilletes son, y más fuertes que el hierro. Mas si, antes, nunca había doblado el firme cuello bajo el triste yugo diré que ahora sólo deseo la cálida, acogida de la cárcel de tus brazos. La vida ha sido hecha para reír, 123 y para amar con corazón ardientes, pero si yo pudiese acariciarte ya habría llegado a mi paraíso. ¡Oh, tú, que me ves, cruel encantadora, buscando, y suplicándote tu amor! ¿Qué otra cosa podría ansiar Skafloc, si son tus encantos las que le hechizan? —Esto no esta bien —protestó Freda, con poca convicción, mientras hacia esfuerzos por seguir seria y no sonreír. —¿Cómo que no esta bien? No hay nada mejor. —Tú eres un pagano, y yo... —Ya te he dicho que no hables de esas cosas. Ahora tienes que pagar la multa —dijo Skafloc, y le dio un largo beso en el que empleó todo su arte, que fue suave al principio y fiero al final. Durante un momento, ella intentó resist írsele, pero se sintió sin fuerzas, que sólo recobró al unirse a él en el beso. —¿Ha sido tan terrible? —preguntó él, con una sonrisa. —No —dijo ella, con un susurro. —Ya sé que tu duelo es reciente. Pero se irá desvaneciendo... Además, aquellos a quienes querías no desearían que ocurriese de otra manera. A decir verdad, aquel duelo ya casi había desaparecido. Permanecía la ternura y cierta tristeza pasajera. ¡Q ué lastima que su familia no hubiera llegado a conocerle! —Debes pensar en el día de mañana, Freda, y más aún en el mañana de la sangre que eres la única en llevar. Te ofrezco las riquezas y maravillas de Alfheim, por supuesto, y no pido otra dote que tu persona; a cambio, tú y los tuyos seréis guardados con todo el empeño que esté a mi alcance; pero el primero de los regalos que te haré al despuntar el día será mi amor inmortal. Aquel amor no habría podido brotar bajo coacción, pero como todo se había desarrollado de la manera más natural, las artes élficas sólo habían acelerado el deshielo de la pena y ese anhelo que en la primavera siempre se tiene del amor; puesto que para que florezca, no se necesita más calor que el de la juventud. 124 El día terminó y la noche llegó al valle del verano. Ambos yacían junto a la cascada, oyendo un ruiseñor. Freda fue la primera en dormirse. Mientras la tenía abrazada, con uno de los brazos de ella posado en su pecho, y escuchaba su suave respirar, y aspiraba los olores de su cabello y de su humana condición, sintiendo su tibieza, y recordando cómo había llegado hasta él, entre risas y lágrimas, Skafloc hizo un descubrimiento repentino. Había dispuesto todo lo necesario para que ella cayera en una trampa, más por entretenimiento que por otra cosa. Todas las jóvenes que había espiado, aquí y allá a lo largo de sus vagabundeos entre los humanos, raramente estaban solas, y las que lo celaban le habían parecido a su mentalidad de elfo demasiado estúpidas, en cuerpo y alma, para ser dignas de él. Pero en Freda había encontrado una hija de hombre capaz de suscitar su deseo, por lo que se preguntaba cómo sería yacer con ella. De tal suerte, él también había acabado cayendo en la trampa. Pero no le importaba. Estaba adormilado, echado de espaldas en la hierba y sonreía a la Osa Mayor, que relumbraba en sus interminables revoluciones alrededor de la Estrella Polar. Las frías y astutas hembras de los elfos tenían muchos poderes; pero, quizá debido a que siempre habían mantenido cerrados sus corazones, jamás habían podido arrebatarle el suyo. Freda... Leea tenía razón. Lo semejante llamaba a lo semejantes. 125 126 CAPITULO 12 ías más tarde, Skafloc salió solo a cazar. Llevaba unos esquís encantados que le impulsaban con la rapidez del viento, subiendo las colinas y bajando los valles, vadeando ríos helados y atravesando bosques de árboles aplastados por el peso de la nieve en sus ramas, por lo que llegó a las Tierras Altas de Escocia a la puesta del sol. Cuando regresaba al hogar, con un corzo atado a la espalda, vio a lo lejos el resplandor de un fuego de campamento. Preguntándose quién o qué podría acampar en aquellas desoladas latitudes, se acercó lentamente pisando sobre la nieve, con la lanza bien dispuesta. Caminando en el crepúsculo, alcanzó a ver una forma de poderosa estatura que, acurrucada en la nieve, se estaba preparando una buena ración de caballo a la brasa. A pesar de aquel viento que producía escalofríos, sólo llevaba un kilt de Piel de lobo; el hacha que tenía a su lado relampagueaba con un fulgor que no era de este mundo. Skafloc sintió la presencia de una Potencia y, cuando vio que el desconocido sólo tenía una mano, un escalofrío le recorrió la espalda, pues no pensaba que fuera nada bueno encontrarse con Tyr, el As, a solas en medio de 127 la oscuridad. Pero ya era demasiado tarde para huir. El dios estaba mirando en su dirección. Skafloc llegó esquiando hasta el círculo iluminado por el fuego y sostuvo la mirada de los pensativos ojos negros de Tyr. —Salud, Skafloc —dijo el As. Su voz era como una tormenta lejana en un cielo de bronce. Siguió dando vueltas al espetón que asaba la carne en el fuego. —Salud, señor —Skafloc se sintió más tranquilo. Como los elfos carecían de alma no adoraban a los dioses, pero nunca había existido ninguna controversia entre ellos y los Ases; todo lo contrario, incluso más de un elfo prestaba servicios a los dioses de Asgard. Tyr, cortésmente, le hizo una seña para que dejara su carga y se acomodase junto al fuego. El silencio se prolongó durante largo tiempo: sólo las llamas, más bien bajas, crepitaban y cantaban, tejiendo sus reflejos sobre el rostro enjuto y misterioso de Tyr. Él fue quien, finalmente, habló. —Huele a guerra. Los trolls piensan invadir Alfheim. —Eso habíamos oído, señor — contestó Skafloc—. Los elfos estamos preparados. —La contienda será más ardua de lo que piensas. En esta ocasión los trolls cuentan con aliados —Tyr contempló sombríamente las llamas—. Hay en juego más de lo que se imaginan los elfos o los trolls. En estos días, las Nornas están terminando de tejer más de un destino. De nuevo se hizo el silencio, hasta que Tyr lo interrumpió, como hiciera antes. —Sí, los cuervos vuelan bajo y los dioses se inclinan sobre el mundo, que tiembla al paso del tiempo. Y esto es lo que te digo, Skafloc: Tendrás absoluta necesidad del presente que los Ases te hicieron cuando recibiste tu nuevo nombre. Los mismísimos dioses pasan por serias dificultades. Sin embargo, yo, El Que Hace la Guerra, me encuentro sobre la Tierra. El viento agitó sus negros cabellos. Sus ardientes ojos se posaron en los del hombre. —Voy a hacerte una advertencia —dijo—, aunque temo que de nada sirva ante la voluntad de las Nornas. ¿Quién era tu padre, Skafloc? 128 —No lo sé, señor, nunca me preocupé de saberlo. Pero puedo pedirle a Imric... _No lo hagas. Lo que debes pedirle a Imric es que no cuente a nadie lo que sabe, y a ti menos que a nadie. Pues cuando sepas quién fue tu padre..., ese día será aciago para ti Skafloc, y el mal que dicho conocimiento te ocasione también acarreará grandes males al mundo. Asintió de nuevo con la cabeza y Skafloc se aprestó a partir, pero sin el corzo, ya que se lo había regalado al dios como agradecimiento a sus consejos. Pero, mientras regresaba lo más deprisa que podía, con el viento que producía su carrera atronándole en los oídos, se preguntó si la advertencia de Tyr había sido realmente oportuna, ya que la pregunta de quién era él en realidad iba abriéndose camino en su me nte, y la noche parecía llenarse de demonios. Aunque su carrera fuera cada vez más rápida, sin que le importara el viento que le cortaba el rostro, no podía apartar de su mente lo que se fraguaba en su interior. Sólo Freda, pensó, mientras recobraba el aliento, sólo Freda podría quitarle el miedo del cuerpo. Antes de la aurora divisó los muros y torres de Elfheugh, recortándose altas contra el cielo. Uno de los elfos de guardia dio una señal con su cuerno para alertar a los que estaban en la puerta. Skafloc pasó rápidamente por ella, llegando al patio. Acto seguido, tras quitarse los esquíes, penetró en el interior del torreón. Imric, que había regresado la tarde de la víspera, estaba hablando en privado con Leea. —¿Y qué importancia tiene que Skafloc se haya enamorado de una joven mortal? —dijo, encogiéndose de hombros—. Es asunto suyo y, además, sin importancia. ¿Estás celosa? —Sí —contestó su hermana con franqueza—. Sin embargo, es más que eso. Fíjate en la joven y dime si no sientes que, en cierto modo, es un arma que alguien está utilizando en contra nuestra. —Hum... ¿tú crees? —el Conde de los Elfos se acarició la barbilla e hizo una mueca—. Cuéntame todo lo que sepas de ella. —Bueno, dice llamarse Freda, y ser hija de Orm, de una familia infortunada del sur... del Danelaw... 129 — ¡Freda..., la hija de Orm!... —Imric la miró estupefacto. Pero esto... significa... Skafloc entró en tromba en la estancia. Su aspecto desordenado les impresionó. Todavía necesitó un breve instante para poder hablar; entonces, la narración de lo ocurrido brotó de él como un torrentes. —¿Qué quería decir Tyr? —exclamó al terminar—. ¿Quién soy yo, Imric? —Me imagino lo que quería decir — respondió, con cierta brusquedad, el Conde de los Elfos—; por eso, el secreto de tu nacimiento, Skafloc, es algo que me pertenece exclusivamente a mí. Sólo te diré que procedes de una valerosa estirpe y que no debes avergonzarte de tu sangre —y entonces volvió a sus maneras más suaves y con bellas palabras consiguió, finalmente, calmar a Leea y a Skafloc. Pero, cuando se hubieron ido, comenzó a pasearse por la escancia y a hablar consigo en voz baja: «Alguien, y no sé cómo, nos ha hecho seguir un camino lleno de trampas y emboscadas —y apretó los dientes—. Mejor sería librarnos de la muchacha... Pero no, Skafloc la protege con todas sus fuerzas, y si hago planes contra ella, antes o desp ués se enterará de ellos y, entonces... No, debo seguir manteniendo en secreto lo que sé. A Skafloc no le importará; a ese respecto piensa como un elfo. Pero si lo descubriera, la muchacha lo sabría al instante; y la cosa sería grave: quebrantar una de las leyes que los seres humanos siempre han considerado más importantes. Y estaría lo bastante desesperada para hacer cualquier cosa. Además, necesitamos a Skafloc.» Y siguió barajando planes, uno tras ot ro, en su bien engrasado cerebro. Se le ocurrió que otra mujer sedujera a Skafloc. Pero desechó la idea porque su hijo adoptivo reconocería cualquier poción; por otra parte, ni los propios dioses tienen poder sobre el amor que florece espontáneamente. Si aquel amor se hubiese extinguido por sí mismo, el secreto ya no tendría importancia. Pero Imric no se atrevió a depositar su fe en una posibilidad tan débil. Así pues, decidió que había que echar tierra sobre el nacimiento de Skafloc, y cuanto antes, mejor. El Conde de los Elfos hurgó en su memoria. Por lo que recordaba —no resultaba fácil remontarse a varios miles de años—, sólo una persona conocía 130 toda la historia. Mandó llamar a Lanzadefuego, uno de los elfos de confianza de su guardia, que, a pesar de ser un mozalbete de dos siglos y pico, era astuto y diestro en brujerías. —Hará unos veinte años, en los bosques que se encuentran al sudoeste vivía una bruja —dijo Imric—. Es posible que haya muerto o que se haya ido a vivir a otro sitio, pero quiero que sigas su pista... y que, si aún está con vida, la mates con tu propia mano. —A la orden, señor —asintió Lanzadefuego—. Si puedo llevar conmigo algunos cazadores y sabuesos, nos iremos en cuanto anochezca. Freda recibió jubilosa a Skafloc cuando éste regresó a sus habitaciones. A pesar de la maravilla y de la magnificencia de Elfheugh, había temblado, aunque sin abandonar su apariencia de intrepidez, cuando la inquietud de Skafloc le había impelido a salir. Los habitantes del castillo, elfos, altos y esbeltos, y sus esposas, de sobrenatural belleza, enanos y goblins, e incluso seres aún más inusuales, como los wyverns, con los que salían a cazar aves, los leones y panteras, que usaban como animales de compañía, o la fiera prestancia, cambiante como la plata viva, de caballos y perros, le resultaban ajenos. El tacto de los elfos era frío; sus rostros, como los de las estatuas, y, al mismo tiempo, inhumanamente cambiantes; el lenguaje, la moda y los usos de una vida que ocupaba varios siglos la separaban de ellos. El difuso esplendor del castillo, que también era un tolmo yerto, las brujerías que aleteaban en la tibieza de su eterna luz crepuscular y las presencias que merodeaban por colinas, bosques y aguas, la oprimían con su extrañeza. Pero cuando Skafloc estaba a su lado, le parecía que Alfheim se encontraba en las proximidades del Paraíso. («¡Que Dios me perdone por pensar eso! —se dijo—. ¡Y también por no huir de tanto paganismo y encerrarme en el frío y la tiniebla de un convento!») Skafloc era cordial, alegre y malicioso y siempre conseguía hacerlo reír e improvisar continuamente poemas, todos en su honor, y sus brazos y sus labios eran capaces de despertar en ella un frenesí que no se detenía hasta que la alegría conseguía, durante unos instantes, disolver la propia carne y transformarla en El Que 131 Canta eternamente. Ella le había visto luchar, por lo que sabía que bien pocos guerreros, ya fuera en las tierras de los hombres o en Faerie, podían resistírsele, y eso la llenaba de orgullo. (Además, no era ninguna hija y hermana desnaturalizada, porque si había abandonado su duelo, cambiándolo por una felicidad que crecía día a día, ¿no había sido a causa de un ensalmo al que no había podido resistirse? No tenía elección, pues Skafloc habría sido incapaz de esperar a que pasase el año de duelo. Por otra parte, ¿qué mejor padre habría podido encontrar para los ni etos de Orm y de Aelfrida?) Además, con ella, Skafloc siempre era gentil. Sabía que la amaba. Debía amarla, pues de lo contrario, ¿por qué yacía con ella, pasando a su lado casi todo el tiempo, cuando podría haber conseguido todas las hembras de elfo que desease? No sabía por qué..., no sabía cuan hondo había entrado su calor humano en su alma, que jamás había sentido nada parecido. Skafloc jamás se había dado cuenta de su soledad hasta que no vio a Freda. Y sabía que, de no pagar un cierto precio —lo que no quería—, algún día moriría y su vida sería un mero recuerdo en los largos anales de los elfos. Era bueno tener al lado a alguien de la misma especie. En los pocos días que habían pasado juntos, habían hecho tantas cosas... Habían cabalgado los caballos veloces como el viento y navegado en ágiles embarcaciones y recorrido muchas leguas de bosques y colinas. Freda era muy hábil con el arco, ya que Orm había querido que las mujeres de su familia fueran capaces de defenderse por sí mismas. Cuando se movía entre los árboles, con el arco en la mano y su cabellera de bronce resplandeciéndole, parecía una joven diosa de la caza. Habían visto a magos y ensalmadores, escuchado a músicos y escaldas, que tanto engañaban a los elfos, aunque éstos fuesen demasiado socarrones y sutiles para los seres humanos. Habían ido a visitar a los amigos de Skafloc: los gnomos que viven bajo las raíces de los árboles, los espíritus de las aguas, blancos y escurridizos, un viejo fauno de ojos tristes, y todo tipo de animales salvajes. Y aunque Freda no fuera capaz de hablar con ellos, su sola contemplación hacía que pusiera unos ojos como platos y sonriera. No había hecho ningún plan para el futuro, aunque daba por sentado que algún día llevaría a Skafloc a la tierra de los hombres y haría que lo bautizaran, lo que sin duda tendría como resultado que se le perdonasen los pecados del 132 presente. Pero todavía no, ya habría tiempo para eso. Como en Elfheug no corría el tiempo, ella había perdido la cuenta de los días y las noches; además, había tanto que hacer... Corrió hacia sus brazos. Cualquiera de las dudas, que aún le surgían al pensar en ella, se desvanecía al verla: joven, ágil, esbelta y de largas piernas, más niña que mujer, y eso que aún no era su mujer. La cogió de la cintura, la lanzó al aire y la recogió cuando caía, mientras los dos se reían a carcajadas. —Bájame al suelo —murmuró ella—. Bájame al suelo para que pueda besarte. —Al momento —Skafloc volvió a lanzarla al aire y trazó un signo. Freda quedó suspendida, ingrávida en mitad del aire, dando patadas y pasando de la perplejidad a la alegría. Skafloc la atrajo hacia sí y ella permaneció flotando en el aire, con su boca junto a la suya. —No tiene sentido que me parta el cuello por hacer esto —dijo Skafloc. Y comenzó a flotar, creando, gracias a un conjuro, una nube, no de vapor de agua, sino como de plumas blancas, para que ambos pudieran descansar en ella. Un árbol crecía en su parte central, cargado de diferentes tipos de fruta, con mil arcos iris que se arqueaban bajo sus hojas. —Algún día, cabeza loca, no te acordarás de alguno de tus trucos y te caerás y te partirás la crisma —comentó Freda. Él se le acercó aún más, mirando sus ojos grises. Entonces comenzó a contar las pecas que oscurecían el puente de su nariz y las besó una a una. —Debía haberte convertido en algo con manchas, como un leopardo — dijo. —¿Necesitas una excusa tan tonta? —le contestó ella, acariciante—. Te he echado de menos, cariño mío. ¿Cómo te fue la caza? Skafloc frunció el entrecejo, al recordarlo. —Bastante bien. —Estás inquieto, tesoro. ¿Algo no va bien? Durante toda la noche han estado sonando los cuernos, y todo ha sido ir y venir de pisadas y de cascos de animales. Cada día veo más guerreros armados en el castillo. ¿Qué sucede, Skafloc? —Ya sabes que estamos en guerra con los trolls —dijo—. Les estamos dejando que se acerquen hasta nosotros, pues nos resultaría arduo 133 desalojarlos de sus reductos montañeses mientras mantengan intacta toda su fuerza. —Los trolls... —dijo ella, estremeciéndose entre sus brazos. —No temas —la animó Skafloc, intentando conjurar sus propias inquietudes—. Les saldremos al encuentro en alta mar quebrantaremos su poderío. Y a los que desembarquen les dejaremos tranquilos y les daremos toda la tierra que necesiten... para quedar bien cubiertos por ella. Entonces, ya privados de su fuerza, será un juego de niños apoderarse de Trollheim. ¡Claro que el combate será duro, pero muy mal tendría que luchar Alfheim para no vencer! —Tengo miedo por ti, Skafloc. Y él dijo, improvisando: El miedo de la más bella hada por el caudillo le hace sentir contento, pues significa amor. Alégrate, muchacha, tan gualda y esplendente, pues alegre acepto yo el regalo que me haces. Mientras tanto, había comenzado a de sabrocharle el ceñidor. Freda se ruborizó. —Eres un desvergonzado —dijo, y comenzó a quitarse la ropa. Skafloc enarcó las cejas. —¿De qué hay que avergonzarse? —preguntó. Lanzadefuego salió a caballo poco después del atardecer, cuando por Poniente aún quedaban unas brasas mortecinas. Tanto él como sus doce acompañantes vestían la túnica verde de la caza bajo una capa negra con capucha. Las puntas de sus lanzas y flechas eran de aleación de plata. Alrededor de sus caballos que caracoleaban, ladraban los sabuesos élficos, 134 grandes bestias salvajes de pelaje rojo o ébano, ojos que ardían como un horno y garras afiladas como puñales, que dejaban tras de sí un reguero de baba. Por ellos corría la sangre de Garm y de Fenrir, y también de los perros de la Caza Salvajes. Se pusieron en marcha nada más oír el sonido del cuerno de Lanzadefuego. El tamborilear de los cascos de los caballos y el ladrar de los sabuesos retumbó entre las colinas. Pasaban como el viento entre los árboles cubiertos de hielo en medio de la noche, que no tardó en hacerse tan oscura como boca de lobo. Un destello plateado, alguna empuñadura enjoyada, o un tenue resplandor, rojizo como la sangre, era lo que se podía apreciar de ellos entre el trajín de las sombras... pero nada más; sin embargo, el clamor de su paso resonaba de un extremo a otro de los bosques. Los cazadores, los carboneros o los proscritos que oían aq uel estruendo, se estremecían y hacían el signo de la cruz o del martillo; y las bestias salvajes huían despavoridas. Aún lejos de ellos, la bruja, acuclillada en el refugio que se había construido en el mismo lugar en que, antaño, se alzase su cabaña —pues sus grandes poderes provenían de las presencias que merodeaban por el lugar y de nadie más—, oyó la llegada de la partida de caza. Se inclinó sobre el escuálido fuego y murmuró: —Los elfos han salido de caza. —Sí —dijo, con un chillido, su familia r. Y cuando el estruendo se hizo más cercano, añadió—: Y me parece que para cazarnos a nosotros. —¿A nosotros? —exclamó la bruja, sobresaltada—. ¿Por qué dices eso? —Porque vienen derechos hacia aquí y porque no eres amiga de Skafloc ni de Imric —dijo, espantada, la rata, escondiéndose en el seno de ella—. Rápido, madre, rápido, pide ayuda o estamos acabadas. La bruja no tenía tiempo de hacer ritos ni preparar ofrendas, así que pronunció, entre aullidos, la invocación que había aprendido, y una negrura más profunda que la noche surgió al otro lado del fuego. Se postró ante ella. Tímidas y frías, las menguadas llamas azules corrieron al encuentro de la tinieblas. —¡Socorro! —gimió—. ¡Socorro, los elfos se acercan! Los ojos la miraron sin cólera ni piedad. El sonido de los cazadores se hizo más fuertes. —¡Socorro! —se lamentó nuevamente la bruja. 135 El recién llegado habló, con voz que se mezclaba con el sonido del viento, pero que parecía llegar de una distancia inconmensurablemente lejana. —¿Por qué me has llamado? —Ellos... quieren... mi vida. —¿De qué te preocupas? En cierta ocasión te oí decir que no te importaba la vida. —Aún no se ha consumado mi venganza —dijo ella, sollozando—. Y no puedo morir sin saber si todo mi trabajo y el precio que he pagado han servido para algo. ¡Amo, ayuda a tu sierva! Los cazadores se acercaban por momentos. La bruja podía sentir el temblor del suelo debido a la proximidad de los cascos de los caballos que se acercaban al galope. —No eres mi sierva, sino mi esclava —dijo la voz, con un susurro—. ¿Qué me importa a mí si has conseguido o no tu propósito? Yo soy el Señor del Mal, que representa todo lo fútil. ¿Acaso piensas que sólo por invocarme concluiste conmigo un pactó? No. Te engañaste; se trataba de otra cosa. Los mortales jamás me venden sus almas: me las entregan. Y, tras aquellas palabras, el Señor Oscuro desapareció. La bruja chilló y salió afuera. Ante ella estaban ya los sabuesos, desquiciados por el hedor de quien les había precedido, ladrando y dispuestos a echársele encima. Por eso se transformó en una rata y se metió en un agujero que había bajo la encina de los druidas. —¡Está cerca! —dijo Lanzadefuego, que seguía a los sabuesos—. Y..., ¡vaya, han encontrado un rastro! La jauría se acercó al árbol. La tierra salió lanzada por los aires cuando los sabuesos comenzaron a buscar su presa, arrancando raíces y ladrando. La bruja salió de su escondrijo, se mudó en cuervo y comenzó a volar. El arco de Lanzadefuego cantó y el ave cayó a tierra, convirtiéndose en una repelente anciana, sobre la que se lanzaron todos los perros. La rata salió de su seno con un brinco, pero uno de los caballos la coceó con sus cascos de aleación de plata y esparció sus entrañas. Los sabuesos descuartizaron a la bruja, pero no sin que esta, antes de morir, gritase a los elfos: —¡Os maldigo! ¡Y maldigo a Alfheim con el mayor de los sufrimientos! Y 136 decidle a Imric que aquel a quien cambió, Valgard, está vivo y sabe... Pero murió sin haber terminado su mensajes. —La caza no resultó difícil —comentó Lanzadefuego—. Me temía que tuviéramos que recurrir a la magia para localizar su pista después de una veintena de años, e incluso tener que viajar a tierras lejanas —husmeó en el viento y añadió—: Pero, por lo que veo, podemos emplear lo que nos queda de noche para cazar algo más interesantes. Imric recompensó espléndidamente a sus cazadores, pero cuando estos le refirieron, con cierta perplejidad, las últimas palabras de su presa, los miró ceñudo. 137 CAPITULO 13 Valgard le fue reservado un lugar de renombre en la corte de los trolls, por ser nieto de Illrede y, además, un poderoso guerrero inmune al hierro. Pero los nobles le tomaron ojeriza, porque también tenía sangre de elfo y provenía de las tierras de los hombres; además, estaban envidiosos de un extranjero que, en cuanto había sido capaz de hablar correctamente su lengua, gracias a un ensalmo, se había puesto a su misma altura. Así pues, Valgard no hizo amigos en Trollheim, cosa que por otra parte no buscaba, ya que el aspecto, olor y forma de vida de aquel pueblo no le agradaban. Sin embargo, eran gente impávida y de terrible fortaleza. Sus hechiceros tenían poderes que ningún ser humano, eso le parecía a Valgard, jamás podría igualar. Su nación era, con mucho, la más fuerte de Faerie excepto —quizá— Alfheim. Aquello le convenía a Valgard, ya que le facilitaba los medios para llevar a cabo su venganza y recuperar su herencia. Illrede le informó de sus planes. —Durante el período de paz nos estuvimos preparando Para la guerra — dijo—, mientras los elfos holgazaneaban, intrigaban entre sí y se divertían. No 138 somos tantos como ellos, pero junto con aquellos que están de nuestro lado, esta vez los sobrepasaremos con creces. —¿De quiénes se trata? —preguntó Valgard. —De la mayoría de las tribus de los goblins, a los que hemos vencido o convertido en aliados —dijo Illrede—. Desde siempre alimentan rencores contra los elfos y contra nosotros, pero yo les he prometido el derecho de saqueo y la libertad de aquellos de su especie que mantenemos como esclavos, así como una posición inferior sólo a la nuestra cuando gobernemos en todo Faerie. Son buenos guerreros, y no escasos. »Además de ellos, disponemos de compañías que provienen de tierras distantes: demonios del lago Baikal, shen de Cathay, oni de Cipango, yinns de los desiertos de Arabia, y otros más, en número nada despreciable. Sólo han venido por el botín, porque no están del todo comprometidos con nuestra causa, pero cuando llegue el momento de la batalla dispondremos de ellos según su capacidad. También tenemos todo tipo de vagabundos y descarriados, que llegaron solos o en bandas pequeñas, como licántropos, vampiros, gules y similares. Y tenemos enanos de sobra, que son nuestros siervos, a muchos de los cuales no les importaría luchar por su libertad; y que, además, pueden manejar el hierro. »Los elfos se encuentran solos contra estas huestes. Quizá consigan juntar unos cuantos goblins y enanos, amigos de ir contracorriente, que no les servirán de mucho. Lo mejor que puede sucederles es que reciban ayuda de los Sídh. Sin embargo, he sabido por mis espías que éstos intentan permanecer neutrales, siempre que su isla no sea atacada, lo que intentaremos evitar por todos los medios... al menos en esta guerra. »Es bien cierto que los jefes de los elfos son astutos y versados en magia... pero también lo son mis comandantes —las risotadas de Illrede resonaron estrepitosamente—. ¡Oh, quebraremos Alfheim contra nuestra rodilla como si fuera un palo seco! —¿No puedes pedir ayuda a Jötunheim? —preguntó Valgard, que aún estaba aprendiendo los entresijos del mundo en que se encontraba—. ¿No es cierto que son parientes de los trolls? —¡No vuelvas a mencionarlos! —exclamó estruendosamente Illrede—. No nos atrevemos a llamar a los Jótuns por la misma razón que los elfos a los 139 Ases —se estremeció—. No queremos ser más peones de lo que ya somos de las Potencias en lucha, más allá de este mundo sublunar. Incluso si supiésemos que iban a contestar a nuestra llamada, ninguno de nosotros se atrevería a llamarlos; y en esto coincidimos con los elfos, debido a que si uno cualquiera de los bandos, Ases o Jótuns, se moviese abiertamente en Midgard, el otro le atacaría al momento, y entonces tendría lugar la batalla final. —¿Cómo se puede conciliar esa contienda con lo que me contaron de... del nuevo dios? —Lo mejor es no hablar de misterios que no podemos comprender — Illrede se movió pesadamente a la luz de las humeantes antorchas, por la habitación subterránea en donde tenía lugar aquella conversación—. Me parece que los dioses son los culpables de que ninguno de los habitantes de Faerie se atreva a hacer gran cosa contra los hombres, sobre todo si éstos han sido bautizados. Algunos encantamientos, una casa ocupada toda la noche, un niño robado, o una mujer, y poco más... y eso de vez en cuando. Por el momento nos evitan, pero, cuando lleguen a temernos demasiado, llamarán a los dioses que los protegen y que los escuchan. Y lo que es aún peor, podrían invocar todos juntos a ese nuevo dios blanco, y entonces sería el fin de Faerie. Valgard dio un respingo. Y aquella noche fue a la tumba poco profunda de Asgerd y exhumó su cuerpo, que cargó a bordo de un bote de los trolls. Puso vela hacia el sudoeste con el viento encantado que Illrede le había enseñado a suscitar se dirigió a una aldea que estaba en el estuario de Moray, en Escocia. En la oscuridad, bajo las nubes henchidas de nieve, llevó lo que transportaba a la iglesia. Se agachó en su cementerio y en uno de sus extremos cavó una fosa, depositándolo en ella, y acto seguido volvió a llenarla para que nadie se percatara de lo ocurrido. —Ahora duermes en tierra bendita, hermana, como habrías deseado — susurró—. Tremendamente malvadas fueron mis acciones... Quizá ahora puedas rogar por mi alma... —y entonces miró turbado a su alrededor, presa de un miedo que jamás había conocido—: Pero, ¿por qué estoy aquí? ¿Qué estoy haciendo? Ella no es mi hermana. Sólo soy una cosa creada por brujería. No tengo alma... Emitió un gruñido y regresó a su em barcación, poniendo rumbo hacia el 140 nordeste como si llevase a la zaga varios demonios. Había llegado el tiempo de hacer el recuento de la hueste troll. Illrede era demasiado astuto para concentrar sus fuerzas en un único lugar, ya que los exploradores elfos podían descubrir su nú mero. Las diversas agrupaciones de su flota se hicieron a la mar desde los respectivos puertos, con un brujo a bordo, o cualquier otro igual de hábil en las artes mágicas, capaces de conseguir que llegaran al mismo tiempo a su punto de encuentro, que debía encontrarse en algún lugar al norte de las tierras élficas de Inglaterra, de suerte que los trolls pudieran desembarcar en las playas desiertas y no en las zonas defendidas por los elfos. Illrede intenta ba quebrantar en aquel lugar el poderío naval de los elfos y, después, avanzar haci a el sur, por tierra y por mar, hasta hacerse con el completo dominio de la isla. Entonces dejaría en ella parte de sus fuerzas para eliminar a los elfos que no hubieran muerto o se hubieran rendido, mientras la flota principal atravesaba el Canal y se dirigía hacia las restantes provincias de Alfheim. Sin embargo, parte de su ejército habría avanzado por tierra desde Finmark y Wendland, y los dominios de los trolls que se encuentran más hacia Oriente, con lo que el Rey de los Elfos se vería atacado por el este y —en cuanto Inglaterra fuese totalmente conquistada— por el norte, con lo que sería derrotado por tan aplastante superioridad. —Los guerreros elfos son rápidos —dijo Illrede—, pero creo que en esta ocasión los trolls se moverán más deprisa que ellos. —Deja que yo me ocupe de Inglaterra —suplicó Valgard—, y comprobarás que en mi condado ninguno de los elfos varones sobrevive. —Ya se lo había prometido a Grum —dijo Illrede—; pero tú, Valgard, vendrás conmigo. En Inglaterra sólo le deberás obediencia a Grum. Valgard respondió que con eso se conformaba. Su fría mirada midió al noble Grum, mientras se decía a sí mismo que aquel troll bien podría sufrir algún percance, lo que acabaría haciéndole a él, Valgard, Conde, como le profetizara la bruja. Se embarcó en el navío insignia, junto con Illrede y la Guardia Real. Era un gran bajel de alto bordo y espolón de hierro forjado por los enanos, negro como la muerte, excepto por su extremo con forma de calavera de caballo que 141 venía a hacer de mascarón de proa. Los trolls que formaban su tripulación tenían armas y cotas de aleación, llevando en su mayor parte mazas con cabeza de piedra, de peso acorde con su corpulencia. Illrede llevaba una diadema de oro encima del negro yelmo y pieles sobre su cota de escamas de dragón, invulnerable incluso al acer o. Los demás estaban tan ricamente vestidos como él, formando una tripulación bulliciosa y arrogante. Valgard era el único que no llevaba ningún adorno, que habría contrastado con la expresión hosca de su rostro; pero su hacha de acero y el hierro que llevaba encima bastaban para que los trolls le tuviesen miedo. Innumerables eran los navíos que formaban parte de la flotilla regia, la mayor parte de tamaño descomunal, por lo que la noche estaba llena de gritos, sonidos de cuernos y del trajín de pies. Los navíos largos de los trolls eran más lentos que los de los elfos, ya que también eran más grandes y pesados, así como más toscos; por eso, cuando se hizo de día, aún seguían en el mar. Los trolls se refugiaron bajo los toldos que los aislaban de la odiada luz del sol, dejando que los barcos prosiguieran su avance, invisibles para los ojos mortales que no estuvieran dotados de la Vista Encantada. A la noche siguiente tuvo lugar el reagrupamiento de la flota. Valgard se sobrecogió al verla. Parecía como si el mar estuviera cubierto por una alfombra que se extendiera hasta el horizonte. Todos los que se encontraban en los navíos eran guerreros, a excepción de quienes cuidaban los enormes caballos, cubiertos de pelo, de los trolls. Pero los capitanes conocían y aplicaban tan bien las directrices, que todos mantuvieron las posiciones que les fueron encomendadas. El tipo de navíos y de tripulac iones que navegaban hacia Alfheim era muy variado. Los navíos largos, pintados de negro, de los trolls iban en el centro, adoptando la formación de cuña, con Illrede en la punta. A babor y estribor estaban los goblins, algunos a bordo de navíos de factura troll y otros en sus propios navíos, ágiles y de color rojo, de proa con forma de serpiente; resultaban más alegres que los trolls y llevaban ropajes extravagantes sobre sus armaduras plateadas. Casi todos iban armados con espadas ligeras, lanzas y arcos. Los extremos de las alas de la flota estaban formados por los extranjeros: shen que enarbolaban grandes picas y oni que empuñaban katanas, a bordo de juncos primorosamente decorados; ágiles duendes sobre 142 galeras impulsadas por los remos de sus esclavos, provistas de ingenios de guerra montados en sus puentes; barcas llenas de demonios alados, procedentes del lago Baikal; enanos guarnecidos de hierro; monstruos de las colinas, de los bosques, de los pantanos, que no usaban otro tipo de armas que dientes y garras. Todos estaban mandados por oficiales trolls, y sólo los que eran de más confianza se encontraban en primera línea, que había sido reforzada en los flancos por navíos trolls. Detrás de la primera cuña iba otra, y detrás de ésta, las reservas, dispuestas a acudir donde se las necesitasen. Los cuernos daban bocinazos desde los navíos de los trolls, y les contestaban las gaitas de los goblins, los gongs de los shen y los tambores de los duendes. Las nubes bajas se adherían a los mástiles, mientras el mar hervía de espuma blanca, por el bogar de tanto remo. Los fuegos fatuos corrían sobre velamen y aparejos, desparramando su resplandor azulado sobre los rostros de todos. En lo alto suspiraban los vientos, y presencias inquietantes merodeaban entre las nubes salpicadas de luz de luna, y lentas a causa de la nieve que transportaban. —La batalla se acerca —dijo Illrede a Valgard—. Entonces podrás cobrarte la venganza que ansias. El berserkr no contestó y siguió mirando de frente a la tinieblas. 143 144 CAPITULO 14 espués de la incursión realizada por los elfos contra Trollheim, Imric trabajó arduamente, durante más de un mes. No consiguió enterarse de mucho en lo concerniente al enemigo, ya que Illrede y sus brujos habían protegido sus tierras con potentes hechizos, pero sí pudo saber que se estaba reuniendo una considerable fuerza que, verosímilmente, se desencadenaría en primer lugar contra Inglaterra. Por este motivo se esforzó por reunir navíos y gente de sus dominios y enviarlos a otras tierras en busca de toda la ayuda que pudieran encontrar. Pero fueron pocos los que acudieron. Cada provincia de Alfheim se estaba preparando por su cuenta; los elfos eran demasiado orgullosos para trabajar juntos. Además, parecía que casi todos los mercenarios de Faerie estaban contratados por Illrede desde hacía ya varios años. Imric envió mensajeros a los Sídh de Irlanda, prometiéndoles un rico botín si conquistaban Trollheim, pero obtuvo la fría respuesta de que ya había suficientes riquezas reluciendo en las calles de Tir n'án Og y en las cuevas de los leprechauns. De tal suerte, el Conde de los Elfos llegó a pensar que iba a quedarse solo. 145 No obstante, su ejército era importante y, según crecía, noche tras noche, también crecía entre la hueste de los elfos su austera alegría. Nadie, pensaban, había llegado a reunir una fuerza tan poderosa en Alfheim. Aunque no ponían en duda su inferioridad numérica, aseguraban que era mucho mejor que la del contendiente, por la calidad de sus guerreros y de sus naves, a lo que venía a sumarse el hecho de que el combate tendría lugar cerca de su patria, en aguas y playas conocidas de todos ellos. Algunos de los guerreros más jóvenes sostenían que los elfos de Inglaterra no sólo estaban en condiciones de derrotar a la flota troll, sino que, sin ayuda de nadie, eran capaces de llevar la guerra hasta Trollheim y hacer que sus aliados los abandonasen. De las Orcadas y de las Shetland vino Flam, hijo de aquel Flam caído en la incursión dirigida por Skafloc, que ardía en deseos de vengar a su padre. Él y sus hermanos se contaban entre los más afamados navegantes de Faerie, y su flota de navíos dragón oscurecía la s aguas mientras progresaba hacia el sur. Los escudos relucían a lo largo de las bordas, mientras el viento ronroneaba entre las jarcias, y el silbido del mar, hendido por las proas, parecía provenir de sus reptilianas cabezas. De las colinas grises y de los páramos del país de los Dominios Pictos llegaban sus indomables caudillos, con sus armas de sílex tallado y sus corazas de cuero. Menos altos y más corpulentos que los auténticos elfos, eran morenos de piel, con largos rizos y barbas que flotaban alrededor de sus rostros tatuados, pues tenían sangre de troll y de goblin, y también de un pueblo aún más antiguo, además de la que provenía de las mujeres píctas raptadas en tiempos inmemoriales. Los acompañaban algunos de los Sídh menores, que siglos atrás llegaran a aquellas tierras con los escotos: leprechauns terriblemente pendencieros que saltaban como cabras, hermosos y altísimos guerreros, que caminaban con paso largo, cubiertos de resplandecientes cotas de malla, y que enarbolaban lanzas o bien iban montados en estruendosos carros de combate, provistos de hojas cortantes en los cubos de las ruedas para segar a los enemigos. Del sur, de las colinas y de las costas horadadas por las cuevas de Cornualles y Gales llegaron algunos de los elfos más antiguos de la isla: ya acudiesen a caballo o conduciendo sus carros de combate, siempre cubiertos 146 de cota de malla, sus banderas hablaban de glorias pasadas; con ellos venía el Pueblo del Mar, de cabellos verdes y piel blanca, que se rodeaba de un velo gris de niebla con aroma a salitre para evitar la sequedad de la tierra firme; los seguían algunos semidioses campestres que los romanos habían llevado a la isla consigo y que después habían abandonado; y, finalmente, los asustadizos y fugaces elfos del bosque, formados por clanes. Las tierras de los anglos y los sajones jamás habían albergado a tantos de aquellos elfos selváticos, ya que buena parte de los que antaño fueran sus pobladores habían huido o habían sido exorcizados, pero todos los que quedaban habían acudido a la llamada, y eran innumerables. Aquellos elfos, a pesar de ser pobres y lentos de pensamiento, seguían siendo terribles en la guerra, pues no pocos de ellos descendí an de Wieland o del mismísimo Odín. En lo concerniente a la forja eran los mejores del condado, ya que tenían algo de sangre de enano, y, si había que combatir, muchos elegían hacerlo con sus grandes martillos. Pero los más poderosos y arrojados eran los que vivían en los alrededores de Elfheugh. No sólo por cuestiones de descendencia, sino de belleza, sabiduría y poderío, los nobles de quienes Imric se rodeaba resaltaban sobre los demás. Eran tan fieros que se dirigían al combate con ropajes alegres, como si fueran a una boda, y besaban sus lanzas como si fuesen sus novias; eran muy diestros y muy capaces de realizar terribles hechizos para desgracia de sus enemigos y protección de sus amigos. Los elfos recién llegados los miraban con respeto, aunque ello no les impidiera gustar de los alimentos y bebidas que enviaban a su campamento o cumplimentar debidamente a sus damas, que los seguían en busca de diversiones. Freda se deleitaba contemplando cómo iba reuniéndose tan poderoso ejército. La vista de aquellos guerreros no humanos, que discurrían sin hacer ruido por la oscuridad y la noche, con sus rostros medio velados a su mirada, le hacían sentirse —y eso era lo que resultaba más extraño— turbada, alegre, acobardada y atrevida. Y su hombre, Skafloc, que gozaba entre ellos de gran rango, tenía entre sus manos más poder que cualquier rey mortal. Pero su soberanía se ejercía sobre gente sin alma. Y ella no podía olvidar la fuerza, casi de oso, de los trolls. ¿Qué ocurriría si los derrotasen? También a él se le ocurrió el mismo pensamiento. 147 —Quizá debiera llevarte al lado de los amigos que te quedan en las tierras de los hombres —dijo, con voz tranquila—. Podría suceder, aunque no lo creo, que perdieran los elfos. La verdad es que todos los presagios nos han sido desfavorables. Si eso ocurriera, és te no sería el lugar más apropiado para ti. —No... no... —Freda le miró un instante, con sus ojos grises llenos de espanto, y ocultó el rostro entre su pecho—. No te abandonaré. No puedo. Él acarició su cabello relucientes. —Yo regresaría a recogerte, cuando todo hubiera acabado —dijo. —No. Podría ocurrir que alguien, una vez allí, me convenciese de que me quedara o me obligase a ello; no sé quien podría ser, salvo quizá un sacerdote, porque según he oído ya han sucedido cosas parecidas —y pensando en las adorables hembras de los elfos y en su modo de mirar a Skafloc, se envaró en los brazos de él, quien lo notó. Su voz se hizo más firme—: Así que no te dejaré. Me quedo. Skafloc la abrazó, lleno de contento. Entonces llegó la noticia de que los trolls acababan de hacerse a la mar. La víspera de zarpar, los elfos celebraron una fiesta en Elfheugh. La sala de los banquetes de Imric era muy amplia. Freda, que se sentaba al lado de Skafloc, muy cerca del sitial del Conde, no conseguía divisar con claridad las paredes que tenía enfrente, ni apenas vislumbrar las vigas, con pámpanos tallados en su madera. El fresco crepúsculo azul, tan caro a los elfos, parecía arremolinarse como el humo a través de la sala, aunque el aire de su interior fuera puro y oliese a perfume de flores. La luz provenía de innumerables candelas, fijas en enormes candelabros de pared, cuyas llamas ardían con tonos plateados, sin oscilar. Arrancaban destellos de los escudos colgados en las paredes y de los paneles de oro, primorosamente trabajados. Todos los trincheros, copas y cálices, que reposaban sobre los paños, blancos como la nieve, eran de metales preciosos constelados de gemas. Y aunque Freda pensara que se había acostumbrado a las delicadas vituallas de Alfheim, se sentía atónita ante tan gran variedad de carnes de pelo y de pluma, de pescados, de frutos, de especias, de condimentos, de cervezas, de hidromieles y de vinos que se habían dado cita aquella tarde. Los elfos se habían ataviado ricamente. Skafloc llevaba una túnica de 148 seda blanca encima de unas calzas de lino; un jubón con unos adornos que habían sido recamados de manera tan intrincada, que venían a ser una suerte de trampantojo; un cinturón trabajado en oro, del que pendía una enjoyada daga, enfundada en una vaina de ámbar; zapatos de piel de unicornio y una capa corta ribeteada de armiño, de color escarlata, que le caía sobre los hombros como un torrente de sangre. Fred a iba vestida con un sutil vestido de seda de araña, surcado por los colores del arco iris; una gargantilla de diamantes caía sobre sus menudos y firmes senos; un ceñidor de oro macizo circundaba su talle; sus desnudos brazos habían de aguantar el peso de brazaletes de oro, y su calzado era de terciopelo. Tanto ella como Skafloc llevaban diademas enjoyadas, como correspondía a un noble de Alfheim y a su dama del momento. Los elfos de alcurnia no eran menos espléndidos, e incluso los jefes más pobres llegados de otras tierras refulgían a causa del oro nativo con que se adornaban. Allí se podía oír diferentes tipos de música, no sólo las extrañas melodías que tanto agradaban a Imric, sino las provenientes de las arpas de los Sídh y de las gaitas de la gente de las comarcas occidentales. Todos charlaban, con la peculiar forma de hablar, rápida, mordaz y brillante, de los elfos, hecha de bromas sutiles y de fulminantes juegos de palabras; así que entre las mesas no se oían sino suaves risitas. Pero cuando hicieron un espacio entre ellas para que los juglares pudieran mostrar sus habilidades, se oyer on voces que pedían la Danza de las espadas. Imric frunció el ceño, porque no quería que los presagios fuesen contemplados por todos, pero ya que la mayor parte de sus invitados insistieron en ello, no pudo negarse. Los elfos se situaron en el centro de la sala: los varones de despojaron de los ropajes que más los molestaban, las hembras se desnudaron del todo, y los siervos entregaron a cada varón una espada. —¿Qué están haciendo? — preguntó Freda. —Es la antigua danza de la guerra —explicó Skafloc—. Me tocará hacer de escaldo, supongo, debido a que ningún ser humano puede ejecutarla sin herirse, aunque conozca perfectamente sus compases. Bailan al ritmo de noventa y nueve versos que el escaldo debe improvisar y, si nadie resulta herido, entonces es un presagio cierto de victoria; pero, si alguien resulta 149 muerto, significa derrota y ruina; incl uso una cuchillada anuncia todo tipo de males. Espero que nada de esto ocurra... Rápidamente, los elfos se dispusieron en dos hileras que se miraban la una a la otra, y pasaron las espadas por encima de sus cabezas; detrás de cada varón se encontraba una hembra, ac uclillada y en tensión. Las hileras se perdían a lo lejos, en la difusa claridad de la sala, como si en ella hubiese surgido una especie de corredor con el techo de espadas resplandecientes. Skafloc se situó enfrente del sitial del Conde. —¡Adelante! —gritó Imric, haciendo un falsete. Y Skafloc cantó: Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, que hace retroceder al enemigo hasta la playa, donde la contienda habla a gritos con voces de metal, entre el estrépito de los broncíneos espolones de las hendientes hachas, humeantes de sangre, donde los reyes del mar cantan la asamblea de las lanzas. Mientras componía versos de tal suerte, los elfos comenzaron a danzar, y la algarabía del entrechocar de las espadas siguió el ritmo del poema. Sus compañeras avanzaron hacia delante, de suerte que cada varón tomó con su mano izquierda la derecha de su hembra, haciéndole efectuar una pirueta en el espacio, cada vez más reducido, donde las espadas relucían y chocaban las unas con las otras. Y Skafloc prosiguió su canto: Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, como la tempestad en su violencia: sangriento relumbrón es el escudo, resplandeciente luna de rojez; los vientos de las sibilantes flechas, los perversos fulgores de las lanzas, 150 golpearán a quienes abandonaron, ha poco, el tibio lecho de la amante. Las hembras de los elfos pasaban en medio de las relucientes y vibrantes hojas, con ritmo ágil y suave, entrelazándose como la espuma sobre las olas. Los varones se aproximaban unos a otros al danzar, cruzándose y dándose la vuelta, tras lo cual hací an describir a sus espadas un arco resplandeciente al que faltaba poquísimo para acertar el cuerpo de quien se hallaba enfrente, quien acababa haciéndose con el arma. Skafloc seguía improvisando: Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, ensangrentando las armas que giran, mientras quebrantan escudos y yelmos y se levantan los gritos de guerra, y las quejumbrosas y airadas hojas despiden chispas y hienden los aires, mientras los lobos aúllan, hambrientos y al festín se dirigen los halcones. Vuelta tras vuelta, la danza proseguía, más rápida de lo que puede discernir el ojo humano; mientras tant o, las espadas iban y venían, con continuos molinetes y cortando el aire, entre las hembras. Momentos después, las hojas parecían apaciguarse, y cuando, tocándose en la punta, se situaban dos a dos muy cerca del suelo, las damas saltaban por encima, antes de que volviesen a alzarse de nuevo tras ellas. Entonces, cada uno de los varones tejía con su espada un resplandor casi continuo de metal alrededor del cuerpo de cada una de las veloces bailarinas. Acto seguido, volvieron a la danza y las hembras saltaron y revolotearon entre los esgrimistas, durante los breves instantes en que las armas retrocedían. Los versos de Skafloc brotaban sin parar. Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, ya canta el metal, suscitando estrépito 151 de hojas que invita y conduce a la danza (y a la muerte al bailarín impaciente). Braman los lures y se carcajean, oh, jóvenes, llamando a la asamblea. ¡Ah, cuan más dulce juego era el dormir plácidamente al lado de la amada! Saltando y esquivando las rumorosas espadas, en un alado frenesí de blanco, Leea gritó: —¡Eh, Skafloc! ¿Por qué no viene tu chica, que tanto parece quererte, a bailar con nosotros y así traerte suerte? Skafloc no interrumpió sus versos: Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, el escaldo que ha poco aquí cantara entra ahora en el juego de los barcos. Tremendo es el valor de nuestra apuesta. No te burles de la mortal muchacha que no comparte el baile con vosotros. Pues mucha mejor suerte me da a mí con un beso, que con cualquier ensalmo. En aquel momento, un estremecimiento agitó a los elfos, pues Leea, atenta más a las palabras de Skafloc que a la propia danza, había ido al encuentro de una de las espadas. Roja era la herida que surcaba su sedosa espalda. Al recobrar el ritmo, su sangre salpicó a quienes la rodeaban. Skafloc intentó dar un tono menos siniestro a sus versos: Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada, y siempre hay alguno que lo pierde, pues sólo las Nornas sin error saben quiénes son los que jugarán mejor: Mas, sin saber nada del vencedor del engañoso juego de las armas, igual de amarga será la batalla 152 que al enemigo daremos en Alfheim. Sin embargo, otras hembras, afectadas por el infortunio de Leea, perdieron el ritmo, que por ser tan sutil implicaba una gran concentración, y resultaron heridas. Imric mandó parar, antes de que alguien resultase muerto y la mala suerte no fuese presentida, sino real e inmediata, por lo que la celebración acabó entre un silencio cargado de tensiones y el murmullo de los comentarios furtivos. Skafloc, turbado, regresó junto con Freda a los aposentos de ambos, quedándose a solas un instante. Cuando volvió a su lado llevaba un ceñidor ancho, de plata cincelada. En su interior se alojaba una pequeña redoma plana, también de platas. Se lo entregó a Freda. —Éste es mi regalo de despedida —dijo tranquilamente—. Me lo había dado Imric, pero creo que será mejor que tú lo lleves, porque, aunque todavía pienso que podemos vencer, va no estoy seguro después de esta maldita Danza de las Espadas. Freda lo aceptó sin hacer ningún comentario. —La redoma contiene una droga rara y efectiva —dijo Skafloc—. Si la desventura se abatiera sobre ti y vieras que el enemigo esta cerca..., entonces habría llegado el momento de tomarla. Durante varios días estarías como muerta y quien te viera te dejaría en el sitio o te arrojaría fuera, que es lo que suelen hacer los trolls con los cadáveres de los extraños. Así tendrías una oportunidad de escapar con vida. —¿Qué importancia tendría seguir viva si tú hubieras muerto? — preguntó Freda, angustiada—. Mejor sería morir. —Quizá. Pero los trolls no te matarían en seguida y a vosotros, los cristianos, os esta prohibido quitaros la vida, ¿no es cierto? —Skafloc sonrió, cansado—. Ya sé, mi bien amada, que no es el regalo de despedida más a punto para dar ánimos, pero es el mejor que tengo. —No —murmuró Freda—. Lo acepto y te lo agradezco en lo que vale. Pero ambos tenemos un don mejor con el que regalarnos. —¡Claro que sí! —exclamó Skafloc, y al poco rato, aunque de manera fugaz, ambos fueron nuevamente felices. 153 154 CAPITULO 15 l encuentro entre las flotas de los elfos y de los trolls tuvo lugar lejos de la costa, bastante al norte del castillo del Conde, poco después del atardecer del día siguiente. Cuando Imric, erguido al lado de Skafloc cerca de la proa del navío insignia que conducía una formación en cuña de bajeles, contempló la enormidad de la fuerza del contrario, dio un respingo y contuvo la respiración durante unos instantes. —Nosotros, los elfos ingleses contamos con la mayor parte de la flota de guerra de Alfheim —dijo—, pero la suya es más del doble que la nuestra. ¡Oh, si los demás señores me hubiesen prestado atención cuando les decía que Illrede había firmado la tregua sólo como una forma más de hacer la guerra, y les imploraba que se uniesen a mí para aplastarle definitivamente! Skafloc estaba al tanto de las rivalidades y vanidades, por no decir de las ansias y desidias, que habían dado lugar a aquella inacción, y a las que Imric no era totalmente ajeno. Pero ya era demasiado tarde para arrepentirse. —No todos pueden ser trolls —dijo Skafloc—, y si es así, no creo que los goblins y demás morralla representen un gran peligro. 155 —No te burles de los goblins. Son buenos guerreros cuando disponen de armas a su medida —el rostro sobrio y pulcro de Imric relució durante un instante en la oscuridad, prisionero de un huidizo rayo de luna, en donde bailaban unos pocos copos de nieve, llevados por un viento cortante—. La magia no será de gran ayuda a ninguna de las partes —puntualizó—, porque los poderes que la gobiernan se encuentran equilibrados. De tal suerte, sólo queda la fuerza de los combatientes, y en esto somos los más débiles. Asintió con su cabeza de cabellos plateados, mientras sus ojos azul luna refulgían. —En el último Consejo del Rey de los Elfos insistí en que sería mejor agrupar todas las fuerzas de Alfheim y dejarles a los trolls las provincias exteriores, incluso Inglaterra, mientras nos hacíamos fuertes y preparábamos el contraataque. Pero los demás señores no quisieron ni oír hablar de ello. Ahora veremos quién tenía razón. —Ellos, señor —dijo Lanzadefuego, sin arredrarse—, porque llevaremos a esos cerdos al matadero. ¿Cómo... íbamos a permitirles que se revolcasen en Elfheugh? Este pensamiento es indigno de ti —alzó la pica y dio un paso hacia delante. También Skafloc, a pesar de comprender que tenían todo en su contra, sólo quería pensar en la batalla. No sería la primera vez que unos valientes conseguían vencer a enemigos poderosos. Ardía de deseos de encontrarse con Valgard, el hermano loco de Freda que tanto daño le había causado, y hendirle el cráneo. Pero, pensaba Skafloc, si Valgard no hubiese llevado a Freda a Trollheim, él, Skafloc, jamás la habría encontrado. Por tanto, se sentía deudor, aunque de forma un tanto imprecisa, del berserkr... Una muerte rápida y limpia, en lugar de suscitar en su espalda el águila de sangre, bastaría para saldar su deuda. Los cuernos de guerra dejaron oír su reclamo en ambas partes. Las velas y los mástiles fueron recogidos y las dos flotas marcharon remando a su encuentro. Según se acercaban, las flechas comenzaron a alzar el vuelo, una tormenta que oscurecía la luna silbó sobre las aguas y encontró su hogar en la madera o en la carne. Tres saetas cascabelearon sobre la cota de malla de Skafloc; una cuarta falló por poco su brazo y se clavó, gimiendo, en el 156 mascarón de proa del navío. Gracias a su facultad de poder ver en la noche, descubrió a bordo a otros que no habían sido tan afortunados como él, pues yacían heridos o muertos por la andanada de los de Trollheim. La luna presenciaba la escena, excepto cuando resultaba tapada por las apresuradas nubes, los fuegos fatuos bail aban entre la espuma y las olas se erguían con un frío esplendor blanco. Pero había luz suficiente para matar. Después, lanzas, dardos y proyectiles de honda cruzaron entre los navíos. Skafloc lanzó una flecha que alcanzó a uno de los trolls del navío insignia en una mano, por donde quedó clavado en el mástil de la embarcación. Pero, a cambio, recibió una pedrada en el yelmo, que suscitó un ruido metálico. Se apoyó en la borda, aturdido durante unos instantes, y el mar salpicó su cabeza, que aún seguía sonándole, de agua salada. Los cuernos aullaban, casi uno contra otro, y las líneas se encontraron. El navío de Imric se lanzó contra el de Illrede. Los guerreros de ambas proas lucharon ferozmente. La espada de Skafloc chilló antes de que lo hiciera el hacha del troll a quien se enfrentaba, y le dejó inútil de un brazo. Se lanzó hacia la hilera de escudos de la borda del navío enemigo, moviendo el suyo sólo lo justo para protegerse del atronador aluvión de golpes que le caía encima, mientras su hoja de acero hacía su labor al otro lado de su superficie. A su izquierda, Lanzadefuego tejía estocadas y molinetes con su pica, aullando por el frenesí de la batalla, sin importar le las saetas que le alcanzaban. A su derecha, Angor, de los Dominios Pictos, luchaba encarnizadamente con su larga hacha. Durante un tiempo ambas partes se intercambiaron golpes y, cuando un hombre de la primera fila caía muerto, otro se apresuraba a ocupar su lugar. Pero hubo un momento en que Skafloc sepultó su espada en el cuello de un troll. Mientras caía, Lanzadefuego hirió con su arma el pecho del que estaba detrás. Skafloc saltó al navío enemigo, aprovechando la brecha que acababa de surgir en las filas de los trolls, y abatió al adversario que tenía a su izquierda. Cuando el guerrero que estaba a su derecha se disponía a herirle, el hacha de Angor se abatió sobre él y la cabeza del troll salió rodando hacia el mar. — ¡Adelante! —exclamó, con un rugido, Skafloc. Los elfos más próximos a él le siguieron. Hombro con hombro, herían a 157 los trolls, que enseñaban los dientes y gruñían mientras intentaban rodearlos. Al oír aquel estruendo, los demás elfos resistieron el ataque y buen número de ellos se decidió a abordar al enemigo. Las espadas volaban entre nubes de sangre. El sonido de tanto metal chocando y rompiéndose vencía al del mar y el viento. Por encima de la contienda se recortaba la figura de Skafloc, con ojos que parecían llamas azules salidas de algún infierno. Debía situarse un poco adelantado respecto a los elfos, para que su malla de hierro no fuera a causarles daño; pero ellos le cubrían las espaldas y, mientras su escudo detenía los pesados golpes y mazazos de los trolls que venían de frente, su espada se precipitaba hacia todos los lados como una víbora. En poco tiempo los enemigos se batieron en retirada y la proa quedó limpia de ellos. —¡Ahora, a popa! —exclamó Skafloc. Los elfos avanzaron, con las espadas sobre los escudos, como el aire que espejea sobre la pared de una montaña. Los trolls combatieron encarnizadamente. Muchos fueron los elfos caídos con el cráneo aplastado, los huesos rotos y las carnes entreabiertas. Pero los trolls seguían retrocediendo, sin dejar a nadie en el puente, excepto a sus muertos pisoteados. —¡Valgard! —aulló Skafloc en medio del estruendo—. ¡Valgard! ¿Dónde estás? Aquel a quien interpelaba se dejó ver. La sangre le manaba de una de las sienes. —La piedra de una honda me dejó sin sentido —dijo—, pero ahora siento la avidez de la batalla. Skafloc gritó y fue corriendo a su encuentro. Entre elfos y trolls se hizo un espacio de nadie. Los primeros ocup aban desde la proa hasta el mástil, mientras que los segundos estaban arrinc onados cerca de la popa; pero tanto los unos como los otros habían llegado en aquel momento al límite de sus fuerzas. Cada vez llegaban más elfos, al tiempo que, desde su propio navío, los arqueros enviaban una lluvia ininterrumpida de muerte de plumaje gris. La espada de Skafloc y el hacha de Valgard se encontraron con un aullido de acero y una lluvia de chispas. La locura aún no había hecho presa en el berserkr; luchaba con siniestra frialdad, sólido como una roca sobre el titubeante puente. La espada de Skafloc golpeó en el mango de su hacha, pero 158 no consiguió penetrar mucho en su madera guarnecida de piel y acabó desviándose. De tal suerte, el hacha pudo abrir un boquete en el escudo, a través del cual Valgard descargó su siguiente golpe. Ya que no había tenido tiempo ni espacio suficientes para cargar todo su peso en él, no consiguió desgarrarle la loriga ni quebrarle ningún hueso. Pero el brazo con que Skafloc asía el escudo se le quedó colgando del costado, insensible. Valgard apuntó a su cuello, pero Skafloc cayó sobre una de sus rodillas, recibiendo aquel espantoso golpe en su yelmo, al tiempo que intentaba acertarle a Valgard en una pierna. Casi sin sentido, a causa de la furia que le había abollado el yelmo y resbalado por uno de sus costados, se derrumbó. Valgard se tambaleó, con un muslo abierto. Ambos rodaron bajo los bancos y la batalla volvió a comenzar, pero sin ellos. Grum, el Conde de los Trolls, había dirigido una carga desde la popa. Su enorme maza, que terminaba en piedra, aplastaba cráneos a diestra y siniestra. Hacia él fue Angor de los Dominios Pict os, quien le golpeó, cortándole el brazo derecho. Grum recogió su caída maza con el brazo izquierdo y lanzó un golpe que le rompió el cuello a Angor, tras lo cual tuvo que arrastrarse para ponerse a seguro y grabar runas salutíferas en el muñón que vomitaba sangren. Skafloc y Valgard se levantaron y comenzaron a buscarse el uno al otro, entre aquel caos, para reanudar su combate. El brazo izquierdo de Skafloc había vuelto a recobrar la sensibilidad, mientras que Valgard aún seguía sangrando. El ahijado de Imric lanzó un violento golpe que mordió la cota de malla del berserkr y que sólo se detuvo ante una de sus costillas. —¡Esto por Freda! —exclamó—. Por todo el mal que le hiciste. —No tanto como el que tú le has hecho —replicó, con un rugido, Valgard. Tembloroso y debilitado, consiguió parar con su hacha la espada de Skafloc en mitad de su trayectoria, partiéndola en dos. —¡Ah! —gritó el berserkr; pero antes de que pudiera aprovecharse de su ventaja, Lanzadefuego se lanzó sobre él como un gato furioso, con más guerreros de Alfheim a su lado. Los elfos acababan de hacerse con el navío. —No me ofreces ninguna razón válida para seguir aquí —dijo Valgard—, pero espero verte pronto, hermano —y saltó por la borda. Había tenido intención de despojarse de la loriga antes de que le 159 arrastrase demasiado hacia el fondo, pero no fue necesario. Muchos navíos habían sido destruidos por los espolones del contrario o por un improvisado cambio de rumbo a lo largo de la batalla. El mástil de uno de ellos flotaba por las inmediaciones, por lo que se agarró a él con la mano izquierda, ya que la derecha aún asía el hacha Fratricida. Du rante un instante se preguntó si no debía abandonarla. Pero no... Maldita o no, era un arma excelente. Otros trolls, que habían tenido tiempo de desembarazarse de sus equipos antes de abandonar el navío, también se agarraban al mástil. —Moved vuestros cuerpos, hermanos —les gritó Valgard—, y llegaremos a uno de nuestros barcos..., a tiempo aún de ganar esta batalla. A bordo del navío insignia de los trolls, los elfos no ocultaban su triunfo. Skafloc preguntó: —¿Dónde está Illrede? Debiera encontrarse a bordo, pero no le he visto. —Posiblemente esté sobrevolando la flota, lo mismo que Imric, en forma de gaviota —contestó Lanzadefuego—. Abramos un agujero en este maldito casco y regresemos a nuestro navío. Y en él les esperaba Imric. —¿Cómo se desarrolla la batalla , padrino? —le increpó Skafloc alegremente. La voz del Conde de los Elfos sonó con amargura: —Mal, pues aunque nosotros luchemos con encono, los trolls nos doblan en número. Algunas formaciones enemigas están desembarcando sin encontrar resistencia. —Malas noticias, en verdad —exclamó Golric de Cornualles—. Tendremos que luchar corno auténticos demonios, o de lo contrario estaremos perdidos. —Temo que ya lo estemos —dijo Imric. Skafloc no consiguió captar en ese momento el auténtico significado de aquellas palabras. Al mirar a su alrededor, vio que el navío insignia se había quedado solo. Ambas flotas se estaban separando a medida que los enemigos iban cortando los ganchos de abordaje, pero la de los trolls había sufrido menores daños que la suya. Con demasiada frecuencia, los trolls dejaban fuera de combate a un navío elfo mediante el simple expediente de atacarle, al 160 mismo tiempo y con dos de sus barcos, por babor y estribor. _¡A los remos! —exclamó Skafloc—. ¡Debemos ayudarlos! ¡A los remos! —Bien dicho —apostilló Imric. El navío largo se acercó al lugar más próximo en donde la batalla se encontraba en plena efervescencia, recibiendo una lluvia de flechas. —¡Disparad! —vociferó Skafloc—. ¡Por todos los infiernos! ¿Por qué no les respondéis? —Nuestras aljabas están vacías, señor —dijo un elfo. Agachándose bajo los escudos de las bordas, los elfos remaron hasta el mismo punto de la lucha. Dos de sus navíos habían sido acorralados por tres embarcaciones mercenarias y un navío dragón troll. Cuando el buque de Imric se acercó, los demonios alados del lago Baikal llegaron volando y lo atacaron desde las alturas. Los elfos lucharon con encono, pero resulta muy difícil combatir contra un enemigo que te ataca desde el aire con una lanza. Gastaron las últimas flechas que les quedaban sin conseguir que la muerte que les llegaba de las alturas dejara de golpearlos. Sin embargo, pudieron llegar hasta el navío que les lanzaba flechas, tripulado por goblins, y permanecer junto a él de costado. Skafloc lo abordó y comenzó a atacar a sus ocupantes con la espada de aleación élfica que reemplazaba la que antes usara. Aquella gente menuda no podía resistir un combate cuerpo a cuerpo. A uno lo partió en dos; a otro lo envió a rodar por el puente, gritando con las tripas fuera; a un tercero lo decapitó, y su cabeza cayó, dando botes, de sus hombros. La pica de Lanzadefuego atravesó simultáneamente a dos, mientras que de una patada le hundía el esternón a un tercero. Los elfos siguieron afluyendo sobre el navío y los goblins retrocedieron. Skafloc llegó a la armería y lanzó sobre la cubierta de su navío las pesadas cajas con las flechas. Pero en vez de conducir a los suyos hacia popa, en lo que habría sido una carnicería, tocó retirada; los goblins no estaban en situación de preocuparse por nadie más que por ellos mismos. Los arcos de los elfos vibraron de nuevo y los demonios que seguían revoloteando se desplomaron sobre el mar. Los trolls se acercaban. Skafloc vio que otros dos navíos tripulados por elfos se dirigían contra los goblins, los oni y los duendes. 161 —Si se ocupan de ellos, creo que nosotros podremos dar buena cuenta de los trolls —dijo. Los guerreros de piel verde lanzaron los garfios de abordaje, pronunciaron su grito de guerra con un aullido y saltaron por encima de la borda del navío dragón elfo. Skafloc corrió hacia ellos, resbaló en el maderamen cubierto de sangre, y cayó entre los bancos. Una lanza silbó en el lugar donde un instante antes se encontraba su pecho, con la suficiente fuerza para haberle traspasado la cota de malla, yendo a clavarse en el corazón de Golric de Cornualles, que cayó sobre el puente. —Gracias —musitó Skafloc, levantándose. Los trolls ya estaban encima de él. Sus golpes, cayéndole desde arriba, le alcanzaron en el escudo y en el yelm o. Él intentó herirles en los tobillos y acertó a uno de sus enemigos, que se desplomó. Pero antes de que pudiese proseguir, otro troll se inclinó sobre él, escrutando su rostro. Skafloc levantó entonces el escudo guarnecido de hierro, y el troll comenzó a gritar, emprendiendo la retirada, con medio rostro abrasado. Skafloc se levantó del montón de aparejos sobre el que estaba echado y se reunió con los elfos. El estruendo del combate seguía sonando a través de la nieve que había comenzado a caer y que iba arreciando. Después se levantó el viento, lo que hizo que los dos navíos, aún unidos por las cuerdas del abordaje, cabecearan y chocaran uno contra el otro. Los comb atientes perdían el equilibrio y caían sobre el primer puente, entre los aparejos y los bancos, llegando hasta el segundo, para levantarse de nuevo y seguir luchando. Al poco tiempo, el escudo de Skafloc estaba tan abollado que resultaba inservible. Se lo lanzó al troll con quien se encontraba intercambiando golpe tras golpe y le clavó la espada, ya embotada por el uso, en el corazón. Entonces sintió que alguien le cogía por la escalda. Echó hacia atrás la cabeza, cubierta de acero, sin conseguir ver nada. Pero el poderoso apretón de aquellos brazos, nudosos como una en cina, se mantuvo igual de fuerte. Girando aún más la cabeza, Skafloc vio que aquel troll estaba cubierto totalmente de pieles, incluidos guantes y capucha. Gracias a una llave de lucha élfica, que consistía en hacer fuerza con los brazos entre el pulgar y el índice del adversario, consiguió liberarse; pero sólo para caer en una presa digna de un oso. El navío cabeceó y ambos cayeron entre los bancos. 162 Skafloc no era capaz de soltarse. Y comprendió con amargura que aquella criatura podría romperle las costilla s como si fuesen astiles de flecha... Puso las rodillas encima del vientre del troll, las manos alrededor del ancho cuello, y apretó a su vez. Es muy posible que ningún otro mortal hubiera podido mantener incólume su columna vertebral contra abrazo tan espantoso. Skafloc sintió que las fuerzas le iban abandonando como el vino que se derrama de una copa volcada. Dirigió fuerza, voluntad y coraje hacia las piernas y la espalda, y también hacia las manos que estrechaban la tráquea del troll. Le pareció que ambos seguían las oscilaciones del navío y supo que no sería capaz de resistir aquello durante mucho tiempo. Entonces el troll soltó su presa y plantó sus zarpas en las muñecas de Skafloc, en un intento desesperado de poder respirar. El hombre golpeó la cabeza de su adversario contra la base del mástil, como si fuese un ariete, una, dos, tres veces, con una furia que hizo cantar a la madera hasta que el cráneo envuelto en pieles acabó por reventar. Skafloc permaneció echado junto al cadáver, medio ahogado, mientras el corazón estaba a punto de salírsele del pecho y la sangre le zumbaba en los oídos. Tras un instante, vislumbró a Lanzadefuego que se inclinaba sobre él y escuchó su voz sobrecogida: —Jamás se supo que hombre o elfo matara con sus manos desnudas a un troll. Tu empresa es digna de un Beowulf y será recordada mientras el mundo exista. Hemos vencido. Ayudó a Skafloc a salir al primer puente. Al mirar a las aguas que rodeaban al navío, entre la nieve que caía oblicuamente, el hombre vio que las embarcaciones de los mercenarios extranjeros también habían sido conquistadas. Pero a qué precio... De las tres naves que formaban la escolta de Imric ni siquiera una veintena de elfos quedaba en pie, la mayor parte con serias heridas. La corriente las arrastraba hacia la playa, cargadas de cadáveres y de los pocos guerreros que eran capaces de manejar una espada. Aguzando la mirada a través de la oscuridad, Skafloc observó que otro navío largo, lleno de trolls, se dirigía hacia ellos. —Me temo que hemos perdido —dijo, con un gemido—. Lo único que 163 nos queda por hacer es intentar salvar lo que podamos. Los navíos iban a la deriva, sin nadie que los guiara, hacia la playa. En ella los esperaba una formación de trolls, desplegados en línea, montados en sus grandes caballos negros. Una gaviota apareció en medio de la nevada, se posó y se convirtió en Imric. —Nos hemos portado bien —dijo, con pesar, el Conde de los Elfos—. Cerca de la mitad de la flota troll no regresará a puerto, sobre todo la formada por sus aliados; pero nosotros... hemos agotado nuestras fuerzas. Las naves que aún podían mantenerse a flote se dieron a la fuga..., las demás esperan su destino, como nosotros —las lágrimas, quizá las primeras en varios siglos, brillaron en sus fríos ojos, desprovistos de pupila—. Inglaterra esta perdida. Y me temo que también Alfheim. Lanzadefuego asió con fuerza el astil de su pica. —Moriremos luchando —dijo, con una voz que sonaba hueca por el cansancio. Skafloc asintió con la cabeza, y al pensar que Freda le esperaba en Elfheugh sintió que en su interior fluía lo poco de fuerza que aún parecía quedarles. —¡Muramos luchando! —exclamó—. Pero antes debemos intentar salvarnos. —Sería un buen tanto si lo consiguiéramos —dijo Lanzadefuego, no muy seguro. Skafloc se quitó el yelmo. Tenía los cabellos pegados del sudor. —Comencemos por quitarnos el equipo —dijo. Los elfos apenas eran suficientes para tripular las tres naves y así mantenerlas próximas unas a otras, por lo que se fueron todos a una de ellas y alzaron el mástil y las velas. Sin embarg o, la probabilidad de salir con vida parecía cada vez menor, ya que los trolls se acercaban con viento de popa, y su embarcación y la de ellos estaban muy cerca de la playa. Skafloc luchó contra el timón, mientras su gente izaba la vela y la nave se dirigía hacia tierra. Los trolls se af anaron con los remos, en un esfuerzo por atrapar al bajel elfo o, si no, para hacer que se precipitara en unos escollos que se encontraban a proa. 164 —El espacio es muy estrecho —advirtió Imric. —¡Más de lo que se imaginan! —dijo Skafloc, con una feroz mueca, entornando los ojos para ver mejor a través de los copos de nieve. Observó la espuma que hacían las olas en la playa y las oyó rugir entre el silbido del viento. Más allá estaban los escollos. Los trolls se disponían a alcanzarlos. Skafloc ordenó a gritos que tensaran velas y se caló el yelmo. El navío giró sobre sí mismo y salió disparado hacia delante, a favor del viento. Demasiado tarde, los trolls comprendieron la maniobra e intentaron detenerse. El navío de Skafloc los embistió en mitad del casco, con un golpe que hizo crujir todas sus cuadernas. El bajel enemigo se deslizó hacia el lado contrario y fue a dar contra los escollos... rompiéndose en mil pedazos. Los elfos de Skafloc maniobraron la vela, enloquecidos, acatando todas sus órdenes. Los remos de los trolls se rompieron cuando pasaron rozando el costado de su navío. Skafloc no tenía esperanzas de salvar su nave, pero usando la del enemigo como parachoques y palanca, podía salir mejor librado y llegar al otro extremo del arrecife, donde el mar se hallaba menos enfurecido. Cuando su navío chocó contra las rocas y se quedó empotrado en ellas, observó que por muy poco no había conseguido su propósito. —¡Sálvese quien pueda! —exclamó Skafloc, y saltó hacia la resbaladiza piedra, cayendo en el agua que cubría hasta el cuello. Rápido como una foca, se dirigió nadando hacia la playa. Sus camaradas iban con él, excepto los que se encontraban heridos de tanta gravedad que no podían moverse y que habían tenido que quedarse en el barco que se iba a pique, a la vista ya de la playa hacia la que se dirigían. Los demás llegaron a tierra lejos de la línea de trolls. Habrían podido escapar de ellos si no los hubieran visto algunos de los jinetes, que se lanzaron en su persecución para matarlos. —¡Dispersaos! —exclamó Skafloc—. ¡La mayoría aún podemos salvarnos! Mientras corría en la tempestad de nieve vio caer a los elfos, traspasados por las lanzas de los trolls o atropellados por sus caballos. Pero la mayor parte de su pequeña banda pudo salir con vida. En lo alto, la gaviota aún seguía volando. 165 Pero por encima del ave se cernió un poderoso halieto. Skafloc gimió. Escondido tras una roca, vio al halieto llevar a tierra a la gaviota, que se convirtió en Imric, mientras su captor resultaba ser Illrede. Las mazas de los trolls se abatieron sobre el Conde de los Elfos, quien yacía inerte en una poza formada por su propia sangre mientras lo ataban. Si Imric había muerto, entonces Alfheim había perdido uno de sus mejores guías. Pero si vivía... ¡ay de el! Skafloc avanzó sobre el brezo cubierto de nieve. No sentía cansancio, ni frío, ni el escozor de sus heridas. Los elfos habían sido derrotados y él sólo tenía una meta: llegar a Elfheugh y al lado de Freda antes de que lo hicieran los trolls. 166 CAPITULO 16 a gente de Illrede buscó un refugio para guarecerse del sol, y se quedó en él un par de días, pues la contienda también había resultado agotadora para ellos. Después se dirigieron hacia el Sur, la mitad por tierra y la otra mitad por mar. Los navíos llegaron al puerto de Elfheugh la misma noche de su partida. Sus tripulaciones, nada más desembarcar, saquearon las casas que encontraron indefensas y esperaron en las inmediaciones del castillo la llegada de los suyos. Las fuerzas de tierra, con Grum y Valgard al frente, llegaron poco después. Los jinetes registraron la campiña, de forma que todas las bandas poco numerosas de guerreros elfos que intentaron oponerles resistencia fueron aniquiladas, aunque no sin causarles a los trolls cuantiosas pérdidas. Las granjas fueron saqueadas y quemadas, y sus habitantes encadenados en largas filas: los grilletes iban de ambas muñecas al cuello, e Imric abría la marcha. Como los trolls se lo pasaban en grande con la comida, la bebida y las hembras de Alfheim, no se dieron mucha prisa en llegar a Elfheugh. Pero, ya fuera a causa de sus artes o por el simple hecho de no haber vuelto a oír nada de sus guerreros, los moradores del castillo ya sabían, la 167 mañana después de la batalla, que Imric había perdido. Más tarde, al ver desde sus altos parapetos los fuegos de campamento que los cercaban y la negrura de las naves que descansaban sobre la arena o que habían anclado en la bahía, supieron que no se había tratado de una victoria pírrica sino de un completo triunfo de los invasores. Mientras Freda miraba a través de la ventana de su dormitorio, oyó el levísimo roce de un vestido de seda. Al volverse, vio tras ella a Leea. En la mano de la hembra élfica refulgía un cuchillo. El dolor y la malicia se dibujaban en su rostro, que ya no era el de un ídolo tallado en marfil por algún antiguo maestro del Sur. Y dijo, hablando la lengua del Norte: —Llora lágrimas amargas por aquel cuyo amor se ha convertido en festín de los cuervos. —Lloraré cuando sepa que ha muerto —contestó Freda, con voz átona— . Pero había demasiada vida en él para que se me ocurra pensar que ahora yace rígido. —¿Dónde podría estar? ¿Qué podría hacer un proscrito que se oculta? —los labios pálidos y plenos de Leea se curvaron hacia arriba—. ¿Ves este puñal, Freda? Los trolls acampan alrededo r de Elfheugh y tu ley te prohibe quitarte la vida. Pero si quieres huir yo puedo ayudarte. —No. Esperaré a Skafloc —dijo Freda—. ¿Acaso no tenemos lanzas, flechas y máquinas de guerra? ¿No hay abundancia de comida y de bebida, no son altos los muros y resistentes las puertas? Lo que deben hacer quienes están en el castillo es defenderlo hasta que regresen los que se fueron. Leea bajó el puñal y se quedó mirando durante largo rato a la esbelta joven de ojos grises. —Tu ánimo es excelente —dijo, finalmente—, y me parece que comienzo a ver lo que Skafloc encontró en ti. Sin embargo, tu consejo es el de una mortal... alocada e impaciente. ¿C ómo unas simples hembras podrían defender un castillo del enemigo que derrotó a sus compañeros? —Pueden intentarlo... o sucumbir como ellos. —Intentarlo, quizá... Aunque no de esa manera, pero sí con otras armas —una alegría cruel le iluminó el semblante—-Armas de hembra. Pero para usarlas habremos de abrir las puertas. ¿Quieres vengar a tu amante? 168 —¡Sí... con flechas y puñales, y veneno si fuera necesario! —Entonces dales tus besos a los trolls : rápidos como flechas, cortantes como pañales, amargos y mortales como el veneno en la copa. Así acostumbran a hacer las hembras de los elfos. —¡Antes preferiría quebrantar la excelsa ley de Aquel que está en los cielos y convertirme en mi propia asesina, que prostituirme a quienes mataron a mi hombre! —declaró, orgullosa, la joven. —¡Palabrería de mortal! —dijo Leea, despectiva, y sonrió como un gato—. Durante algún tiempo encontraré interesantes las caricias de los trolls. Al menos, representan algo nuevo, pues no resulta nada fácil encontrar algo fresco después de tantos siglos. Cuando llegue nuestro nuevo Conde, le abriremos las puertas de Elfheugh. Freda se dejó caer encima del lecho y escondió su rostro entre las manos. Leea dijo: —Si quieres seguir con tus alocadas ideas de mortal me sentiré muy feliz de librarme de ti. Mañana, después de la aurora, cuando los trolls duerman, te ayudaré a salir del castillo, con todo lo que quieras llevarte. Después puedes hacer lo que te plazca... Irte a las tierras de los hombres, supongo, y unir tu voz a los estridentes gemidos de las monjas, cuyo celestial esposo jamás acude a ellas. ¡Espero que lo disfrutes! Y se fue. Durante un tiempo, Freda permaneció echada, presa de la tiniebla y de la desesperanza. No conseguía llorar y los sollozos se resistían a salir de su garganta. Había perdido todo, familia, amante... ¡No! Se sentó y apretó los puños. Skafloc no había muerto. No lo creería hasta que no hubiera besado sus labios exangües, entonces, si Dios era misericordioso, se le rompería el corazón y caería muerta a su lado. Pero si estaba vivo..., si yacía gravemente herido, quizá rodeado de enemigos y necesitando de su ayuda... Se apresuró a recoger lo que podría serle de mayor utilidad. El yelmo y la loriga de él, y las ropas que llevaba debajo (que entonces le parecieron extrañamente vacías, más que cualquier otra de las que estaban junto a ellas), hacha, espada, escudo, lanza, arcos y muchas flechas. Para sí cogió una loriga 169 ligera, del tipo utilizado por los jóvenes escuderos elfos. Se adaptaba perfectamente a su delgada figura, y no pudo reprimir una sonrisa cuando cubrió sus cabellos rojizos con un yelmo de alas doradas y se miró en el espejo. A él le gustaría verla vestida de aquella manera, que le hacía parecer menos niña, aunque por otra parte se prestara a que le gastase alguna broma. Aunque los pertrechos habían tenido que ser forzosamente de aleación élfica, ya que los caballos de Faene no podían soportar el contacto del hierro, Skafloc haría buen uso de ellos. Pescado seco y otros alimentos fueron añadidos a las armas, así como pieles, mantas, su estuche de costura y cualquier otra cosa que le pudiese servir. «¡Me estoy convirtiendo en un ama de casa!», pensó, y se rió de su ocurrencia. Aquellas tres palabras le nacían sentirse alegre, como cuando vemos a un viejo amigo. Después cogió algunas cosas que no sabía para qué servían, porque recordaba que en alguna ocasión Skafloc les había dado mucha importancia: una piel de lobo, otra de nutria y una especie de aderezo de plumas de águila, pequeñas varas de fresno y de abedul grabadas con runas, y un anillo de extrañísima factura. Cuando todo estuvo convenientemente empaquetado, buscó a Leea. La noble dama miró atónita la figura de valkiria que estaba ante ella. —¿Qué quieres ahora? —preguntó. —Necesito cuatro caballos —contestó Freda— y ayuda para cargar en uno de ellos todo lo que me llevo. Después, que me ayudes a salir de aquí. —Todavía es de noche y los trolls están despiertos y merodean por todas partes. Pero como nuestros caballos no pueden viajar durante el día... —No importa. Pueden ir más deprisa que los demás, y rapidez es lo que ahora más deseo, por encima de cualquier otra consideración. —De acuerdo, podrás llegar a alguna iglesia antes de que se haga de día... si consigues romper el cerco —bromeó Leea—; las armas de que te has provisto te darán alguna protección durante el camino. Pero no esperes que el oro de Faerie vaya a durarte mucho tiempo. —No llevo nada de oro, ni pienso acercarme a las tierras de los hombres. La puerta que quiero que me abras es la norte. Leea abrió desmesuradamente los ojos y se limitó a encogerse de 170 hombros. —Es una locura. ¿De qué te servirá el cadáver de Skafloc...? De acuerdo... haré lo que dices —y suavizó las líneas de sus labios cuando añadió, muy bajo, y con voz a punto de quebrarse—: Dale un beso de parte de Leea, te lo ruego. Freda no dijo nada, a pesar de que en su fuero interno sabía que Skafloc, ya estuviera vivo o muerto, jamás tendría aquel beso. Cuando se fue, la nieve seguía cayendo copiosamente. La puerta se cerró sin hacer ruido, mientras los guardias goblins, a los que se había prometido la libertad a cambio de sus servicios, agitaban la mano, en señal de despedida. Freda comenzó a cabalgar con su reata de caballos, sin mirar hacia atrás, pues sin Skafloc los esplendores de Elfheugh no eran sino ceniza. El viento gemía a su alrededor y le mordía a través de las pieles. Se inclinó hacia su caballo y le susurró al oído: —¡Venga, deprisa, deprisa, demuestra que eres el mejor de los corceles, galopa deprisa y raudo hacia el Norte, hasta encontrar a Skafloc! ¡Búscale con tus poderes y sentidos sobrenaturales, y dormirás en establos de oro y correrás en libertad a través de los pastizales estivales por todos los siglos venideros! En aquel momento sonó un grito estridente, que hizo que Freda se inmovilizase en su silla de montar, mientras sentía que el terror la iba invadiendo. Nada le resultaba más terrorífico que los trolls... y ahora la habían visto. —¡Oh, rápido, caballito! El viento de la galopada resonaba en sus oídos, tan fuerte que casi la despedía de la silla, obligándola a cubrir se los ojos con el brazo izquierdo que mantenía delante de su rostro. Casi no conseguía ver a través de la noche y de la niebla, a pesar de su Vista Encantada, pero le bastaba con oír el galopar de cascos tras ella. Cada vez más deprisa hacia el Norte, siempre hacia el Norte, sin que el aire dejara de silbar en sus oídos y de morder su carne, ni sus perseguidores cesaran en sus gritos ni en su galopada. Cada vez que miraba hacia atrás veía a los trolls como si fueran una sombra más oscura que las demás, cabalgando en medio de la noche. ¡Si pudiese detenerse y ordenarles que regresaran en nombre de Jesús! Pero era una idea descabellada, porque, si bien estaba 171 demasiado lejos de ellos para que la oyeran, no lo estaba del alcance de sus flechas. La nieve comenzó a caer más espesa, haciendo que los trolls se fuesen rezagando, aunque Freda sabía que prosegui rían, incansables, tras su pista. Y mientras volaba literalmente hacia el Norte, llegó a encontrarse muy cerca del ejército de Trollheim, que se dirigía hacia el Sur. El tiempo corría tan veloz como el viento. Freda vislumbró el resplandor lejano de un fuego en la cima de una colina. .. Posiblemente procedía del incendio de la casa de algún elfo. Las tropas debían de calar muy cerca y, en cualquier momento, ella podía encontra rse con sus exploradores que estarían rastreando toda la zona. Como si alguien hubiese escuchado sus pensamientos, un aullido se elevó de las tinieblas que había a su derecha. Oyó ruido de cascos. Si le cortaban el paso... En su camino apareció una forma monstruosa, un caballo gigantesco y peludo, más negro que la noche, con ojos que relucían como carbones, montado por un jinete de cota de malla negra, de poderosa musculatura y rostro espeluznante... ¡un troll! El caballo élfico se echó a un lado, pero no con la rapidez suficiente. El troll adelantó uno de sus largos brazos, agarró su brida y detuvo al corcel. Freda gritó. Pero antes de que pudiese pronunciar cualquier nombre santo, el ser la había arrancado de su silla, atraído hacia sí con uno de sus brazos y tapado la boca con una fría zarpa, tan apestosa como un nido de serpientes. —¡Jo, jo, jo! —se carcajeó el troll. Acuciado a través de la ventosa oscuridad por la urgente sensación de que ella necesitaba ayuda, aún sin aliento por la larga caminata y el miedo de llegar demasiado tarde, Skafloc se arrojó sobre el troll. Puso un pie en el estribo de su caballo, se irguió y le clavó un puñal en el corazón. Acto seguido, tomó a Freda entre sus brazos. 172 173 CAPITULO 17 uando la hueste troll llegó a Elfheugh, en lo alto de las atalayas sonó un cuerno y las grandes puertas de bronce se abrieron de par en par. Valgard, entornando los ojos, tiró de las riendas de su cabalgadura. —Una trampa —murmuró. —No, no lo creo —dijo Grum—. En el castillo sólo deben de quedar unas pocas hembras, que esperan que las respetemos —y presa de risa convulsa, añadió—: ¡Y así será! ¡Así será! Los cascos de los robustos caballos resonaron sobre el empedrado del patio. El aire era agradable y tranquilo, sumido en la penumbra poco cálida que se tornaba azulada en las paredes y torrecillas que lleg aban hasta el cielo. En los jardines se respiraban aromas lánguidos; las fuentes rumoreaban, y arroyuelos cristalinos corrían hasta desembocar en ensenadas tan pequeñas que sólo podían contener a dos de ellos. Las damas de Elfheugh se habían congregado ante la torre para recibir a los vencedores. Aunque en el transcurso de su avance hacia el Sur ya había visto y tomado a otras de su especie, Valgard no pudo por menos de maravillarse al verlas. 174 Una de ellas se adelantó, con sutiles vestiduras que se adherían a cada una de sus formas, eclipsando de tal suerte a las demás, como la luna a las estrellas. Hizo una reverencia a Grum y el frío misterio de sus ojos quedó velado por sus largas pestañas. —Salud, señor —dijo, con voz que más parecía canto que palabras—. Elfheugh se somete a ti. El Conde se hinchó como la rana del cuento. —Antaño, este castillo se nos resistió durante largo tiempo —dijo—, y no pocos asaltos rechazó. Pero ahora os habéis comportado sabiamente, al decidiros a reconocer la fuerza de Trollheim. Si resultamos terribles como enemigos, nuestros amigos, en cambio, no reciben de nosotros más que espléndidos dones —sonrió con afectación—. Dentro de poco te haré un regalo. ¿Cómo te llamas? —Soy la noble Leea, señor, hermana de Imric, el Conde de los Elfos. —No sigas dándole ese apelativo, puesto que ahora yo, Grum, soy el Conde de esta isla, provincia de Faerie, e Imric es el último de mis siervos. ¡Traed a los prisioneros! Lentamente, con la cabeza gacha y arrastrando los pies, los nobles de Alfheim hicieron su entrada, empujados por los guardias. Sus rostros tiznados estaban llenos de amargura y sus espaldas se arqueaban bajo un peso más opresivo que el de las cadenas. Imric, con el cabello pegado por su propia sangre, que también quedaba en las huellas que dejaban en el suelo sus pies desnudos, encabezaba la fila. Nada dijeron los elfos, ni siquiera miraron a sus hembras, mientras eran devueltos a las mazmorras. Los seguían los cautivos que no eran de tan noble condición, una fila de miseria de una milla de largo. Illrede llegó a bordo de un barco. —Elfheugh es nuestra —dijo—, y a ti, Grum, te dejamos en ella, para que la guardes mientras sometemos el resto de Alfheim. Aún quedan por tomar las plazas de los elfos de Escocia, Inglaterra y Gales: como muchos de ellos acecharán por bosques y colinas, te espera un arduo trabajo. Y se dispuso a entrar en la torre. —Aún nos queda una cosa por hacer antes de irnos —dijo—. Hace ahora novecientos años, Imric se llevó a nuestra hija Gora. Liberadla. Mientras el rey se iba, acompañado de su séquito, Leea tiró a Valgard de 175 la manga, atrayéndole hacia ella, y lo estudió intensamente. —Al principio te tomé por Skafloc, un mortal que vivía entre nosotros — susurró—. Pero ahora puedo sentir que no eres humano... —No —los labios de Valgard se contrajeron—. Yo soy Valgard Berserkr de Trollheim. Pero en cierto modo, Skafloc y yo somos hermanos, pues, tras ser engendrado por Gora, la hembra de troll, e Imric, éste me cambió por el niño que se convertiría en Skafloc. —Entonces... —los dedos de Leea se cerraron alrededor de su brazo. Sus palabras eran como un susurro—, ¿eres el Valgard de quien hablaba Freda? ¿Su hermano? —El mismo —su tono de voz se hizo más duro—. ¿Dónde está ella? — preguntó—. ¿Y dónde está Skafloc? —No... lo sé... Freda ha huido del castillo, dijo que iba en su busca. —Entonces, si no ha sido hecha prisionera en el camino, y no he oído nada al respecto, estará con él. ¡No está bien! Leea sonrió, con los labios prietos y los ojos cerrados. —Al final comprendo lo que Tyr el As quería decir —susurró en voz baja, hablando consigo misma—, y la razón por la que Imric lo mantenía en secreto —y, ya a plena voz, dirigiéndose valientemente a Valgard, preguntó—: ¿Por qué piensas que no está bien? Has matado a toda la descendencia de Orm, excepto a ellos dos, y has hecho todo lo posible para que les ocurriera lo peor. Si odiabas a esa familia, como todo parece indicar, ¿qué mejor venganza podrías encontrar? Valgard sacudió la cabeza. —Nada tenía contra Orm o su familia —murmuró. Y mirando a su alrededor, presa de un súbito desconcierto, como si acabara de despertarse de un sueño inquieto, añadió—: Supongo que he debido de odiarlos mucho para hacerles tanto daño... a mis propios hermanos... —se pasó una mano por la frente—. No, no son de mi sangre, ¿o sí lo son? Y cortó la conversación, dejando a Leea y acercándose al rey. Leea siguió sus pasos, sin dejar de sonreír. Illrede se había sentado en el sitial de Imric. Su mirada se hallaba fija en una puerta interior. Hizo una mueca que quería ser una sonrisa cuando oyó las pisadas de sus guardias. 176 —Traen a Gora —murmuró—. Mi pequeñita, que hace tanto tiempo reía y jugaba dando vueltas alrededor de mis rodillas —puso una pesada mano sobre los hombros de Valgard—. Tu madre. Gora entró vacilando en la sala, delgada, llena de arrugas, arqueada por el peso de los siglos que había pasado arrebujada en la más completa oscuridad. Sobre aquel rostro de calavera, sus ojos miraban fijamente, vacuos, excepto cuando pasaba frente a ellos alguno de los fantasmas que poblaban su mentes. —Gora —Illrede se incorporó a medias y volvió a caerse en el asiento. Ella movió la cabeza hacia todas las direcciones, completamente ciega. —¿Quién llama a Gora? —murmuró—. Quien llama a Gora llama a una muerta. Gora está muerta, señor, lleva muerta novecientos años. La enterraron debajo de un castillo; sus huesos blan queados empujaron su torre hacia las estrellas. ¿Por qué no dejáis que la pobre muerta repose en paz? Valgard retrocedió, alzando casi una mano para apartar la cosa que avanzaba en dirección a él dando traspiés . Illrede extendió sus brazos hacia ella. —Gora, ¿no me conoces, no conoces a tu padre? ¿No conoces a tu hijo? Su voz sonó en la sala como un viento lejano. —¿Cómo es posible que una muerta pueda conocer a alguien? ¿Cómo es posible que una muerta pueda dar a luz a alguien? El cerebro que diera a luz tantos sueños se ha convertido en un paridero de dragones. Las hormigas rampan por el interior de la oquedad donde antaño latiera un corazón. ¡Oh, devolvedme mis cadenas! ¡Devolvedme el amante que me hacía suya en la oscuridad! —gimió—. No hagáis que la pobre muerta, que se espanta de miedo, salga de su tumba, señor, ni despertéis a la loca, porque la vida y la razón son monstruos que sólo viven para devorar a quien les dio el nacer. Echó la cabeza hacia un lado, como si escuchase algo. —Oigo el retumbar de cascos de caballo —dijo, en voz muy baja—. Oigo cascos galopando por los confines del mundo. Es el tiempo que cabalga, mientras la nieve cae de las crines de su caballo y los relámpagos brotan de sus cascos, dejando a su paso hojas marchitas, que se agitan en el viento que desata. Se va acercando, oigo el romperse de mundos ante él... 177 ¡Devolvedme mi muerte! —gimió—. ¡Dejadme bajar, reptando, a mi tumba, para ocultarme del tiempo! Y cayó al suelo, sollozando. Illrede hizo una seña a sus guardias. —Llevadla afuera y dadle muerte —ordenó. Y, volviéndose hacia Grum, dijo—: Colgad a Imric de los pulgares sobre carbones ardiendo hasta que hayamos conquistado Alfheim y podamos pensar en la recompensa que se merece —se levantó y exclamó—: ¡Eh, guerreros de los trolls, recoged vuestras cosas! ¡Zarpamos al instante! Aunque todos habían esperado el momento en que serían agasajados con un festín, ninguno de los que vio el rostro del rey se atrevió a protestar por su decisión, y al poco tiempo la mayo r parte de los negros navíos ya había desaparecido del horizonte, rumbo al Sur. —Así tocamos a más —bromeó Grum. Y, al darse cuenta de lo pálido que se encontraba Valgard, añadió—: Me parece que esta noche vas a beber de lo lindo. —Sí —asintió el berserkr—, y después, en cuanto disponga de gente, me iré a luchar. Los jefes de los trolls reunieron a las hembras del castillo y escogieron las que más les apetecían antes de dejar las demás a sus guerreros. Grum puso la mano que le quedaba en el talle de Leea. —Has demostrado sabiduría al entregarte —dijo, con una mueca—, porque no dejaré que bajes de rango. Podrás seguir siendo la Dama del Conde. Ella le siguió mansamente, pero al pasar junto a Valgard esbozó una sonrisa. La mirada del berserkr la siguió, fascinado. Jamás había visto ninguna hembra semejante; con ella, se dijo, podría olvidar la bruja de cabello negro que aún hechizaba sus sueños. Los trolls comieron y se emborracharon durante algunos días, tras lo cual Valgard llevó sus tropas a conquistar otro castillo que aún resistía, ya que un crecido número de elfos había conseguido guarecerse en él. Aunque no era de gran tamaño, sus murallas se levantaban altas y macizas Y las flechas de sus defensores mantenían a distancia a los trolls. Valgard esperó mientras fue de día. Ya cerca del crepúsculo, avanzó reptando, amparándose en las zonas boscosas y en los roquedales, hasta 178 llegar a las murallas, sin que los elfos, soñolientos y deslumhrados por la luz que aún quedaba, le vieran. Cuando se hizo de noche, los cuernos dieron la señal del combate y los trolls avanzaron. Valgard se levantó y, con un poderoso impulso, consiguió encajar un gancho en un merlón. Subió por la soga que pendía de él, hasta arriba del todo, e hizo sonar su cuerno. Los centinelas elfos cargaron contra Valgard. A pesar del hierro que llevaba encima, su lucha fue desesperada. Pero los trolls no tardaron en dar con la soga y seguirle. Cuando dispusieron de un espacio libre de atacantes en el parapeto, otros, desde abajo, apoyaron en él varias escalas. Al poco tiempo, ya había el suficiente número de trolls para llegar hasta las puertas y abrirlas a los que esperaban fuera. Lo que siguió fue una espantosa matanza de elfos. La mayor parte fueron hechos cautivos y llevados encadenados a Elfheugh. Valgard no hizo otra cosa que saquear e incendiar a todo lo largo de la comarca, regresando con un cuantioso botín. Grum le recibió de mala gana, pues pensaba que Valgard se estaba haciendo demasiado famoso entre los trolls. —Podías haberte quedado con la guarnición que dejaste en el castillo — dijo—, pues este lugar es demasiado pequeño para los dos. —Es verdad —murmuró Valgard, midiendo al Conde con sus gélidos ojos azules. Sin embargo, Grum no pudo por menos de celebrar su regreso con un festín y colocarle a la derecha de su sitial. Las damas de los elfos servían a los trolls, y Leea no dejaba de llevarle a Valgard más y más cuernos de vino generoso. —Para nuestro héroe, el más esforzado de los guerreros no sólo de las tierras de los hombres, sino de toda Faene —dijo Leea, brindando a la salud de Valgard. La luz plateada esplendía sobre su piel, a través de su fino vestido de seda, y a Valgard comenzó a darle vueltas la cabeza, pero no sólo por efecto del vino que había bebido. —¡Puedes darme las gracias de otra manera mucho mejor! —exclamó y, abrazándola, la puso encima de sus ro dillas y la besó apasionadamente, a lo 179 que ella respondió con el mismo ardor. Grum, que seguía sentado en su sitial, un tanto desmadejado, bebiendo sin decir una palabra, se agitó, colérico. —¡Vuelve a tu quehacer, zorra infiel! —la regañó y, dirigiéndose a Valgard, dijo—: ¡Deja a mi hembra! ¡Tú ya tienes la tuya! —Pero ésta me guata más —replicó Valgard—. Te la cambio por otras tres. —¡Ja, esas tres puedo quitártelas cu ando me apetezca, ya que soy... tu Conde! La que elegí es mía. Déjala en paz. —El botín pertenece a quien sabe hacer mejor uso de él —le provocó Leea, sin abandonar las rodillas de Valgard—. Y tú sólo tienes una mano. El troll salió lanzado de su asiento, ciego de rabia, y echó mano de su espada, pues los de su especie no se la quitan para comer. —¡Socorro! —gritó Leea. El hacha de Valgard pareció saltar sola hacia su puño. Antes de que Grum, debido a la desventaja de tener que usar la mano izquierda, pudiese desenvainar su espada, el arma del berserkr se clavó en su cuello. Grum cayó a los pies de Valgard, chorreando sangre, y alzó la mirada hacia su pálido rostro, aún contorsionado de ira. —Eres un hombre malvado —dijo—, pero ella es peor —y murió. En la sala se levantó un gran clamor, las armas comenzaron a chocar entre sí y los trolls avanzaron hacia el sitial. Algunos gritaron pidiendo la cabeza de Valgard, mientras otros juraban que lo defenderían con sus vidas. Durante un momento, estuvo a punto de desencadenarse una batalla. Entonces Valgard tomó de la cabeza de Grum la diadema que fuera de Imric, manchada de sangre, y se la puso en la suya. Se subió en el sitial y mandó callar a todos. Poco a poco fue haciéndose la calma hasta que sólo se oyó la pesada respiración de los presentes. Las armas relucían, desnudas, se sentía el acre olor del miedo y todos los ojos estaban puestos en Valgard cuando habló, altanero, desde la autoridad que le daba su fuerza. Había hierro en sus palabras: —Esto ha ocurrido antes de lo que había pensado, era inevitable. ¿Qué utilidad tenía para Trollheim un lisiado como Grum, inútil para el combate, quien 180 no sabía hacer otra cosa que tragar, emborracharse y dormir con mujeres que debieran haberles tocado en suerte a otros hombres mejores que él? Yo, que tengo en mis venas sangre que nada tiene que envidiar a la mejor de Trollheim y que ya he demostrado que puedo conseguir la victoria, soy más digno de ser vuestro Conde. Por otra parte, ya lo soy, por la expresa voluntad de mi abuelo, el rey Illrede. No tardaréis en comprobar que esta voluntad resulta beneficiosa para todos los trolls, sobre todo los de Inglaterra. Os prometo victorias, riquezas, vida lujosa y gloria, si me aclamáis como vuestro Condes. Extrajo su hacha del cadáver de Grum y la levantó en alto. —Quien ponga en tela de juicio mi derecho habrá de pasar sobre mi cadáver... ahora —prosiguió—. Pero a quien me sea fiel le daré el mil por uno. Al oír aquello, los guerreros que le habían seguido en el asedio le aclamaron. Los demás, que no deseaban luchar, se les fueron uniendo uno tras otro, con lo que Valgard se sentó definitivamente en el sitial y el festín pudo proseguir. Como Grum no había sido muy apreciado entre los trolls y, además, los pocos parientes que tenía no estaban muy unidos, el weregild fue aceptado sin rechistar. Más tarde, cuando se encontraba a solas en su dormitorio con Leea, Valgard la miró fijamente, con expresión sombría. —Es la segunda vez que una mujer me incita a matar a alguien —dijo—. Si fuera sabio partiría tu cuerpo en tres pedazos. —No puedo impedírtelo, señor —murmuró ella con dulzura y le pasó los blancos brazos alrededor del cuello. —Sé que no podría hacerlo —afirmó Valgard, con rudeza—. Así que dejémonos de chachara. Cuando me falta la paz que encuentro en ti, siento la negrura de mi vida. Quedó en silencio; poco después preguntó: —¿Era lo mismo con los elfos..., con Skafloc? Ella levantó la cabeza, de modo que la red suavemente perfumada de sus cabellos les cubriera el rostro a ambos. —Basta con que haya sido así contigo, señor —musitó, y le besó. A partir de entonces, Valgard gobernó en Elfheugh. A principios del invierno salió de la fortaleza para realizar frecuentes incursiones contra las plazas fuertes de los elfos y dar caza a los fugitivos con sus guerreros y sus 181 sabuesos. Pocos castillos quedaban sin incendiar, y cuando los elfos intentaban oponerle resistencia les ec haba encima sus tropas, que siempre atacaban dando rugidos. Algunos de los elfos que capturó con vida fueron a parar a las mazmorras o, más afortunados, acabaron realizando trabajos serviles; a la mayor parte los mandó matar y repartió a sus hembras entre los trolls. Pero él nunca se quedaba con ninguna, pues sólo sentía deseos por Leea. Del Sur llegó la noticia de que los ejércitos de Illrede estaban empujando a los elfos hacia ellos. Todas las regiones de Valland y Flandes pertenecientes al reino de Faerie estaban en poder de los trolls. Al Norte, sólo los elfos de Escania disfrutaban de libertad; pero iban siendo rodeados tan rápido como lo permitía la gran masa forestal de su tierra. Por otra parte, todo hacía esperar que los trolls entrarían en un breve plazo de tiempo en las tierras donde vivía el Rey de los Elfos. Los hombres habían tenido algunas visiones vagas de tanto suceso: fuegos distantes, sombras que galopaban, vientos tempestuosos que traían el clamor del metal y la batalla. Pero además de todo eso, estaba la magia que se perdía sin llegar a su objetivo y que causaba todo tipo de desórdenes y ruidos, enfermedades del ganado, cosechas arruinadas y, en general, mala suerte. En algunas ocasiones, sucedía que un cazador llegaba a un campo totalmente cubierto de huellas de pisadas y de sangre, e incluso conseguía ver con el rabillo del ojo algunos cuervos devorando cadáveres que no parecían humanos. La gente se encerraba en sus casas, ponía trozos de hierro en las vigas y maderos del porche o de la puerta, e invocaba la protección de sus diferentes dioses. Según pasaba el tiempo, Valgard seguía consolidando su posición en Elfheugh. Había capturado todos los castillos y colinas fortificadas con las que se había topado, había devastado toda la tierra comprendida desde las Orcadas a Cornualles, por lo que, si aún quedaban elfos, debían de estar bien escondidos..., pues la verdad era que sólo salían de su escondrijo para atacar a sus guerreros, de suerte que siempre volvían mermados a sus fortalezas; también vertían veneno en los alimentos y en el agua, tullían a los caballos, corroían armas y cotas y suscitaban tormentas de nieve, como si toda la isla se levantase contra el invasor. 182 Los trolls mantenían bajo su garra a Inglaterra, de eso no había duda, y día a día, la fuerza de aquella garra iba en aumento. Pero, a pesar de ello, Valgard ansiaba como nunca la llegada de la primavera. 183 CAPITULO 18 kafloc y Freda se refugiaron dentro de una cueva. Era un agujero profundo tallado en la pared de un acantilado, que se alejaba oblicuamente de la playa, bastante al norte de las Colinas de los Elfos. Detrás de ella se extendía una floresta de árboles cubiertos de hielo que se espesaba hacia el sur y se desvanecía entre páramos y tierras altas, más al norte. Aquella tierra, lóbrega y poco acogedora, no estaba habitada por nadie de Faerie, por lo que era uno de los lugares más idóneos para hacer planes que les permitieran proseguir la lucha. No podían excederse en el consumo de la magia para no ser descubiertos por los trolls, por lo que Skafloc hizo buen uso de las pieles y plumas que Freda le había llevado, cazando con la apariencia del lobo, la nutria o el águila, y sólo se permitió transformar en cerveza el agua del mar y hacer algún que otro leve encantamiento. Como no resultaba nada fácil seguir con vida en aquel lugar dominado por los vientos —el invierno más crudo que se recordaba en Inglaterra desde la Era Glacial—, Skafloc tenía que pasar la mayor parte del tiempo cazando. El interior de la cueva era húmedo y frío. Los vientos azotaban su 184 entrada y las olas chocaban contra las rocas y casi entraban en ella. Pero, cuando Skafloc regresó de la primera expedición de caza realmente larga, al menos durante un momento, pensó que se había equivocado de lugar. Un fuego ardía, amoroso, en un hogar de piedra, provisto de una rústica chimenea hecha de mimbres y de pieles sin curtir. Otras pieles tenían como finalidad aislarlos del frío, al cubrir suelo y paredes, mientras que otra, colgada a la entrada, los resguardaba del viento. Los caballos, al fondo, estaban atados a una estaca, rumiando el heno que Skafloc había obtenido de las algas, gracias a sus artes mágicas, y las armas de repuesto, brillantes y bien ordenadas, habían sido dispuestas en fila, como si la cueva fuese una sala donde se estuviese celebrando algún festín. Detrás de cada arma había un pequeño ramo de muérdago. Agachada sobre el fuego y dando vueltas a un espetón de carne, estaba Freda. Skafloc se detuvo de repente, pues casi se le para el corazón al verla. Sólo llevaba una breve túnica, y su esbe lto cuerpo de largas piernas y suaves curvas, en muslos, talle y seno, parecía flotar en medio de la penumbra, como si fuese un pájaro dispuesto a levantar el vuelo. Ella le vio acercarse, y a través de sus cabellos, rojizos y despeinados, sus grandes ojos grises le miraron con alegría, iluminando su rostro enrojecido y tiznado por el humo. Sin decir nada, corrió a su encuentro, con su forma de moverse tan juvenil, y ambos se abrazaron durante un instantes. —¿Por qué has hecho todo esto, cariño? —preguntó Skafloc, maravillado. Ella se rió, halagada. —No soy un oso, ni un hombre, para poner un montón de hojas en un rincón y decir que va a ser mi casa durante el invierno. Algunas de estas pieles ya las teníamos, el resto me las he teni do que procurar por mi cuenta. ¡Oh, como ves, soy una buena ama de casa! —y se acercó más a él, tiritando de frío—. Como te habías ido tan lejos y no tenía nada que hacer, no se me ocurrió nada mejor que ponerme a trabajar en algo para cansarme durante el día y así poder dormir bien por la noches. A Skafloc le temblaron las manos mientras la acariciaba. —Este lugar no es para ti. La vida del proscrito es ardua y peligrosa. Debería llevarte a algún lugar habitado por los hombres, para que esperaras en 185 él nuestra victoria u olvidaras nuestra derrota. —¡No... no, jamás haré una cosa semejante! —y cogiéndole de las orejas acercó la boca de él hasta la suya. Entonces, entre risas y sollozos, insistió—: He dicho que no te abandonar é. No, Skafloc, no te resultará nada fácil librarte de mí. —La verdad —admitió él, tras un instante— es que no sé lo que podría hacer sin ti. A tu lado todos los problemas parecen desvanecerse. —Entonces no me dejes sola nunca más. —Tengo que salir a cazar, amada mía. —Pues cazaré contigo —y señaló la pieza que se asaba al fuego—. Ya que, a fin de cuentas, no se me da del todo mal. —Lo mismo que otras cosas —dijo, riéndose. Y, volviendo a su seriedad de antes, añadió—: Freda, donde yo quiero ir, no sólo hay caza, sino también trolls. —Entonces iré contigo —el rostro de la joven se había puesto tan serio como el suyo—. ¿Acaso piensas que no tengo nada de qué vengarme? Skafloc levantó la cabeza, orgulloso, para bajarla después, al inclinarse a besarla, lo mismo que un halieto con su presa. —¡Así sea! Orm el Guerrero estaría orgulloso de tenerte por hija. Los dedos de Freda comenzaron a contornear una de sus mejillas y, tras llegar a la barbilla, pasaron a la otra. —¿No sabes quién era tu padre? —le preguntó. —No —contestó, sintiéndose incómodo al recordar las palabras de Tyr— . Jamás lo he sabido. —No importa —dijo ella, con una sonrisa—, excepto por el hecho de que él también podría estar orgulloso. Creo que Orm el Fuerte habría dado todas sus riquezas por tener un hijo como tú... Con esto no quiero decir que Ketil y Asmund fuesen débiles. Y a falta de ello, se habría sentido muy feliz de saber que estabas con su hija. Según fue avanzando el invierno, las condiciones de vida fueron haciéndose más duras. El hambre era un invitado asiduo en la cueva, y el frío traspasaba a hurtadillas la piel de la entrada y se reía del fuego, viéndose 186 contenido solamente por el calor que Skafloc y Freda generaban bajo las pieles de oso con las que se cobijaban. Salían a cazar durante días enteros, montados en sus veloces caballos élficos que casi no tocaban la nieve, buscando sus presas en las vastas y blancas soledades. De vez en cuando pasaban ante las renegridas ruinas de una fortaleza élfica. En tales ocasiones Skafloc perdía la color y pasaba varias horas en silencio. Sólo en muy raros momentos encontraban algún elfo con vida, cubierto de harapos y casi en los huesos, a quien nada contaba el hombre de formar ninguna banda, porque sólo habría servido para atraer la atención de los trolls, ya que no para oponerles resist encia. Si hubiera sido posible obtener ayuda de fuera, las cosas hubieran marchado de otra manera y habría tenido sentido unirse en bandas. Skafloc siempre estaba en guardia contra los trolls. Si encontraban su rastro, él y Freda salían al galope. Si divisaban a lo lejos un grupo numeroso, les lanzaban una rociada de flechas y salían a escape; o bien Skafloc esperaba a que se hiciera de día, para deslizarse en los abrigos donde se refugiaban los trolls y cortarles el cuello. Cuando sólo se las tenía que ver con dos o tres, iba a su encuentro, tirando molinetes con su espada, y la canción de ésta, junto con el silbido de las flechas de Freda, era lo último que oían los trolls antes de morir. Por ambas partes se trataba de una caza despiadada. Con frecuencia se guarecían en una cueva o debajo de alguna gran roca para protegerse del temporal, mientras los trolls que los perseguían pasaban ante sus ojos sin verlos, ya que sólo el leve encantamiento producido al salmodiar algunas frases secretas escritas en alfabeto rúnico los protegía de cualquier mirada directa y ocultaba sus huellas. Flechas, lanzas y piedras de honda cortaban el aire a su alrededor cuando emprendían la huida, después de abatir con sus flechas a dos o tres de los guerreros de una compañía. Desde la cueva que se había convertido en su hogar veían pasar los negros navíos largos de los trolls, tan cerca de ellos que podían contar los remaches de los escudos de sus guerreros. Aparte de eso seguía haciendo frío, mucho frío. Sin embargo, el llevar aquella vida hizo posible que Skafloc y Freda llegaran a conocerse. Aprendieron que sus cuerpos no eran lo más importante 187 en el amor, y Skafloc se preguntó si habría tenido los redaños suficientes para seguir luchando si Freda no hubiese estado a su lado. Sus flechas habían abatido a muchos trolls, y sus atrevidas tácticas de emboscada, muchos más..., pero los besos que ella le daba en aquellos dulces momentos de paz eran lo que le infundía valor, y la ayuda y el sosiego que sabía darle, hora tras hora, aumentaban su fuerza. Y a ella le parecía que él era el más grande, el más bravo y el más gentil de todos los hombres, su espada y su escudo, y a un mismo tiempo, su hermano y su amante. Incluso llegaba a confesarse a sí misma que aquella vida no le había hecho perder la fe, aunque ya no fuese tan devota como antes, lo que inducía en ella un leve sentimiento de culpabilidad. Skafloc le había explicado que las palabras y los signos de aquella fe podrían anular la magia que les era tan necesaria. Por su parte, Freda pensaba que sería una blasfemia usarlos para sacar ventaja en aquella guerra que enfrentaba a dos especies sin alma; mejor sería, y posiblemente más saludable, rezar con el corazón en vez de con los labios. Y en lo referente a aquella guerra, como era la de Skafloc también se había convertido en la suya. Algún tiempo después, cuando hubieran conseguido la victoria, le llevaría a hablar con un sacerdote, pues estaba segura de que Dios no le iba a negar la fe a un hombre como él. La vida del proscrito era ruda. Pero hacía que el cuerpo se acostumbrase a ella, aguzando los sentidos, endureciendo los tendones y fortaleciendo el espíritu, y ella lo sintió en carne propia. El viento impulsaba la sangre en sus venas hasta producirle hormigueo; las estrellas prestaban sus fulgores a sus ojos. Con la propia vida balanceándose en el filo de una espada, aprendió a saborear cada uno de sus momentos con una plenitud que jamás hubiera podido imaginar. Era extraño, se decía, que a pesar de sentirse hambrientos, ateridos de frío y asustados, no hubiera entre ellos palabras de reproche. Ambos pensaban y actuaban como si fueran uno solo, como si hubieran salido del mismo molde. Sus diferencias servían simplemente para cubrir las necesidades del otro. —En cierta ocasión, estando en presencia de Imric, me jacté de no haber conocido nunca el miedo, la derrota o el mal de amor —dijo Skafloc, mientras, echado en el suelo de la caverna, reposaba su cabeza en las rodillas de Freda, dejando que ella le peinase los cabellos, agitados por el viento—. Él me habló 188 entonces de las tres cosas que resultan esenciales en la vida de la especie humana. Por aquel tiempo no le comprendí. Pero ahora me doy cuenta de su sabiduría. —¿Y él cómo podía saberlo? —No lo sé, pues los elfos sólo habían conocido la derrota en muy contadas ocasiones, el miedo, casi nunca, y el amor, jamás. Pero desde que te conocí, amada mía, he encontrado juntas en mi interior estas tres cosas. Estaba a punto de ser más elfo que hombre. Tú me hiciste humano de nuevo, y lo que me queda de élfico se va desvaneciendo. —Pero no se ha perdido, pues algo de los elfos ha entrado en mi sangre. Me temo que cuanto menos pienso en lo que es correcto y santo, tanto más voy tomándole aprecio a lo que resulta útil y agradable. Mis pecados van en aumento... Skafloc atrajo el rostro de Freda hacia el suyo. —Entonces has hecho muy bien. Tanto parloteo de deberes, leyes y pecados no es bueno. —No blasfemes... —comenzó a decir. Pero él interrumpió sus palabras con un beso. Freda intentó soltarse y todo acabó en una pelea incruenta con revolcones y carcajadas; cuando se terminó, Freda ya había olvidado sus prevenciones. Después de que los trolls completaran la devastación de los territorios de los elfos, se retiraron a sus plazas fuertes, aventurándose fuera de ellas muy raramente, excepto en formaciones demasiado nutridas para ser atacadas. El humor de Skafloc, que había acumulado en la cueva una notable cantidad de carne congelada, gracias a la caza de gran número de ciervos, se estaba deteriorando a causa de la inacción. Su viveza se ofuscaba mientras pasaba los días acurrucado en la cueva, refunfuñando. Freda intentó darle ánimos. —Ahora corremos menos peligros —dijo. —¿Y para qué nos sirve esta seguridad, si no podemos luchar? — contestó Skafloc—. No hacemos más que esperar el fin. Alfheim se está muriendo. Dentro de poco, todo el reino de Faerie pertenecerá a los trolls. ¡Y 189 yo... sigo aquí sentado! Días después, Skafloc salió de la cueva y vio un cuervo que volaba contra el viento, bajo el cielo encapotado. El mar seguía hiriendo las rocas que se encontraban al pie de la cueva, estremeciéndose y retrocediendo para dar un nuevo asalto, y la espuma de las olas se helaba en cuanto mojaba cualquier cosa. —¿Qué novedades hay? —preguntó Skafloc en la lengua de los cuervos, dando comienzo a un diálogo que no se desarrollo con estas mismas palabras, pues tanto aves como animales poseen lenguajes muy diferentes de los usados por los hombres, pero sí con el mismo significado. —Vengo del sur, del otro lado del Canal, para avisar a los míos — contestó el cuervo—. Valland y Wendland han caído ante los trolls, Escania está a punto de sucumbir, y los ejércitos del Rey de los Elfos no hacen más que retroceder en todos sus dominios. Grande es el festín, pero los cuervos debemos darnos prisa si queremos llegar a él, porque la guerra ya no puede durar mucho. Al oír aquellas palabras, Skafloc montó en tan ardiente cólera que aprestó su arco y disparó al ave. Pero, cuando ésta cayó muerta a sus pies, la ira le abandonó, dejando en su lugar un vacío que comenzó a llenarse poco a poco de tristeza. —Ha sido una vileza matarte, hermano —dijo en voz baja—, porque no obraste mal, sino todo lo contrario, al eliminar de este mundo los despojos desordenados y malolientes del pasado. Fuiste amistoso conmigo y estabas indefenso... y yo te he matado mientras dejo que mis enemigos vivan en paz. Regresó a la cueva y, de repente, comenzó a llorar. Parecía que los sollozos fueran a descoyuntarle las costillas. Freda le abrazó, hablándole como a un niño, y él derramó en su seno todas sus lágrimas. Aquella noche no pudo dormir. —Alfheim ha caído —murmuró—. Antes de que se derrita la nieve, Alfheim sólo será un recuerdo. Lo único que puedo hacer es cabalgar al encuentro de los trolls y arrastrar conmigo, camino a los infiernos, al mayor número de ellos. —No digas eso —dijo Freda—. De ese modo traicionarías estúpidamente tu empeño... y también a mí. Es mucho mejor, y más propio de 190 valientes, seguir con vida y combatir. —Combatir... ¿con qué? —preguntó con amargura—. Nuestra flota ha sido hundida o dispersada y nuestr os guerreros muertos, encadenados o proscritos, como nosotros. Solo el viento, la nieve y los lobos moran en los arrogantes castillos, y el enemigo ocupa los sitiales de nuestros señores de más rancio abolengo. Los elfos están solos, desnudos, a Punto de morir de hambre, desprovistos de armas... Ella le besó. Y como si acabase de ver un luminosísimo relámpago, le pareció divisar ante sus ojos el brillo de una espada elevada hacia lo alto, que le llegase a través de las tinieblas. Durante un largo momento, Freda lo sintió tan envarado como una barra de hierro y tan tembloroso como si la barra se hubiese convertido en un martillo; y él murmuró en la penumbra: —La espada..., el regalo que me hicieron los Ases cuando me dieron este nombre... Sí, la espada... El miedo a lo desconocido se insinuó en Freda. —¿Qué quieres decir? ¿A qué espada te refieres? Entonces, mientras yacían en la os curidad, muy juntos para protegerse de la helada, él le contó entre susurros, como si tuviese miedo de que la noche pudiese escuchar lo que decía, lo sucedido cuando Skirnir había llevado la espada rota, la manera como Imric había emparedado sus fragmentos en las mazmorras de Elfheugh y cómo Tyr le había prevenido de la inminencia del momento en que le sería necesaria. Cuando acabó, era precisamente Freda quien buscaba calor entre sus brazos, la misma que había cazado a tantos trolls armados. Su voz le llegaba débil e indecisa: —No me gusta, Skafloc. Hay algo malo en todo esto. —¿Malo? —exclamó—. Pero si es la única esperanza que nos queda. Odín, que lee el futuro, debió de ver con antelación el día de la derrota de Alfheim... y por eso nos dio la espada, para que lo impidiéramos. ¿Desprovistos de armas? ¡Ja! ¡Ya verás cuando la vean! —Es un error comerciar con cosas paganas, y mucho más cuando son ofrecidas por los propios dioses paganos —dijo Freda, intentando convencerle—. ¡De ellas sólo puede venir el mal! ¡Oh, amado mío, olvida la 191 espada! —Lo cierto es que no hay que poner en duda que todo esto obedece a un plan de los dioses —dijo—, pero lo que ellos buscan no debe ser muy diferente a lo que nosotros queremos. Me parece que Faerie se encuentra en un tablero de ajedrez donde Ases y Jötuns mueven a elfos y trolls en una partida más allá de nuestro entendimiento. Y hasta el más sabio jugador siempre intenta no malgastar sus piezas. —Pero si la espada está sepultada en Elfheugh... —Conseguiré entrar, de uno u otro modo. De hecho, ya se me ha ocurrido una idea. —Pero si la espada está partida en varios trozos, ¿cómo vas... vamos a encontrar al gigante que, según me has dicho, puede repararla? ¿Cómo obligarle a forjarla para ser usada contra los trolls, a fin de cuentas, sus parientes? —Ya habrá algún medio —el tono de Skafloc era tan tajante como el acero—. Ahora mismo recuerdo uno, aunque un tanto peligroso. Es posible que no lo consigamos, pero no por ello el regalo de los dioses deja de ser nuestra última oportunidad. —El regalo de los dioses —Freda comenzó a llorar—. Te repito que de todo esto no vendrá nada bueno. Me parece ya sentirlo, frío y agobiante. Si te embarcas en esta búsqueda, Skafloc, nuestros días juntos están contados. —¿Me dejarías por esto? —preguntó, estupefacto. —No... no, querido... —y se cogió a él, cegada por la oscuridad y las lágrimas—. Sólo era un sollozo que se escapaba de lo más profundo de mi alma... y sin embargo sé... Skafloc la atrajo aun más hacia sí, y la besó ardientemente, hasta que a ella le comenzó a dar vueltas la cabeza y él rió de alegría; finalmente, Freda no pudo por menos de olvidar todas sus angustias, porque resultaban indignas de la esposa de Skafloc, y gozó de su compañía. Pero en su amor había un anhelo que jamás había conocido antes. Y en lo más profundo de su ser supo que ya no volverían a darse muchos momentos como aquél. 192 193 CAPITULO 19 pocas horas antes de que la noche de aquel día llegase a su fin, después de salir de la cueva a dar un paseo con los caballos, que se convirtió en una galopada frenética, tiraban de las riendas de sus corceles élficos. Skafloc no podía estar inactivo mientras Alfheim se moría. La media luna recorría un cielo lleno de nubes, y su tenue luz se filtraba a través de los árboles cargados de carámbanos que se destacaban, resplandecientes, sobre la nieve. El aliento humeaba y ascendía como el humo hacia el cielo, en el aire inmóvil y frío, reluciente como un espectro que abandonase los labios de un muerto. —No nos arriesgaremos a acercarnos los dos a Elfheugh —el susurro de Skafloc sonó anormalmente alto en aquella quietud, entre la penumbra del bosquecillo que los ocultaba—. Pero yo puedo llegar solo, con el aspecto de un lobo, antes del amanecer. —¿Por qué tanta prisa? —Freda se aga rró a su brazo y él notó el sabor de la sal en su mejillas—. ¿Por qué no ir de día, cuando ellos duermen? —El cambio de piel no puede efectuarse en pleno día —explicó—. Y una vez dentro de los muros del castillo, lo mismo da que sea de día o de noche, ya 194 que los trolls pueden estar despiertos o dormidos a cualquier hora. Cuando esté en el interior buscaré a quiene s puedan ayudarme. Sobre todo, estoy pensando en Leea. —Leea... —Freda se mordió el labi o inferior—. No me guala esta empresa a la desesperada. ¿No hay otra forma de hacerlo? —Ninguna que se me ocurra. Tú, tesoro, tendrás que cumplir la tarea más ingrata, lo admito, esperarme aquí, sola, hasta que vuelva —miró su rostro, que permanecía en la penumbra, como si quisiera grabar en su memoria cada uno de sus rasgos—. Ahora recuerda: antes de que salga el sol, haz una tienda con las pieles que hemos traído para que los caballos se guarezcan bajo ella. Y recuerda que regresaré en forma de hombre, ya que tengo que llevar encima el paquete con la espada. Por tanto, podré viajar de día, sin correr riesgos hasta que se haga de noche, pero no podré caminar muy deprisa, por lo que no podré estar de vuelta hasta mañana por la noche. No seas imprudente, princesa. Si los trolls se acercan, o si yo no he regresado dentro de tres noches, márchate. ¡Huye al mundo de los hombres y de la luz del sol! —Puedo soportar la espera —dijo ella, con voz átona—, pero dejar este lugar, sin saber si estás vivo o... —le faltó el aire— muerto, sería algo superior a mis fuerzas. Skafloc bajó de su silla y comenzó a caminar por la nieve, que crujió bajo su peso. Se desvistió rápidamente, quedándose desnudo. Tiritando de frío, se ató la piel de nutria alrededor de la cintura, echó por encima de sus hombros las plumas del águila y se cubrió, lo más que pudo, como si se tratara de una capa, con la piel de lobo. Freda desmontó a su vez. Se besaron con frenesí. —Adiós, mi bien amada —dijo—. Adiós, hasta que vuelva con la espada. Se volvió para no contemplar su silencioso llanto y demorarse, y se ciñó la piel gris. Se puso a cuatro patas y recitó la fórmula de rigor. Entonces, su cuerpo comenzó a estirarse y moldearse y él sintió que sus sentidos se hacían más confusos, como resultado del cambio. Freda vio cómo se transformaba, tan deprisa como si se fundiera, hasta que en el lugar donde había calado apareció un enorme lobo, cuyos ojos resplandecían, verdes, en la oscuridad. Durante un instante, el frío hocico del animal olfateó su mano mientras ella acariciaba su áspera pelambre. Y, después, se fue. 195 Se alejó en la nieve, corriendo entre árboles y matorrales, más rápido y menos fatigado que un hombre. Resultaba extraño ser un lobo. El juego de huesos, músculos y tendones era diferente del de su propio cuerpo. El aire le rizaba la piel. Su vista estaba nublada, y carecía de relieve y color. Pero podía oír hasta el sonido más débil, cualquier suspiro, cualquier susurro, de manera que la tremenda soledad de la noche se había poblado de murmullos... la mayor parte de tonos demasiado agudos para el oído humano. Y olfateaba el aire como si fuese algo vivo, lleno de incontables y sutiles olores, rastros y sugerencias que se arremolinaban en el extremo de su hocico. Se trataba de sensaciones que los hombres no pueden describir con palabras. Era como encontrarse en un mundo nuevo, un mundo donde cada cosa fuera diferente. Y él mismo se encontraba cambiado, no sólo en lo corporal, sino en los nervios y en el cerebro. Su mente seguía los derroteros propios de un lobo, más estrechos, pero en cierto modo más agudos. Bajo la forma del animal no era capaz de captar todos los pensamientos que tenía como hombre, al igual que cuando recobraba la forma humana no podía recordar todo lo que había sentido y pensado como fiera. ¡Adelante, siempre adelante! La noche y las millas volaban bajo sus patas. Los bosques gemían con su vida secreta. Captó el olor de una liebre — una liebre asustada, echada cerca de él que le miraba con unos ojos enormes— y su boca de lobo babeó de placer. Pero su alma humana prevaleció sobre aquella enjuta figura gris. Un buho lanzó su inconfundible llamada; árboles, colinas y ríos envainados en hielo pasaban en vertiginosa confusión; la luna avanzaba fatigosamente por el cielo, y él seguía corriendo. Y al final, amenazador y recortándose sobre nubes teñidas de plata, pero con los pináculos de sus torres engastados de gélidas estrellas invernales, divisó Elfheugh. ¡Elfheugh, Elfeugh, bellísima y perdida, convertida en una inmensa amenaza negra que se proyectaba hacia el cielo! Se agachó sobre su vientre peludo y se acercó, arrastrándose, hasta la colina, hasta las murallas de Elfheugh. Todos sus sentidos de lobo estaban al acecho, rastreando el espacio que le rodeaba... ¿Había enemigos cerca? El olor a serpiente, propio de los trolls, llegó hasta él. Bajó la cola y sacó las garras. El castillo apestaba a troll... y lo que era peor, a miedo, a angustia y a rabia contenida. 196 Con sus nublados ojos de lobo no conseguía ver bien el extremo superior del muro bajo el que se hallaba agazapado. Oyó a los guardias que estaban arriba y se puso a temblar por los deseos que le entraron de destrozarles la garganta. «Calma», se dijo. Cuando llegaron a su altura y le sobrepasaron, decidió que ya era tiempo de cambiar de piel. Se retorció de angustia, por las contracciones y el acomodo de su cuerpo , y el cerebro se le oscureció de nuevo. Entonces, comenzó a agitar sus grandes alas de águila y se elevó hacia el cielo. Su vista se había hecho muy aguda, y veía las cosas con nitidez sobrehumana, mientras que de la alegría del vuelo, del viento y de la inconmensurabilidad del cielo se hacían eco cada una de sus plumas. Sin embargo, el austero cerebro del águila supo imponerse y negarse a proseguir aquella ebriedad imponente. Sus ojos no eran los de un buho, y en vuelo, constituía un excelente blanco para las flechas de los trolls. Superó el muro y sobrevoló el patio, plegando las alas en el aire para frenar. Se posó en la torre, a la sombra de otra, más pequeña, cubierta de hiedra, y nuevamente sufrió los dolores del cambio. Después, convertido en nutria, aguardó unos instantes. Bajo aquella apariencia, su olfato no era tan agudo como el del lobo, pero sí mucho más que el del hombre, mientras que su vista era mejor y su oído igual de bueno. Su cuerpo estaba en nerviosa alerta, y cada pelo, ya fuera del cuerpo o del hocico, enviaba a su cerebro sensaciones que a un hombre, a él, le habrían resultado indescriptibles; y su agilidad, su viveza y el lustre de su pelaje eran una continua fuente de alegrías para el cerebro vanidoso, coqueto y juguetón de la nutria. Permaneció inmóvil, pero con todos los nervios en tensión. De las almenas brotó una marejada de gritos de alarma. Y como eso quería decir que alguien debía de haber vislumbrado el águila, juzgó más aconsejable abandonar el patio. Se deslizó ágilmente a lo largo del muro, amparándose en las sombras. La nutria era demasiado grande para pasar desapercibida —mejor hubiera sido una comadreja o una rata—, pero era lo más que podía hacer. Y estaba agradecido al hecho de que Freda le hubiese llevado aquellas tres pieles 197 mágicas. Le invadió un sentimiento de ternura, que debió reprimir, pues no podía pararse a pensar en ella... aún. Había una puerta medio abierta, por la que se deslizó furtivamente. Se encontraba en la parte trasera del edificio; pero él conocía bien cada rincón y recoveco de aquel laberinto. Sus bigotes se estremecían mientras olfateaba el aire. Aunque aquel lugar apestaba a troll, también estaba cargado con el olor del sueño, lo que era una suerte. Podía sentir que alguien se movía, pero no era un gran problema, ya que podría evitar pasar cerca. Atravesó el salón de los banquetes. Los trolls yacían en desorden, roncando sus borracheras. Los tapices estaban desgarrados, los muebles llenos de rayas y golpes, y los adornos de oro, plata y gemas, un trabajo de siglos, habían sido robados. Mejor habría sido, pensó Skafloc, ser derrotado por los goblins. Al menos eran gente educada. Pero aquellos sucios puercos... Subió las escaleras, hacia donde se encontraban los que antaño fueran los aposentos de Imric. Quienquiera que fuese el nuevo Conde, seguramente dormiría en ellos... y tendría a Leea a su lado. La nutria se aplastó contra la pared y descubrió sus dientes afilados como agujas en una sonrisa silenciosa. Sus ojos amarillos relampaguearon. Al otro lado del pasillo olía a troll. El Conde había apostado un guardia y... Como un relámpago gris, el lobo cayó sobre el troll. Adormilado, el guerrero no supo qué le había atacado has ta que las fauces le desgarraron la garganta. Cayó al suelo entre el tintineo de su cota de malla, con la bestia encima del pecho, y murió. El lobo se agachó. La sangre le caía de las fauces. Tenía un sabor amargo. La pelea había hecho mucho ruido... pero no, no se oía ningún sonido de alarma ni de que nadie acudiese a in vestigar... Después de todo, el castillo era tan grande... Debía correr el riesgo de que el cadáver fuera encontrado mientras él estaba dentro. Eso significaría que le habían descubierto... pero no. Había una solución. Transformándose rápidamente en hombre, Skafloc usó la Daga del troll muerto para darle un tajo en la garganta, de manera que todos pensaran que una espada, y no los dientes de un lobo, había acabado con su vida. Así podrían pensar que el guardia había muerto en una disputa entre borrachos. ¡Vaya broma! Aquella idea suscitó en él una mueca mientras se limpiaba la 198 boca y escupía la sangre que aún tenía en ella. Convirtiéndose de nuevo en nutria, siguió pasillo adelante. Escaleras arriba, la puerta de los aposentos de Imric se veía cerrada, pero eso no era obstáculo para el, que conocía los seseos y silbidos secretos que abrían su cerradura. Los formuló someramente, empujó con el hocico la puerta abierta, y entró. En el lecho de Imric había dos personas. Si el nuevo Conde se despertaba, aquello supondría el fin de la búsqueda de Skafloc. Se arrastró sobre su liso vientre de nutria en dirección al lecho, y cada movimiento le pareció terriblemente ruidoso. Al llegar a él, se levantó sobre sus patas posteriores. El rostro de diosa de Leea descansaba sobre una almohada, rodeado de una nube de cabellos de oro y plata. Cerca de ella se encontraba la cabeza de tonos castaños de un hombre, de rostro adusto hasta en el sueño... pero que en todos los rasgos y en la configuración de sus músculos faciales era idéntica a la suya. Así supo Skafloc que Valgard, el responsable de tantos males, era el nuevo Conde. Y mucho le costó abstenerse de plantar sus dientes de lobo en aquella garganta, saltar con su pico de águila sus ojos, o lamer con su lengua de nutria sus vísceras abiertas. Pero aquellos eran impulsos propios de un animal. El darles satisfacción habría supuesto, muy posiblemente, hacer ruido y acabar perdiendo la espada que había ido a buscar. Rozó con su hocico la suave mejilla de Leea, quien movió sus largas pestañas, al tiempo que sus ojos relampagueaban con la luz de la comprensión. Muy despacio, se incorporó en la ca ma. Valgard se revolvió, dormido, y gimió. Ella se quedó inmóvil. El berserkr hablaba en sueños. Skafloc sólo pudo comprender algunas palabras: —... El niño que cambiaron..., el hacha... ¡Oh, madre, madre...! Leea deslizó un pie en el pavimento y, apoyándose en él, se levantó del lecho. La blancura de su cuerpo relucía a través del agitado velo de su larga cabellera. Como una sombra, salió de la habitación, atravesó una segunda y llegó a una tercera. Skafloc la siguió. Sin hacer ruido, al volver, Leea había ido cerrando todas las puertas. 199 —Ahora podemos hablar —dijo, en un susurro. Avanzó hacia ella, tras recobrar su figura humana, y Leea cayó en sus brazos, con una risa en sordina que casi era un sollozo. Le besó durante largo rato, a lo que él no se opuso, pues, a pesar de acordarse de Freda, era ardientemente consciente de la adorable hembra que tenía entre sus brazos. Ella se dio cuenta e intentó arrastrarle a un divan. —Skafloc —susurró—. Amor mío. Él se dominó. —No tengo tiempo —dijo, con rudeza—. He venido a por la espada rota que los Ases me regalaron cuando se me dio el nombre. —Estás cansado —las manos de Leea siguieron las ásperas líneas de su rostro—. Has pasado frío y hambre, y has estado a punto de perder la vida. Déjame que te cure y te conforte. Tengo una habitación secreta... —No tengo tiempo, no tengo tiempo —refunfuñó—. Freda me espera en el mismísimo corazón del poderío troll. Llévame hasta donde se encuentra la espada. —Freda —Leea palideció visiblemente—. Así que la joven mortal sigue contigo. —Sí, y se ha batido por Alfheim como un valiente guerrero. —Yo tampoco he estado mal —dijo Leea, dando a su antiguo humor, cargado de malicia, un toque de melancolía—. Valgard ha matado a Grum, el Conde de los Trolls, y sólo por mi amor. Es fuerte, pero le tengo encadenado — se acerco a él—. Es mejor que un troll, es casi como tú..., pero no del todo, Skafloc, y ya estoy cansada de fingir que sí lo es. —¡Vamos, deprisa! —exclamó Skafloc, tomándola de los hombros y zarandeándola suavemente—. Si me encuentran aquí podría ser el fin de Alfheim. A cada momento que pasa, disminuye mi suerte. Ella permaneció en silencio durante un instante. Finalmente, echó una mirada afuera, por el cristal de la amplia ventana, hacia un mundo en donde las nubes acababan de engullir la luna, una tierra silenciosa y helada en la tiniebla que Precede a la aurora. —Sí —dijo—. Tienes razón, por supuesto. Nada mejor, ni mas natural, que apresurarte a volver con tu amor..., con Freda. De repente se volvió hacia él, presa de una hilaridad silenciosa. —¿Quieres saber quién fue tu padre, Skafloc? ¿Debo decirte quién eres 200 en realidad? Él le tapó la boca con la mano, anulado por sus antiguos miedos. —¡No! ¡Ya conoces la advertencia de Tyr! —Sella entonces mis labios —dijo—, con un beso. —¡No puedo esperar más...! —obedeció—. ¿Podemos irnos ya? —Ese beso era frío —murmuró, desolada—, tan frío como el deber. Bueno, sigamos nuestro camino. Pero estás desnudo y desarmado. Ya que no puedes llevar encima nada de hierro, dado que estás cambiando de piel todo el tiempo, ponte, al menos, algunas ropas —y abrió un baúl—. Aquí hay túnicas, pantalones, calzado, mantos, y todo lo que puede servirte. Skafloc revolvió entre las ropas con rapidez febril. Estaban guarnecidas con ricas pieles, y debían haber sido confeccionadas a partir de las de Imric para que Valgard las usase, porque le quedaban como si fuesen suyas. Metió una espada corta en el cinto. Leea ocultó su propia desnudez con una capa de color rojo fuego, y después le condujo hacia otra escalera. Bajaron más y más. El lugar era gélido y silencioso, pero el silencio que reinaba en él parecía a punto de romperse. En una ocasión, pasaron junto a uno de los trolls de la guardia. Skafloc sintió que se le erizaba el cabello y llevó su mano al arma que llevaba a la cintura. Pero el guardia sólo inclinó la cabeza, tomándole por su doble. En su vida de proscrito, Skafloc se había dejado crecer la barba, que, aunque completa, llevaba arreglada, como Valgard. Llegaron a las mazmorras, donde sólo unas pocas antorchas muy espaciadas entre sí iluminaban la húmeda penumbra. Los pasos de Skafloc resonaban en los corredores, llenos de sombras que parecían casi sólidas. Leea le guió, sin hablar. Finalmente, se encontraron en un lugar donde la piedra mostraba una leve capa de cemento, encima de la cual se habían garabateado varias runas. Al lado había una puerta cerrada, hacia la que señaló Leea. —En esta celda, Imric mantuvo encerrada a la madre de Valgard — explicó—. Ahora se encuentra en ella, colgado de los pulgares, encima de un fuego que nunca muere. Con mucha frecuencia se convierte en la diversión preferida de Valgard, quien acude aquí cuando está borracho, para azotarle hasta hacerle perder el sentido. Los nudillos de la mano de Skafloc, que este había cerrado 201 violentamente sobre la empuñadura de su espada, se habían vuelto blancos. Sin embargo, no podía dejar de preguntarse si aquello sería realmente peor que la suerte que Imric había hecho correr a la hembra de troll y a mucha otra gente. ¿No tendría razón Freda —y también el Cristo blanco de quien le había hablado en alguna ocasión— cuando decía que las injusticias sólo generan mayores injusticias y que todo se termina con el Ragnarók; que había venido un tiempo en donde el orgullo y la venganza habrían de quedar a un lado, para dejar paso al amor y al perdón, que, a pesar de no hallarse fuera de la esfera del hombre, son las cosas más difíciles de acometer por él? Sin embargo, si bien era cierto que Imric le había adoptado y Alfheim era su patria, ¿cuál era la razón de que no debiese conocer el origen de su nacimiento entre los hombres...? Furioso, hundió la punta de su espada en la pared. Hasta ellos llegó un leve rumor, de voces que gritaban y de pies que corrían. —Una alarma —dijo Leea, en voz baja. —Han debido de encontrar al guardia que he matado —Skafloc hizo más fuerza con su espada. Poco a poco, el cemento fue cediendo. —¿Te vio entrar alguien? —preguntó Leea. —Han podido verme en forma de águila —la hoja se rompió con un chasquido. Skafloc masculló una maldición y siguió forcejeando con lo que le quedaba de espada. —Si Valgard oye lo del águila será lo bastante astuto para suponer que su guardia no ha muerto en una reyerta. Si envía gente a registrar el castillo, y nos encuentran... ¡Démonos prisa! El ruido que procedía de arriba sonaba cada vez más fuerte, aunque no tanto como el roce del metal de su improvisado utensilio contra la piedra, o el agua cayendo desde tiempo inmemorial en las mazmorras. Skafloc introdujo la hoja rota en un resquicio e hizo palanca con ella. Una, dos, tres veces, hasta que la piedra cayó al suelo. Había llegado al nicho. Sus manos se estremecieron cuando sacó la espada. La tierra húmeda se había adherido a los dos fragmentos de la gran hoja. Era de dos filos, y tan enorme y pesada que sólo el más fuerte de los hombres 202 podría empuñarla. A pesar de llevar sepultada tanto tiempo, no se había oxidado, y sus filos aún eran tan cortantes como los de una navaja. Guarda, empuñadura y pomo relucían como el oro, viniendo a ser, respectivamente, la cola, el cuerpo y la cabeza de un dragón enroscado; los resplandecientes remaches eran como un tesoro que guardase con su cuerpo. A lo largo de su oscura hoja había grabadas unas runas que Skafloc no pudo descifrar. Y tuvo la impresión de que las más poderosas debían encontrarse escondidas en la punta. —El arma de los dioses —dijo, mientras la empuñaba, sobrecogido—. La esperanza de Alfheim... —¿Esperanza? —Leea retrocedió, levantando las manos como si fuera a impedir que algo o alguien se le acercara—. ¡Lo dudo! Y ahora que está en nuestras manos, lo dudo cada vez más. —¿A qué te refieres? —¿Es que no lo sientes? —dijo Leea—. ¿No notas el poder y la avidez que se alojan en ese acero, contenidos por esas runas desconocidas? Quizá la espada provenga de los dioses, pero no es de ellos. Hay en ella una maldición, Skafloc. Y traerá desventura a todo el que la toque. Leea comenzó a temblar de un frío que nada tenía que ver con el que hacía en las mazmorras. Luego dijo: —Creo... Skafloc, creo que sería mejor que emparedases de nuevo la espada. —¿Qué otra esperanza nos queda? —envolvió los dos fragmentos en su manto y se puso el paquete bajo el brazo—. Debemos irnos. A regañadientes, Leea le condujo a una escalera. —Habrá que disimular —dijo—, ya que no podremos evitar que nos vean. Déjame a mí hablar por los dos. —No, sería peligroso para ti, a no ser que vinieras conmigo. Ella se volvió, rápidamente, con el rostro encendido. —¿Te preocupa mi suerte? —Por supuesto, lo mismo que la de Alfheim. —¿Y... Freda? —Ella me preocupa más que todo el mundo, dioses, hombres y Faerie incluidos. La amo. 203 Leea volvió a mirar hacia delante. Su voz sonó apagada cuando dijo: —Conseguiré salvarme. Siempre me queda el recurso de decirle a Valgard que me obligaste o que me engañaste. Llegaron a la salida. Había una gran confusión de guardias, yendo y viniendo, entre gritos. —¡Deteneos! —exclamó un troll nada más verlos. El rostro de Leea llameó con el resplandor de un fuego perdido entre los hielos. —¿Quieres detener al Conde? —preguntó. —Perdón... perdóname, señor —balbució el troll—. Es que... como te he visto hace sólo un momento, señor... Salieron al patio. Cada uno de los nervios de Skafloc le decía que emprendiese la huida, cada músculo estaba contraído a la espera del grito que querría decir que debía salir corriendo. ¡Corre, corre! Temblaba por el esfuerzo de tener que caminar con naturalidad. Fuera había pocos trolls: por Oriente asomaban ya las primeras claridades de la odiosa aurora. Hacía mucho frío. Leea se detuvo en la puerta oeste e hizo señas de que la abrieran. Miró a los ojos de Skafloc, con expresión distante y fría. —A partir de aquí deberás seguir solo —dijo, arrastrando las palabras—. ¿Sabes lo que tienes que hacer? —Más o menos —respondió—. Debo encontrar al gigante Bolverk y hacer que forje de nuevo la espada para mí. —Bolverk..., «el que hace el mal»... Su propio nombre ya es en sí signo de mal agüero. He comenzado a intuir el carácter de esa espada y la razón por la que ningún enano se atrevería a forjarla otra vez —Leea asintió con la cabeza—. Sé lo que piensas cuando aprietas de esa manera los dientes, Skafloc. Ni todas las huestes del infierno podrán detenerte..., sólo la muerte, o la pérdida de tu voluntad de combatir. ¿Pero qué tiene que ver tu querida Freda en todo esto? —sus últimas palabras estaban cargadas de sarcasmo. —Ella vendrá conmigo, aunque intentaré persuadirla de la conveniencia de quedarse al margen —Skafloc sonrió, orgulloso y enamorado. La débil luz de la aurora dio a su cabello un toque de oro helado—. Nada nos separara!. ——No-o-o. Pero, en lo de encontrar al gigante, ¿quién te mostrará el camino? 204 El rostro de Skafloc palideció. —No resultará agradable —dijo—, pero puedo evocar a un muerto. Los muertos saben muchas cosas, e Imric me enseñó los ensalmos que los obligan a hablar. —Es una acción desesperada, pues a los muertos no les gusta que se los despierte de su sueño atemporal, y toman venganza por ello. ¿Te mantendrás incólume frente a un espectro? —Lo intentaré. Creo que mi magia es lo bailante fuerte para protegerme de él. —Quizá no deba protegerte sólo a ti, pero... —Leea hizo una pausa cargada de astucia antes de proseguir—. Quizá su venganza no fuera tan terrible si alguien mediase por ti..., digamos..., Freda. E hizo una pausa, en espera de que la sangre le afluyera por las mejillas y los labios. También ella se había quedado un poco pálida. —¿Tanto te preocupa esa muchacha? —añadió en un susurro. —Sí. Mucho —dijo, con voz ronca—. Tienes razón, Leea. No puedo arriesgarme. Creo que preferiría la caída de Alfheim a que... que... —¡No, aguarda! Te iba a indicar un plan. Pero antes tengo que preguntarte una cosa. —¡Deprisa, Leea, deprisa! —Sólo una cosa. Si Freda te abandonase... No, no me interrumpas para decirme que jamás lo hará, simplemente es una suposición... Si ella te dejase, ¿qué harías entonces? —No lo sé. No puedo ni imaginármelo. —Quizá... ¿Ganar la guerra y regresar aquí? ¿Volver a ser un elfo? —Quizá. No lo sé. ¡Deprisa, Leea! Ella esbozó su sonrisa felina, mirándole con ojos soñadores: —Sólo quería decirte esto: que en lugar de evocar a cualquier muerto, llamaras a quienes se sentirían felices de ayudarte y por quienes deseas cobrar cumplida venganza. ¿No fueron exterminados por Valgard todos los familiares de Freda? Pues entonces, ¡evócalos a ellos, Skafloc! Durante un momento, él se quedó inmóvil. Después, dejó caer el envoltorio con la espada, levantó en vilo a Leea, tomándola entre sus brazos, y la besó con tanta fuerza que casi le corta la respiración. Tras agacharse a 205 recoger el preciado paquete, salió por la puerta y se apresuró a alcanzar el bosques. Leea siguió mirándole, con los dedos sobre sus labios, que aún le hormigueaban. Si tenía razón en lo de la espada, volvería a ocurrir algo que ya había sucedido antaño. Y, por aquel motivo, se echó a reír. Valgard se enteró de que un hombre idéntico a él había sido visto en el interior del castillo. Su amante, con aspecto aturdido y tembloroso, dijo, desesperada, que alguien la había hechizado mientras dormía, por lo que era incapaz de recordar nada. Pero aquello no le importó gran cosa, porque sobre la nieve podían verse sus huellas, y porque los sabuesos de los trolls eran capaces de rastrearlas, aunque llegasen a desaparecer. Al atardecer, el Conde guiaba a sus jinetes en la persecución. Mientras tanto, Freda seguía escondida en su retiro, mirando hacia Elfheugh a través de los bosques, iluminados por la desnuda y espectral luna. Estaba helada de frío aquella noche de espera, la segunda, tanto que parecía que el frío ya había dejado de ser una sensación para convertirse en parte integrante de ella misma. Se había acurrucado entre los caballos, que siendo élficos estaban fríos y carecían del cálido calor de los animales domésticos. Curiosamente, el pensar en los caballos de Orm le había hecho recordar lo sola que se encontraba. Se sentía como si fuese la última criatura viva en un mundo formado exclusivamente de luz de luna y nieve. No se atrevía a llorar. ¡Skafloc, Skafloc! ¿Aún sigues vivo? Se levantó un viento que hizo que unas nubes más espesas cruzaran el cielo, de forma que la luna parecía huir de los grandes dragones negros que no dejaban de devorarla para, acto seguido, vomitarla y volver a devorarla. El viento gemía y rugía a su alrededor, desordenando sus vestidos y clavándole los dientes en la carne. ¡Uhh, uhh!, cantaba, desplegando de improviso una cortina de nieve sobre ella, blanca bajo la luna, ¡uhh, uhh, que te cojol ¡Uhh, uhh!, sonaron, como un eco, los cuernos de los trolls. Freda se sobresaltó. El miedo se clavó en ella como un puñal. Ellos estaban cazando... y, ¿quién podía ser la presa sino...? Al instante oyó los ladridos de sus sabuesos, más cerca, cada vez más 206 cerca, aquellos tremendos perros negros qu e en vez de ojos tenían ardientes brasas. ¡Oh, Skafloc! Freda tropezó y cayó hacia delante, sin oír sus propios sollozos... ¡Skafloc! Una tiniebla que antes no estaba se acercó a ella. Freda se aplastó contra el tronco de un árbol, mientras lo golpeaba con frenesí: —Quítate de en medio, cosa, hazte a un lado, Skafloc me necesita. ¡Oh! Cuando volvió la claridad, vio al extraño. Era alto, y llevaba echado por encima un manto, agitado de tal forma por el viento que parecía tener alas. Bastante entrado en años, su larga cabellera y su barba ondeaban grises, como la pelambre de un lobo, bajo aque lla apresurada luz. Pero la lanza que empuñaba jamás habría podido ser esgrimida por un mortal. Aunque un sombrero de ala ancha mantuviese su rostro entre sombras, Freda llegó a distinguir el resplandor de un único ojo. Entonces retrocedió, con la respirac ión entrecortada, intentando invocar al Cielo. La voz la contuvo, profunda y pausada, de la misma esencia que el viento y, sin embargo, fluyendo con la misma majestuosidad que un glaciar: —Vengo a ayudarte y no a hacerte daño. ¿Quieres tener de nuevo a tu hombre junto a ti? Freda cayó de rodillas, sin habla. Durante un momento, bajo la luz confusa y oscilante de la luna, fue capaz de ver más allá de la nieve que caía, más allá de millas y millas de nieve helada, hasta llegar a la colina por donde huía Skafloc. Iba desarmado, cansado y tambaleándose, con los sabuesos pisándole los talones. Sus ladridos llenaban el cielo. La visión se desvaneció. Miró a la forma nocturna que se inclinaba sobre ella. —Tú eres Odín —susurró—, y no debo hacer pactos contigo. —Todavía puedo salvar a tu amante ... y sólo yo, porque es pagano —el único ojo del dios se clavó en ella con la fuerza de una lanza—. ¿Estás dispuesta a pagar el precio que pido? —¿Qué quieres? —preguntó ella, jadeantes. — ¡Decídete, los sabuesos están a punto de descuartizarlo! —¡Lo pagaré..., te lo pagaré...! Él asintió. —Entonces, jura por tu propia alma y por todo lo que te sea sagrado que, cuando vuelva para reclamarlo, me darás lo que tienes detrás de tu ceñidor. 207 —¡Lo juro! —exclamó. Las lágrimas la cegaban, eran lágrimas de libertad. Odín no había resultado ser tan despiadado como decían, si se limitaba a pedirle a cambio, como algo simbólico, la droga que Skafloc le había entregado—. Lo juro, señor, y que tierra y cielo tengan piedad de mí si no cumplo mi juramento. —Con eso me doy por satisfecho —dijo—. Ahora los trolls siguen una pista falsa y Skafloc se dirige hacia aquí. ¡Mujer, recuerda tu palabra! La oscuridad volvió, mientras una nube escondía la luna. Cuando pasó, el Vagabundo ya se había ido. Freda casi ni se enteró, pues agarraba con fuerza a Skafloc, quien, sin creer aún que había sido arrancado de las fauces de los sabuesos de los trolls y llevado a salvo al lado de su amada, tenía la suficiente lucidez para responder a sus besos. 208 CAPITULO 20 ólo descansaron dos días en la gruta antes de que Skafloc se empeñase en emprender el viaje. Freda no lloró, pero sentía que la angustia de las lágrimas no derramadas se agolpaba en su garganta. —Tú piensas que para nosotros va a surgir un nuevo día —dijo en un determinado momento—. Pero yo te digo que se trata de la noche. El la miró sin comprender lo que decía. —¿A qué te refieres? —La espada esta llena de maldad. Vamos a hacer algo equivocado: de ello no resultará nada bueno. Skafloc le puso las manos en los hombros. —Comprendo que no quieras que tus parientes recorran ese camino tan terrible —dijo—. Es algo que tampoco me agrada; pero, ¿quiénes, de entre tanto muerto, podrían ayudarnos, sin hacernos ningún mal? Quédate aquí, Freda, si piensas que no podrás soportarlo. —No... no, estaré a tu lado hasta en el Infierno. No temo a mis parientes. Vivos o muertos, entre nosotros hay amor; y ahora también a ti te toca algo de 209 él —Freda bajó la mirada y se mordió los labios hasta que le dejaron de temblar—. Si esta idea se nos hubiera ocurrido a uno de los dos, no me habría dado tan malos presentimientos, porque creo que cuando Leea te la propuso no lo hizo de buena fe. —¿Por qué iba a querer hacernos daño? Freda movió negativamente la cabeza y no contestó. Skafloc dijo, con voz pausada: —Debo confesar que no me agrada del todo tu encuentro con Odín. No tiene por costumbre cobrar precios tan bajos. Pero lo que realmente persigue es algo que se me escapa. —Y la espada... Skafloc, si los trozos de esa espada rota llegan a unirse de nuevo, se desatará sobre el mundo un poder terrible, que traerá interminables sufrimientos. —Para los trolls —Skafloc se puso en pie hasta que sus cabellos rubios tocaron el techo lleno de humo de la caverna. Sus ojos relampaguearon en la penumbra, con tonos azulados—. No hay otro camino que el que vamos a tomar, por arduo que nos parezca. Y no olvides que ningún hombre sobrevive a su destino; así que mejor será enfrentarse a él cara a cara. —Y hombro con hombro, como haremos nosotros —añadió Freda, apoyando su cabeza rematada en broncínea cabellera sobre su pecho, mientras las lágrimas le fluían copiosam ente—. Sólo te pido una cosa, cariño mío. —¿Qué quieres pedirme? —Que no salgamos esta noche. Esperemos un día más, uno sólo, y entonces nos iremos —y le clavó los dedos en los músculos de los brazos—. No más tarde, Skafloc. Él asintió, a regañadientes. —¿Por qué? Ella no quiso decírselo, y tras el am or que siguió a todo aquello él no se acordó de preguntárselo de nuevo. Pero Freda no lo olvidó. Y cuando le tenía más estrechamente abrazado contra su pecho y sentía latir su corazón contra el suyo, lo recordaba, y eso daba a sus besos un ansia terrible. Y de una manera que no pudo explicar, supo que aquella había sido su última noche. 210 El sol salió, brilló débilmente a mediodía y se hundió detrás de las pesadas nubes de tormenta que llegaban del mar. Un viento, tan cortante como los dientes de un lobo, aullaba sobre las olas que se lanzaban con ruidosa muerte hacia los acantilados. Poco después del anochecer pudo escucharse, durante un instante, el lejano sonido de cascos de caballos galopando por el cielo, más veloces que el viento, y el sonido de relinchos y ladridos. Incluso Skafloc sintió escalofríos. Era la Caza Salvaje. Él y Freda montaron en sus cabalgaduras élficas, llevando sus enseres en las otras dos, ya que no pensaban regresar a la cueva. Skafloc llevaba atada a la espalda la espada rota, envuelta en una piel de lobo. Su hoja de aleación élfica descansaba en su vaina, a su costado; en la mano izquierda llevaba una lanza y, lo mismo que la amazona que le acompañaba, completaba su atuendo con yelmo y loriga, cubierta esta última con pieles. Mientras se alejaban al trote, Freda se volvió para mirar la entrada de la cueva. A pesar de parecer fría y lóbrega, les había dado la felicidad. Apartó la mirada y miró decidida hacia delante. —¡Al galope! —exclamó Skafloc, y los caballos élficos obedecieron su orden. El viento se arremolinaba a su alrededor, mordiéndolos en la carne. Saltaban las aguas, la nevisca y la espuma formando cortinas que los fustigaban, blancas bajo la huidiza y c onvulsa luna. Él mar rugía dirigiéndose hacia la tierra, desde un horizonte embravecido, rompiéndose en los acantilados y en la playa. Cuando las olas retrocedían, ribeteadas de espuma, el cascabeleo de las piedras sugería los movimientos agitados y gemebundos de algún monstruo aprisionado en el hiel o. La noche era tempestad, nevisca y olas violentas, un estruendo que llegaba hasta las laceradas y móviles nubes. La luna fue subiendo por el cielo y, si bien en un principio fue al paso, acabó galopando sobre los acantilados. ¡Deprisa, deprisa, no aflojéis el paso, oh, vosotros, los mejores de entre todos los caballos, galopad raudos hacia el Sur, siguiendo la costa, partid el hielo con vuestros cascos, haced saltar chispas de las rocas, galopad, galopad! 211 ¡Cabalgad con el aire zumbando en vuestros oídos y su hielo entrando en vuestros pulmones, cabalgad a través de una blanca cortina de sibilante nevisca, a través de las tinieblas y de las tierras de los hombres! ¡Deprisa, cabalgad deprisa, hacia el Sur, para saludar al muerto que yace en su tumba! Un cuerno de los trolls dio la alarma cuando pasaron por el puerto de Elfheugh. Skafloc y Freda, a pesar de su Vista Encantada, no fueron capaces de divisar el castillo, pero en cambio comenzaron a oír ruido de cascos de cabalgaduras detrás de ellos. Aquel estruendo se debilitó al poco tiempo, ya que los trolls no podían ir tan deprisa, ni querían seguir a su presa al lugar adonde se dirigía aquella noche. ¡Deprisa, deprisa, a través de los bosques, donde el viento silba entre las ramas cargadas de hielo, esquivando los árboles que clavan como garras sus ramas desnudas..., a través de estanques helados, subiendo a las oscuras crestas de las colinas, bajando hasta las llanuras y cruzando campos yermos...! ¡Galopad, galopad! Freda comenzó a reconocer el camino. El viento aún estaba cargado de nevisca, pero las nubes eran más delgadas, y la gibosa luna esparcía su luz por campos de labranza y prados rodeados de nieve. Ya había estado allí antes. Recordaba el río y el prado oscuro, donde había ido a cazar con Ketil, cuando ella y Asmund habían estado pescando un caluroso día de verano, y también aquel prado donde Asgerd había entrelazado coronas de margaritas para ella... ¿hacía cuánto tiempo? Las lágrimas se le congelaron en las mejillas. Sintió que Skafloc se acercaba para tocarle en el brazo y la sonrisa regresó a su ensombrecido rostro. Su corazón casi no podía soportar el volver a aquellos lugares, pero él se encontraba a su lado, y cuando los dos estaban juntos no había nada que no pudiesen afrontar. Lentamente, montados en sus jadeantes y vacilantes corceles, que bajo su orden habían aflojado su avance, sin decir una palabra, pero cabalgando cogidos de la mano, llegaron adonde había estado la mansión de Orm. Vieron grandes montones de nieve, acumulada por el viento, blancos a la luz de la luna, de los que sobresalían vigas carbonizadas. A lo lejos, en uno de los extremos de la bahía, se levantaba el túmulo. Un fuego ardía sobre él, crepitando y llameando con tonos 212 blancoazulados... sin calor, sin alegría, pero llegando bastante alto en la tiniebla. Freda se santiguó, tiritando. Así habían ardido antaño, en el ocaso, los fuegos sepulcrales de los antiguos héroes paganos. Seguramente a aquel pagano errante le habría gustado aquello: no podía ser tierra consagrada si en ella reposaba Orm. Pero, por muy lejos que se encontrase en las innombrables tierras de la muerte, seguía siendo su padre. No podía sentir miedo del hombre que la había llevado a caballito en sus rodillas y que le había cantado canciones que casi tiran abajo la casa. Pero no podía dejar de temblar. Skafloc desmontó. Tenía las ropas pegadas al cuerpo por el sudor. Jamás había utilizado anteriormente la magia que debería poner en práctica aquella noches. Avanzó... y se detuvo de repente, con el aliento escapándosele entre los dientes mientras desenvainaba su espada. Negra bajo la luz de la luna y del fuego, una forma estaba sentada, inmóvil, como si fuese una lápida hincada sobre el túmulo, bajo las ululantes llamas. Si tenía que luchar contra un... Freda gimió, y dijo, con la voz de una niña que se hubiera perdido: —¡Madre! Skafloc la tomó de la mano, y juntos escalaron el túmulo. La mujer que estaba sentada, sin preocuparse del fuego, podría haber sido Freda, se dijo Skafloc, desconcertado. Tenía los mismos rasgos desenvueltos, los mismos ojos grises, muy separados, el mismo cabello castaño de reflejos rojizos. Pero no, no..., era mayor que ella. Carcomida por la pena, sus mejillas estaban hundidas, sus ojos miraban fijamente al mar, pero sin verlo, sus cabellos se agitaban, desordenados, en el vendaval. Encima de sus andrajos llevaba un pesado manto de piel, que cubría su triste figura. Cuando los recién llegados se acercaron al fuego, ella volvió lentamente la cabeza y estudió detenidamente a Skafloc. —Has regresado. Bienvenido, Val gard —dijo con voz opaca—. Aquí estoy. Ya no puedes hacerme daño. Sólo puedes darme muerte, que es lo que más deseo. —Madre —Freda cayó de rodillas delant e de la mujer. Aelfrida la miró fijamente. —No comprendo —dijo, al cabo de un tiempo—. Te pareces a mi 213 pequeña Freda... pero ella está muerta. Valgard te llevó con él, y no puedes haber seguido con vida mucho tiempo —asintió con la cabeza, sonrió, y echó los brazos hacia delante—. Ha sido b ueno que abandonaras la tranquilidad de tu tumba y vinieras a verme. He estado tan sola... Ven, mi querida niña muerta, ven a mis brazos y te cantaré hasta que te duermas, como hacía cuando eras pequeñita. —Estoy viva, madre, estoy viva... como tú... —Freda dejó de llorar y comenzó a toser, estando a punto de ahogarse—. Mira, toca, estoy caliente, estoy viva. Y este no es Valgard, es Skafloc y me ha salvado de él. Es Skafloc, mi dueño, un nuevo hijo para ti... Con extrema dificultad, Aelfrida se puso en pie y se apoyó pesadamente en el brazo de su hija. —He esperado —dijo—, he esperado aquí todo el tiempo, por eso pensaron que estaba loca. Me traen comida y todo lo que necesito, pero no se quedan, porque tienen miedo de la loca que no quiere abandonar a sus muertos —rió tranquilamente, muy tranquilamente—. ¿Acaso es esto locura? Los que abandonan a sus seres queridos... ¡esos sí que están locos! Y siguió escrutando el rostro de Skafloc. —Eres igualito que Valgard —dijo, en el mismo tono—. Tienes la misma estatura que Orm, y tu prestancia debe repartirse entre la suya y la mía, a partes iguales. Pero tus ojos son más gentiles que los de Valgard —de nuevo se rió con aquella risa tan tierna—. ¿Y por qué tenían que decir que estaba loca? ¡Esperaba, eso era todo, esperaba, y ahora, saliendo de la noche y de la muerte, dos de mis hijos han regresado a mi lado. —Podemos hacer que veas a los demás antes de que se haga de día — dijo Skafloc, mientras ayudaba a Freda a bajar a su madre del túmulo. —Madre está viva —murmuró la joven—. Pensaba que también había muerto, pero estaba viva, aquí, sentada en el frío del invierno, desamparada. ¿Qué he hecho? Se echó a llorar y Aelfrida la consoló. Skafloc no se atrevió a esperar más. Hincó varias varas, grabadas con caracteres rúnicos, una por cada punto cardinal, se colocó en el pulgar de la mano izquierda el anillo de bronce que tenía engastada una piedra de pedernal, y se situó en la parte de la tumba que daba al oeste, levantando los 214 brazos hacia el cielo. Del otro lado llegaba el rugido del mar. La luna seguía corriendo entre las deshilachadas nubes. La nevisca seguía cayendo, arrastrada por el viento. Skafloc comenzó a recitar su conjuro. Sentía calambres por todo el cuerpo y la garganta totalmente seca. Zarandeado por el poder que brotaba de todo su ser, trazó los signos con sus manos levantadas. El fuego rugió y se elevó. El viento maulló como un gato salvaje y las nubes devoraron la luna. Skafloc declamó estas palabras: ¡Despertad, oh, conductores de hombres, guerreros caídos! Yo, Skafloc, os evoco, y os despierto con mi canto. Os conjuro a regresar por el infernal camino. ¡Oh, muertos, ligados por las runas, levantaos y contestadme! El túmulo se agitó. La helada llama que lo coronaba fue haciéndose cada vez más alta. Y Skafloc prosiguió con su conjuro: ¡Abrase, pues, este túmulo! ¡Salgan fuera de él los muertos! Que los héroes que cayeron a esta tierra, ahora, se acerquen. Acudid, mas no olvidéis las espadas enmohecidas, los escudos destrozados, y las lanzas empapadas. Tras aquellas últimas palabras, el túmulo se abrió, con un resplandor de fuego, y Orm y sus hijos aparecieron por su boca. El jefe gritó, airado: ¿Quién se atreve a sacudir el túmulo, y a exigirme 215 que regrese de la muerte con runas y encantamientos? ¡Huye, más bien, de la cólera del muerto, oh, tú, extranjero! Y permite que los muertos descansen en sus tinieblas. Orm se apoyaba en su lanza, que aún llevaba clavada. Se le veía exangüe y cubierto de escarcha. Sus oj os resplandecian, ciegos, entre las llamas que crepitaban y giraban a su alrededor. A su derecha se hallaba Ketil, rígido y pálido, con una raya negra en la cabeza resaltando entre sus cabellos. A su izquierda estaba Asmund, envuelto por las sombras, cubriendo con sus brazos la herida de lanza de su pecho. Detrás de ellos, Skafloc podía ver, aunque vagamente, el navío funerario y la tripulación que se movía dentro de él, despierta de su sueño. Expulsó de su mente el terror que le producía lo que acababa de surgir de la tumba y dijo: Ningún miedo podrá hacerme olvidar mis intenciones. Estas runas os obligan. ¡Levantaos y contestadme! ¡Que las ratas se decidan a anidar en vuestros cuerpos si no me decís al punto lo que voy a preguntaros! La voz de Orm sonó lejana y extraña, como si el viento hablase por ella: Hondo y sin ensueños, brujo, es el sueño de la muerte. Los muertos, al despertar, se sienten enfurecidos. 216 Los fantasmas siempre cumplen las más terribles venganzas cuando sus tristes despojos alguien saca de sus tumbas. Freda dio un paso hacia delante,. —¡Padre! —exclamó—. ¡Padre! ¿No reconoces a tu hija? Los ojos vacíos de Orm llamearon al mirarla, y la cólera que ardía en ellos se extinguió. Asintió con la cabeza y permaneció inmóvil en el fuego que silbaba y giraba. Entonces le tocó hablar a Ketil: De verte estamos contentos, mujer de cabellos de oro. ¡Doncella como el sol, fúlgida, hermana, sé bienvenida! Gélidos y cenicientos están nuestros pechos hueros, tan fríos como la tumban. ¡Acércate a calentarnos! Freda se acercó lentamente a Orm. Padre e hija se miraron en la luz fría e inquieta de aquel fuego. Ella cogió sus manos; estaban frías, como la tierra de la que habían salido. Y Orm dijo: ¡Si en la muerte no había sueños, mil terrores sí que había! Y tus lágrimas, querida, mi corazón desgarraban. Mil víboras derramaban sobre mí sus mil venenos, cuando en la muerte te oía llorar con gran desconsuelo. Y, por tanto, yo te ordeno, 217 a ti, bienamada hija, vivir siempre entre alegría, y entre risas y canciones. Y la muerte será, entonces, el más caro de los sueños, arropado en calma y paz, y circundado de rosas. —No tengo ánimo para hacer lo que me dices, Orm —dijo Freda; y tocó su rostro—. Tienes el cabello helado. Hay tierra en tu boca. Estás frío, Orm. —Estoy muerto. El abismo de la tumba nos separa. —Que no nos separe, entonces. ¡Llévame contigo, Orm! Y Orm rozó con sus labios los de Freda. Y Skafloc dijo a Ketil: Habla sin miedo, oh, tú, muerto, y dime cómo encontrar la morada de Bolverk, el gigante..., el herrero. Dime también, oh, guerrero, sin atreverte a mentirme, cómo poder inducirle a que temple bien mi acero. Y Ketil le respondió: Tu búsqueda es vana, oh, brujo, pues buscas la desventura. La peor de las desdichas muy pronto te alcanzara. A Bolverk olvida pronto pues mil penas te dara. Y abandónanos ahora mientras la vida te dura. 218 Skafloc negó con la cabeza. Entonces, Ketil se apoyó en su espada y declamó: Hacia el Norte, en Jötunheim, cerca, muy cerca de Utgard, mora Bolverk, el gigante, bien dentro de la montaña. Ve a los Sidh, que te darán un barco para encontrarle. Dile que Loki desea ver ya el juego de la espada. Asmund, que seguía ocultando su rostro entre las sombras, habló en ese momento, con voz cargada de pena: Es amargo y muy cruel, hermano mío, hermana... el destino que las Nornas al nacer os asignaron. Los muertos que despertasteis mucho habrían agradecido que omitieseis el conjuro que desata la verdad. El horror atenazó a Freda. No podía hablar. Se acercó, casi arrastrándose, a Skafloc, y juntos se quedaron mirando fijamente a los cansados y sabios ojos de Asmund, quien, pausadamente, mientras las llamas danzaban, blancas, alrededor de su negra figura, dijo: La ley de los hombres vivos es válida entre los muertos. En verdad es cosa ardua decidirse a respetarla. Por ello pronunciaré 219 las palabras más amargas. Has de saber, Skafloc, que Freda es tu propia hermana. Hermano, sé bienvenido, oh, tú, guerrero valiente. Y aunque del todo inconsciente siempre fuiste tú, hermana, con vuestro amor, más que puro, el parentesco quebrasteis. ¡Adiós, mis queridos niños, a la pena condenados! El túmulo se cerró con un ruido que parecía como si fuera a desmoronarse. Las llamas se hicieron más pequeñas y la luna volvió a arrojar su débil resplandor. Freda se apartó de Skafloc, lo mism o que si se hubiera convertido en un troll. Él fue en su busca tropezando como un ciego. Un sollozo sin lágrimas se ahogó en su garganta. Ella se volvió y echó a correr. —Madre —sollozaba—. Madre. Pero el túmulo aparecía solitario bajo la luna. Ningún hombre volvió a ver nunca más a Aelfrida. El día comenzaba a despuntar sobre el mar. El cielo estaba encapotado y opresivo, con nubes que parecían colgar, heladas, sobre un paisaje blanco y desolado. Unos cuantos copos de nieve eran impulsados por el viento. Freda estaba sentada encima del túmulo y miraba a lo lejos. No lloraba. Se preguntaba si no se le habrían secado los ojos. Skafloc acababa de dejar los caballos a cubierto. Se acomodó a su lado. Su voz y la expresión de su rostro eran tan plomizos como el amanecer. —Te amo, Freda. Ella no le contestó. El dejó pasar cierto tiempo y añadió: —No puedo por menos de amarte. ¿Qué importa que el azar hiciera que 220 tuviésemos la misma sangre? Nada. Sé de pueblos, de gente humana, que acostumbraban a hacer este tipo de matrimonios. Freda, ven conmigo, y olvida esa maldita ley... —Es la ley de Dios —dijo ella, en el mismo tono de derrota que él había usado—. Y no puedo quebrantarla conscientemente. Mis pecados ya son demasiado graves. —Y yo digo que si un dios se interpone entre dos que se han amado como nosotros, no estoy dispuesto a escucharlo. Si se atreve a acercárseme, le enviaré de vuelta a su casa dando aullidos. —¡Claro... como que eres un pagano! —dijo Freda, colérica—. ¡Y como ellos te comportas, ahijado de los elfos sin alma, que te atreves a traer a los mismísimos muertos de sus tumbas, sin importarte las angustias que ello pueda ocasionarles! —un leve color apareció en sus mejillas—. ¡Pues vuelve con tus elfos! ¡Vuelve con Leea! Skafloc se levantó al mismo tiempo que ella. Intentó cogerla de las manos, pero Freda se liberó de un tirón. Él dejó caer los brazos. —¿No tengo esperanzas? —preguntó. —Ninguna —e hizo intenciones de irse—. Buscaré una casa por las cercanías. Quizá consiga expiar lo que he hecho —de repente, se encaró con él—. ¡Ven conmigo, Skafloc! ¡Ven, olvida tu paganismo, bautízate y haz las paces con Dios! El negó con la cabeza. —No con ese dios. —Pero... yo te quiero, Skafloc, te quiero demasiado para desear que tu alma vaya a parar a otro lugar que no sea el Cielo. —Si me amas —dijo él, con voz muy baja—, quédate conmigo. No te tocaré... sino como hermano. Pero quédate conmigo. —No —dijo Freda—. Adiós. Y se fue.. Él la siguió. La nieve crujió bajo los pies de ambos. Cuando la adelantó y se volvió para mirarla, ella vio que co ntraía los labios, como si un cuchillo le estuviese desgarrando las entrañas. —¿Ni siquiera me darás un beso de despedida, Freda? —preguntó. —No —casi no se la oía, y ella apartó su mirada de él—. No me atrevo. Y salió corriendo. 221 Skafloc la miró mientras se iba. La luz arrancaba resplandores cobrizos de su cabello, el único color en aquel mundo gris y blanco. Rodeó un grupo de árboles y desapareció. Skafloc se encaminó lentamente en la dirección opuesta, alejándose de la granja vacía. 222 CAPITULO 21 n los días que siguieron, el largo y cruel invierno comenzó a decaer. Y una tarde, hacia el oc aso, Gulban Glas Mac Grici, que estaba en la cima de una colina, captó en el viento del Sur el primer hálito de la primavera, inusual, por lo débil. Se apoyo en su lanza y, aún en el crepúsculo, miró a través de la nieve que bajaba hasta el mar. La tiniebla y las estrellas salían por Oriente, que era la dirección por donde llegaba una barca de pescadores. Era una simple embarcación hecha por hombres, comprada o robada a algún inglés, y el que estaba a su timón era un ser humano. Pero de él emanaba algo extraño, que venía a unirse al hecho de que sus ropajes, mojados de agua de mar, fuesen de factura élfica. Encalló en la playa y arrastró su embarcación hasta la arena seca. Entonces Gulban le reconoció. Los Sídh irlandeses se mantenían apartados del resto de la gente de Faerie, pero ello no les había impedido relacionarse en el pasado con los de Almeim. Gulban recordaba a Skafloc como un joven alegre que vivía con Imric; por eso le había costado trabajo reconocerle en el hombre que acababa de llegar, más delgado y torvo de lo que cabía achacar al 223 infortunio de su pueblo. Skafloc se encaminó a la colina donde estaba el altísimo jefe guerrero, cuya figura negra se recortaba sobre un cielo entre rojo y azul verdoso. Al acercarse, reconoció a Gulban Glas, uno de los Cinco Guardianes del Ulster, y le saludó. El jefe le devolvió el saludo con la misma gravedad que la que él empleara, inclinando la cabeza cubierta con un yelmo dorado, hasta que los largos y oscuros cabellos ocultaron sus pómulos. Pero, curiosamente, no fue capaz de reprimir un respingo cuando notó la maldad que yacía dormida en el envoltorio de piel de lobo que Skafloc llevaba a la espalda. —Me dijeron que te esperase —explicó. Skafloc le miró, levemente sorprendido. —¿Tan lejos llegan los oídos de los Sídh? —preguntó. —No —dijo Gulban—, pero saben cuándo va a ocurrir algo portentoso. ..¿ya qué otra cosa podría referirse, en estos tiempos, que no fuese a la guerra que enfrenta elfos y trolls? Así pues, supusimos que vendría a vernos un elfo, trayendo extrañas nuevas, y supongo que ese debes de ser tú. —¡El elfo... sí! —afirmó Skafloc, casi con brusquedad. Su rostro estaba surcado de profundas arrugas y tenía los ojos inyectados en sangre; lo descuidado de su indumentaria era impensable en alguien de Alfheim, por muy desesperados que corrieran los tiempos. —Acompáñame —le instó Gulban—. Lugg Brazo Largo debe pensar que el asunto es importante, pues ha convocado a Consejo a todos los Tuatha Dé Danann, así como a los señores de otra s tribus de los Sídh, en la Cueva de Cruachan. Pero estás cansado y hambriento. Antes iremos a mi casa. —No —dijo Skafloc, con una brusquedad igualmente ajena a los elfos—. Esto no puede esperar. Sólo quiero el descanso y los alimentos imprescindibles para reponerme. Llévame al Consejo. El jefe guerrero se encogió de hombros y prosiguió su camino, con su manto azul como la noche ondeando en el viento. Dio un silbido, y dos de los excelentes caballos de ligeros cascos de los Sídh se acercaron galopando. Al olfatear a Skafloc, relincharon y se espantaron. —No les gusta lo que llevas —dijo Gulban. —A mí tampoco —comento, lacónico, Skafloc. Se aferró a una de 224 aquellas sedosas crines y se montó en la silla—. ¡Y ahora, deprisa! Los caballos emprendieron el galope, tan rápidos como los de los elfos, volando sobre colinas y valles, campos y florestas, lagos y ríos helados. En la penumbra, Skafloc vislumbró a mucha gente de los Sídh, dotada con la facultad de ver las cosas antes de que ocurran: un jinete de resplandeciente loriga, armado con una lanza de reluciente terror; un lechepraun pendenciero, a la puerta de su casa subterránea; el rostro, extrañamente apuntado, de un hombre muy delgado, envuelto en un manto, que tenía plumas grises en la cabeza en vez de cabello; una sombra furtiva; el débil sonar de gaitas en bosquecillos secretos. El aire invernal estaba tenuemente cargado de neblina, y brillaba sobre la capa de nieve. La noc he iba cayendo en silencio. Las estrellas comenzaron a pestañear, tan brillantes co mo los ojos de Freda... ¡No! Skafloc expulsó de su mente aquellos pensamientos. Al poco tiempo, los jinetes llegaban a la Cueva de Cruachan. Cuatro centinelas que montaban guardia fuera se tocaron la frente con la espada, a guisa de saludo, y se hicieron cargo de las retozonas cabalgaduras. Gulban condujo a Skafloc al interior. Una luz verde mar llenaba la inmensa y áspera bóveda de la cueva. Del techo colgaban estalactitas relucientes, y los escudos de las paredes reflejaban la clara luz de las velas. Aunque no había encendido ningún fuego, allí dentro hacía calor, y podía apreciarse el tenue olor de humo de turba tan característico de Irlanda. El suelo estaba cubierto de juncos. El suave sonido que hacían sus pies al pisar encima fue el único sonido que Skafloc alcanzó a oír mientras se dirigía a la mesa del Consejo. A los extremos se encontraban los jefes del pueblo de Lupra, pequeños, fuertes y vestidos muy toscamente: Udan Mac Audain, rey de los leprechauns, y Beg Mac Beg, su tanist; Glomhar O'Glomrach, de potente cintura y brazo poderoso; los jefes Conan Mac Rihid, Gaerku Mac Gaird, Mether Mac Mintan, y Esirt Mac Beg, vestidos con pieles y oro nativo. Con gente como aquella, un mortal podía sentirse como en su casa. En el centro de la mesa estaban los Tuatha Dé Danann, los hijos de Danu, la Madre Tierra, llegados de la dorada Tir n'an Og para celebrar el Consejo Sagrado en la Cueva de Cruachan. Silenciosos y temibles, estaban sentados, bellísimos y espléndidos, y hasta el mismísimo aire parecía rebosar 225 del poder que había en ellos, pues habían sido los dioses de Irlanda antes de que Patricio, el santo, llevase hasta allí el Crísto blanco: aunque hubiesen tenido que huir ante la Cruz, aún conservaban grandes poderes y vivían con el esplendor de los días de antaño. Lugh Brazo Largo se sentaba en el trono, a su derecha tenía al guerrero Angus Mac Oc y a su izquierda al Rey del Mar Manannán Mac Lir. También había otros de los Tuatha Dé Danann: Echu Ollathir, también conocido como el Dagda Mor; Dove Berg, el Irascible; Cas Corrach; Mac Cuill, hijo del Avellano; Mac Cecht, hijo del Arado; Mac Gréine, hijo del Sol, y muchos otros más, de gran fama; y con ellos estaban sus esposa s e hijos, y los arpistas y guerreros de su séquito. Daba gloria ver tan magna asamblea, una gloria terrible. Pero aquello no impresionaba a Skafloc, a quien ya no importaban ni la majestad, ni la maravilla, ni el peligro . Avanzó a grandes pasos hacia ellos, la frente alta y los ojos al encuentro del oscuro fulgor de los de Lugh, mientras pronunciaba el saludo de rigor. La profunda voz de Brazo Largo brotó de su austero rostro: —Sé bienvenido, Skafloc de Alfheim, y bebe con los jefes de los Sídh. Le hizo seña de sentarse en un asiento vacío a su izquierda, justo después del de Manannán y su esposa Fand. Los coperos sirvieron doradas copas del vino de Tir n'an Og, y, mientras bebían, las arpas de los bardos tocaron una melodía fascinante. Fuerte y dulce era aquel vino; entró en Skafloc como una llama que quemara todo su cansancio, pero sólo sirvió para traerle de nuevo la tristeza. Angus Mac Oc, el guerrero de rubios cabellos, dijo: —¿Cómo van las cosas en Alfheim? —Ya sabes que mal —contestó con brusquedad Skafloc—. Los elfos luchan en solitario y caen... como caer án uno tras otro todos los pueblos divididos de Faerie, que acabarán siendo devorados por la gente de Trollheim. Las palabras de Lugh sonaron firmes e implacables: —Los Hijos de Danu no temen a los trolls. ¿Cómo vamos a tener miedo nosotros, que derrotamos a los Fomorianos, y que después de haber sido vencidos por los Milesios nos convertimos en sus dioses? Con mucho gusto habríamos ido a luchar al lado de Alfheim... —¡Ya lo veo! —Dove Berg golpeó en la mesa con el puño. Su cabellera 226 parecía roja como una antorcha en la verdosa claridad de la cueva, y su grito despertó mil resonancias entre sus paredes—. ¡No ha habido contienda tan importante, ni tanta gloria que ganar en más de cien años! ¿Por que no podemos ir? —Bien sabes la respuesta —dijo Echu Ollathir, el Padre de las Estrellas. Se envolvía en un manto que parecía una oscuridad azul, constelado de diminutos puntos luminosos, que también brillaban en su cabello y en las profundidades de su mirada. Cuando movía las manos, parecía que una minúscula lluvia de estrellas bailase en el aire—. Se trata de algo más que de una simple guerra entre dos facciones de Faerie. Es una fase de la larga disputa que opone los dioses del Norte a sus enemigos del Hielo Eterno; y resulta difícil saber con cuál de ambas facciones haya de mostrarse más cautela. No arriesgaremos nuestra libertad para convertirnos en simples piezas del ajedrez del mundo. Skafloc se agarró a los brazos de su asiento, hasta que los nudillos se le quedaron sin sangre. Su voz tembló un poco. —No he venido a pedir vuestra ayuda en esta guerra, aunque sería de agradecer. Sólo quiero que me prestéis un navío. —¿Puedo preguntarte para qué? —dijo Mac Gréine. Su rostro era brillante y las llamas ondeaban sobre su resplandeciente loriga y el broche dorado, con forma de disco solar del que emergían rayos, con que sujetaba su manto. Skafloc contó rápidamente el asunto del regalo de los Ases, y acabó diciendo: —He conseguido llevarme la espada de Elfheugh, y gracias a la magia he descubierto que podría obtener de los Sídh un bajel con el que llegar hasta Jötunheim. Así que he venido a pedirlo —inclinó la cabeza—. Es cierto que vengo como un mendigo. Pero, si vencemos, comprobaréis que los elfos no son ingratos. —Me gustaría ver esa espada —dijo Manannán Mac Lir. Era alto, delgado y fuerte, de piel blanca y cabello de oro y plata, con un levísimo toque de verde. Sus ojos er an cambiantes, entre verdes, grises y azules, y su voz suave, aunque podía convertirse en un rugido. Iba ricamente vestido, y su espada corta llevaba engallados en empuñadura y vaina, oro, 227 plata y preciadas gemas; pero sobre los hombros llevaba echado un gran manto de cuero negro que había visto demasiadas tempestades. Skafloc abrió el envoltorio que contenía la espada, o, mejor, sus trozos, y los Sídh, que podían soportar el hierro lo mismo que la luz del día, se abalanzaron para verla. De repente, retrocedieron como un solo hombre, al sentir la ponzoña que contenía aquella hoja. No tardaron en correr los murmullos. Lugh levantó su cabeza coronada y miró duramente a Skafloc. —Estás en tratos con el Mal —dijo—. En esta espada duerme un demonio. —¿Qué otra cosa os esperabais? —comentó Skafloc, encogiéndose de hombros—. Da la victoria. —Sí, pero también la muerte. Acabará contigo si la empuñas. —¿Así, rota? —y cerró el envoltorio. El acero hizo ruido en el silencio en que había caído, como si las dos partes de la espada se pelearan entre sí; y había algo en aquel sonido que hizo que todos los que lo oyeron sintieran escalofríos. —Os pido un navío —rogó Skafloc—. Os lo pido en nombre de la amistad que había entre los Sídh y los elfos, en nombre de vuestro honor de guerreros y en el nombre de vuestra misericordia, como hijos que sois de la Madre Tierra Danu. ¿Me lo dejaréis? De nuevo se hizo el silencio, roto finalmente por Lugh. —No resulta fácil negarte nuestra ayuda... —¿Y por qué no le ayudamos? —exc lamó Dove Berg. Su espada brilló al desenvainarla, lanzarla en el aire y recogerla al caer con la mano diestra—. ¿Por qué no reunimos las fuerzas de los Sídh y les hacemos la guerra a esos bárbaros de trolls? ¡Cuan pobre y mísera se vería Faerie si los elfos fuesen aplastados! —¿Y cuánto tardarían los trolls en caer sobre nosotros? —preguntó Conan. —Calma, señores —ordenó Lugh—. Entre todos debemos pensar lo que hemos de hacer —se levantó, dominando a todos con su imponente estatura—. Sin embargo —dijo—, considérate nuestro huésped, Skafloc, Ahijado de los Elfos. Te has sentado a nuestra mesa y bebido nuestro vino; bien nos 228 acordamos de cómo antaño fuimos recibidos en Alfheim. Lo menos que podemos hacer es ofrecerte, como un pequeño don, el navío que nos pides. Pero yo soy Lugh Brazo Largo, y los Tuatha Dé Danann hacen lo que quieren sin pedir el parecer de Ases o Jótuns. Nada más pronunciar aquellas palabras, las armas relampaguearon, las espadas golpearon de plano los escudos, y los bardos comenzaron a improvisar cantos de guerra mientras pulsaban con frenesí las cuerdas de sus arpas. Frío y sosegado en aquel tumulto, Manannán Mac Lir dijo a Skafloc: —Te ofrezco una embarcación. No es más que un pequeño bote, pero es lo mejor de mi flota. Y como es difícil de manejar y el viaje puede resultar interesante, iré contigo. Al oír aquello, Skafloc se alegró. Una tripulación muy numerosa no tenía por qué resultar más útil que una reducida —quizá, todo lo contrario, porque llamaría mas la atención—; y, por otra parte, el Rey del Mar sería el mejor de los marinos. —Puedo darte las gracias con palabras —dijo—, pero preferiría hacerlo con un juramento de fraternidad. Mañana... —No tan deprisa, impulsivo —sonrió Manannán. Sus ojos soñadores escrutaron a Skafloc con más atención de lo que parecía a simple vista—. Descansaremos un poco y haremos una fiesta. Veo que necesitas un poco de alegría; además, un viaje al País de los Gigantes no es cosa que se haga a la ligera, y menos aún sin los preparativos pertinentes. Skafloc no pudo negarse a aquella proposición, pero en su fuero interno estaba enfurecido. No podía sentir alegría en aquellos días. Para lo único que le sirvió el vino fue para traerle a la memoria... Sintió que alguien le tocaba suavemente en el brazo y, al volverse, se encontró con Fand, la esposa de Manannán. Las hembras de los Tuatha Dé Danann eran majestuosas y bellísimas, porque habían nacido diosas. Ninguna palabra podría haber descrito lo esplendorosas que eran. Y Fand la que más. Su cabello sedoso, dorado como la luz del sol en un atardecer estival, le caía en ondas desde la corona hasta la frente. Su vestido vibraba con los colores del arco iris, sus torneados y blancos brazos resplandecían cargados de enjoyados anillos... que palidecían ante su persona. 229 Sus sagaces ojos violeta miraron a Skafloc o, mejor, a través de él. Su voz atemperada era música. —¿Estabas dispuesto a viajar solo a Jötunheim? —En efecto, mi señora —contestó Skafloc. —Jamás humano alguno pudo ir y regr esar, salvo Thjalfi y Roskva; pero porque fueron acompañando a Thor. Debes de ser demasiado valiente o demasiado temerario. —¿Cuál es la diferencia? Tanto me da morir en Jötunheim como en otro lugar. —Y si vives... —parecía más angustiada que espantada—. Si vives, ¿volverás con la espada y la usarás..., sabiendo que acabará causándote la muerte? Skafloc asintió, indiferentes. —Creo que consideras la muerte como una amiga —murmuró—. Es una amiga más bien extraña para un hombre joven. —La única amiga fiel que hay en el mundo —dijo—. Pues siempre podemos estar seguros de que la muerte está a nuestro lado. —Creo que estás condenado, Skafloc, Ahijado de los Elfos, y eso me da pena. Desde los tiempos de Cu Chulai nn... —por un momento, sus ojos se nublaron—, nadie de tus características había vivido entre los mortales. Y me aflige ver que el niño alegre y travieso que recordaba se ha convertido en un joven sombrío e introvertido. Un dragón te roe el pecho y el sufrimiento hace que busques la muerte. El no contestó, limitándose a cruzarse de brazos y a mirarla como si no la vieses. —Pero incluso la angustia acaba por morir —dijo Fand—. Puedes sobrevivir. Y yo usaré todas mis artes para protegerte, Skafloc. —¡Magnífico! —exclamó, incapaz de contenerse—. ¡Tú haciendo magias para cuidar mi cuerpo y ella, rezando para preservar mi alma! Y se fue adonde estaban las copas de vino. Fand suspiró. —La angustia os acompañará en vuestro viaje, Manannán —dijo a su marido. Él Rey del Mar se encogió de hombros. —Déjale que siga con su melancolía. No creo que consiga estropearme 230 el viaje. 231 CAPITULO 22 res días después de la celebración del Consejo, Skafloc se encontraba en la playa, contemplando cómo un leprechaun sacaba el bote de Manannán de la gruta que le servía de cobijo. Era una embarcación pequeña y estili zada, y su casco plateado parecía demasiado frágil para la navegación en alta mar. El mástil tenía incrustaciones de marfil; la vela y otros aparejos eran de seda colorada. Una magnífica imagen de Fand ejecutando una danza, al parecer de oro, se hallaba a proa y hacía las veces de mascarón. La dama en persona acudió a despedirlos. El resto de los Tuatha De Danann ya lo habían hecho con antelación, de suerte que no había nadie más entre las frías brumas grises de la mañana. La niebla resplandecía como gotas de rocío en sus cabellos trenzados, y sus ojos adquirieron más brillo Y un color violeta más profundo cuando deseó buen viaje a Manannán. —Que la fortuna te acompañe —le dijo— y que vuelvas pronto a las verdes colinas de Erin y a las doradas calles del pais de la Juventud. De día, pondré la mirada en el mar y, de noche, el oído entre las olas, en espera del regreso a casa de Manannán. 232 Skafloc se mantenía distante, mientras pensaba cómo se habría despedido Freda de él. Y se dijo, embargado por la nostalgia: Infortunado es el joven que parte sin que su amada de él acuda a despedirse quedamente, en la mañana. Más fríos que sus besos es el rocío del mar. Siento el corazón pesado... ¿Cómo la podré olvidar? —Vamonos —dijo Manannán. Él y Skafloc bajaron del pequeño muelle hasta el bote y alzaron la reluciente vela. El hombre se encargó del timón, mientras el dios tocaba un acorde en su arpa y cantaba así: Viento, te llamo, antiguo, incansable, desde lo hondo del cielo y el mar. Llévame lejos, hasta lo impensable, respóndeme, amigo, con tu gritar. Desde colinas que están a tu espalda, hasta las tierras del nunca jamás, acude viento, sin perder la calma. ¡Empuja mi bote, empújalo ya! Al acabar la canción, se levantó una potente brisa y el bote se lanzó hacia las ondas frías y verdes que dejaban en los labios un sabor a sal. La embarcación de Manannán era tan rápida como las de los elfos, por lo que bien pronto fue imposible distinguir las tierras grises de las nubes, igualmente grises, que se perfilaban en los confines del mundo. —Me parece que para encontrar Jötunheim habrá que hacer algo más que navegar hacia Septentrión —dijo Skafloc. —Es cierto —replicó Manannán—. Será necesario algún que otro encantamiento; pero, sobre todo, corazón animoso y brazo fuerte. 233 Entornó los ojos al mirar hacia delant e. El viento agitaba sus cabellos, y su rostro era, al mismo tiempo, majestuoso y sonriente, amable y distante. —El primer hálito, casi imperceptible, de la primavera recorre las tierras de los hombres —dijo—. Este invierno ha sido el peor desde hace siglos, y creo que es debido a que el poder de los Jótuns se extiende por el mundo. Estamos navegando hacia los hielos eternos de su patria. Posó su mirada en Skafloc. —Hace tiempo que debiera haber ido hasta los límites de lo creado, hasta los confines del mundo, y no haber esperado tanto. Pues ¿no soy acaso el Rey de la Mar Océana? La mejor época habría sido cuando los Tuatha Dé Danann éramos dioses y nuestro poder se hallaba en su culmen —movió la cabeza, con pesar—. Incluso los Ases, que aún siguen siendo dioses, no regresan incólumes de las escasas incursiones que hacen a Jötunheim. En cuanto a nosotros dos... no sé... No sé... —y, recobrando el arrojo, añadió—: ¡Pero yo navego adonde quiero! ¡Ninguna de las aguas de los nueve mundos quedará sin surcar por la quilla de Manannán Mac Lir! Skafloc no hizo comentario alguno, concentrado como estaba en sí mismo. El bote parecía animado de vida propia. El viento sonaba entre las jarcias, como si pulsase las cuerdas de un arpa, y la espuma de las olas formaba un velo aureolado con los colores del arco iris alrededor de la bellísima imagen de Fand. El aire era gélido, pero el sol había amanecido cegador: tras beberse las brumas, dispersaba polvo de diamantes entre las olas, que se rompían en la quilla con un grito, baj o la bóveda de azur surcada de blancas nubes que corrían veloces. El timón transmitía su vibración al brazo de Skafloc, que, incapaz de apreciar la frescura de la mañana, dijo en voz baja: Claro se presenta el día, y frío, llamando al mar con voz de viento, jugando, como un titán, con las olas. Si estuvieses a mi lado, bienamada, en este bote, me sonreiría la vida. (¿Acaso me anhelas, Freda?) 234 Manannán escrutó su rostro. —Esta empresa requiere todo nuestro empeño —dijo—. No dejes, por tanto, nada en tierra. Skafloc enrojeció de ira. —No ha venido contigo hombre que tema a la muerte —contestó, desabrido. —El hombre que no tiene nada por lo que vivir no es el más peligroso para sus enemigos —dijo Manannán. Y, cogiendo su arpa, cantó una de las antiguas canciones guerreras de los Sídh. Era extraño oír aquello entre la vastedad de las olas, el cielo y el viento. Por un instante, Skafloc tuvo la impresión de ver entre las nubes: huestes indistintas enzarzadas en combatir unas contra otras, con el sol llameando sobre sus emplumados yelmos; y bosques de lanzas bien dispuestas; banderas ondeando en su carrera; cuernos dando alaridos; y carros, con hoces en los cubos de sus ruedas, retumbando por los cielos. Navegaron a toda vela durante tres días y tres noches. El viento siguió soplando a sus espaldas y el bote cabalgó sobre las olas tan deprisa como el aire. No descuidaron la guardia en ningún momento; durmieron por turno en sus sacos bajo el exiguo puente de proa; comieron pescado seco, queso, galletas y las demás vituallas que había a bordo; y pudieron beber a sus anchas gracias a sus conjuros, que convertían el agua salada en potable. Cruzaron entre ellos pocas palabras, pu esto que Skafloc no estaba de humor para charlas y Manannán encontraba la satisfacción del inmortal en sus propios pensamientos. Pero el respeto y la amistad recíprocos fructificaron entre tan arduas fatigas, de suerte que llegaron a cantar juntos las poderosas canciones que los impelían hacia los confines de Jötunheim. Y el bote corría veloz. De hora en hora sentían espesarse el frío y la lobreguez según avanzaban hacia el Norte, adentrándose en el corazón del invierno. El sol bajó de sus alturas, hasta convertirse en un pálido y lejano disco sobre el lúgubre horizonte, que apenas llegaba a verse entre las apresuradas nubes de tormenta. El frío creció inexorablemente, mordía la carne y los huesos a través de las ropas, y calaba hasta el alma. El agua del mar se transformaba en carámbanos al golpear en las jarcias, mientras que la dorada 235 Fand, en la proa, estaba cubierta de escarcha. Al tocar cualquier objeto metálico, se les pegaba en él la piel de los dedos, y el aliento formaba carámbanos en sus bigotes. El mundo que los rodeaba se fue convirtiendo, a medida que entraban en él, en un mundo nocturno, en el que navegaban por mares negros, levemente salpicados de plata, entre montañas espectrales de luz de luna, todas de hielo, los icebergs. El cielo era una tiniebla ab soluta, cuajada de incontables estrellas que relucían con luz cargada de pesares, entre las que danzaban las auroras boreales que traían a la memoria de Skafloc los extraños fuegos que aparecieron durante su operación de nigromancia. En aquella tremenda desolación, el aullido del viento y el rumor del mar era lo único que se oía. En Jötunheim no se entraba como en cualquier otro reino de Midgard. Se trataba, simplemente, de perderse mar adentro una vez hubieran avistado la costa, en aguas que se iban tornando cada vez más frías, muertas y tenebrosas, hasta que las únicas luces que se vislumbraran fueran las de las estrellas, la luna y las estremecedoras auroras boreales. Skafloc pensó que aquel reino no debía encontrarse en la Tierra, sino en alguna extraña dimensión cerca de los confines del mundo, donde lo creado se precipitaba nuevamente en el abismo de donde había surgido. Y supo que navegaba en el Mar de la Muerte, alejado completamente del mundo de los vivos. Después de los tres primeros días de su periplo, en que habían visto la luz del Sol, perdieron el sentido del tiempo. La Luna y las estrellas giraban de manera distinta a la acostumbrada, y el tiempo no se manifestaba en el viento, en las olas o en el frío helador. Los hechizos de Manannán comenzaban a fallar. Había sobrepasado los límites de la región en que sus poderes tenían vigencia. Llegaron vientos de locura, que habrían impedido navegar a cualquier otro barco que no hubiera sido aquel. La nieve y la nevisca caían cegadoras. El bote cabeceaba y daba vueltas entre la galerna, llenándose de agua helada que les hacía tiritar, mientras la vela ondeaba y el timón quería ir a su antojo. Los icebergs se recortaban, monstruosos, en la negrura, yendo al encuentro del bote, de forma que los navegantes podían a duras penas esquivarlos. Pero las nieblas eran lo peor: una humedad gris sin viento ni sonido, que limitaba la visibilidad apenas a media braza, que mojaba y helaba, metiéndose entre las ropas hasta llegar a la piel, para después bajar hasta los pies y 236 ocasionar una tremenda tiritona. Entonces el bote permanecía varado, apenas sin moverse, excepto por un levísimo e invisible oleaje, y lo único que se llegaba a escuchar era el sonido que hacía al chocar contra el casco y el gotear de los carámbanos que cubrían todo el cordaje. Buscando a tientas, maldiciendo y tiritando, Skafloc y Manannán intentaban cambiar aquel mal tiempo mediante encantamientos. Tenían la impresión de que unas Potencias invisibles se movían agazapadas entre aquella niebla, mirando, famélicas, al interior del bote. Entonces llegó una tormenta, con rumbo contrario al que ellos llevaban, y los ardores de la maniobra les hicieron olvidar sus inquietudes. El mástil gimió, las cuerdas se tensaron, casi a punto de cortarles las manos, las olas bramaron contra el casco, que venía lanzado hacia un cielo delirante, para bajar acto seguido, como si fuese a desplomarse sobre el mismísimo infierno. Y Skafloc dijo: Negras y frías, las potentes olas golpean como el trueno nuestro barco. Timón y jarcias caen en rebeldía, de nevisca, viste el embravecido aire. Tropiezan y maldicen los marinos, pues lamentan haber perdido el ancla. Amargos son los tragos que ellos beben: salada es la cerveza de las ondas. Pero no dejó de maniobrar. Manannán, pensando que desfogarse de aquella manera era mucho mejor que quejarse, sonrió bajo aquel cielo enloquecido. Pasó el tiempo, y al final llegaron a su meta. Se la podía ver a lo lejos, bajo la luz de estrellas que no parpadeaban y de auroras boreales que danzaban y se elevaban altas entre montañas desoladas y glaciares de reflejos verdes. Los acantilados, sobre los que se desplomaban las olas, daban paso a un terreno empinado: un mundo inmenso, muerto, lleno de picachos, campos de hielo y de vientos aullando sobre la nieve antigua. —Ahí tenemos a Jötunheim —dijo Mannanán, señalando con el brazo, y 237 sus palabras casi se perdieron entre el ruido que los envolvía—. Creo que Utgard, cerca de donde, según tú, vive el gigante, debe de estar más al Este. —Si tú lo dices... —Skafloc había perdido el sentido de orientación desde hacía mucho tiempo, y, por otra parte, lo mismo que los elfos, no conocía de aquellas costas más que rumores capaces de helar la sangre. Ya había dejado de sentir cansancio . Seguía marchando como si fuese un navío con el timón condenado, ya que era lo único que tenía que hacer y a nadie le importaba si se derrumbaba o no. Pero, poco después, mientras se había quedado inmóvil, mirando la terrible faz del País de los Gigantes, pensó que Freda podría ser tan infeliz como él. Quizá más; pues él podía perderse en la empresa de la espada y saber que ella estaba a salvo, mientras que ella sólo sabía que había emprendido una búsqueda mortal, y que bien poco podía hacer al respecto, sino pensar en ello. —No se me había ocurrido —musitó, sorprendido; de repente, comenzó a sentir que las lágrimas mojaban sus mejillas y que comenzaban a helarse. Entonces declamó: Sé que largo será el tiempo para olvidar a mi amada y que siempre, en mis viajes, triste y sólo yo estaré. Callado está el corazón donde, antaño, ella cantaba. Pues tremendo es mi dolor por la pena que la embarga. Y volvió a abismarse en sus pensamientos. Manannán le dejó tranquilo, porque había aprendido que era inútil intentar sacarle de aquel estado; el bote avanzó hacia el Este en alas del viento apresurado. Parecía que nada se moviera en aquella desolación de hielo y rocas, excepto las sonoras olas, los diablos de las nieves arremolinándose en las montañas y los aleteos de las auroras boreales. Pero sentía que no lejos de ellos había Presencias. Aquella era la tierra que había producido toda aquella 238 gente que amenazaba a los dioses del Norte: Asa-Loki, Utgard-Loki, Hel, Fenrir, Jörmungandr y Garm, que devorará la Luna al llegar el fin del mundo. Cuando Skafloc se había repuesto de su ataque de melancolía, el bote ya había recorrido una distancia considerable, y Manannán costeaba cada uno de los fiordos para ver si conseguía dar con lo que estaba buscando. El Rey del Mar estaba inquieto, porque casi podía oler los miasmas de las madrigueras de Ütgard y no se atrevía a acercarse a aquella ciudad sombría. —Bolverk vive en una montaña, según me han dicho —comentó Skafloc—. Eso quiere decir que hay que buscar una cueva. —Cierto, pero lo malo es que esta maldita tierra está llena de cuevas. —Habrá que buscar una grande, supongo. Con indicios afuera de que dentro están trabajando en una forja. Manannán asintió y se dirigió hacia el fiordo más cercano. Mientras se acercaban a los acantilados, Skafloc pudo comprobar su tamaño. Su altura era tal que sintió vértigo al intentar divisa r sus cimas. Sobre ellas se movían unas cuantas nubes, iluminadas por las auroras. Y entonces tuvo la sensación de que aquellas paredes de roca iban a desplomarse sobre ellos... y que los lados del mundo se iban a partir en dos y a precipitarse en el mar, hundiéndose en él. El bote pasó por debajo de los acantilados como si fuera una hormiga y entró tímidamente en el fiordo. Hasta donde se extendía la vista, surgía un laberinto de escollos e islotes, tan altos que tapaban las estrellas. Pero las fosas nasales de Skafloc se estremecieron ante un leve aroma llevado por el viento —de humo y hierro fundido—, al tiempo que escuchaba el lejano repiqueteo de un martillo. No hubo lugar para palabras. Manannán avanzó, decidido, en el fiordo; y bien pronto los acantilados les cortaron el viento y los dos navegantes tuvieron que remar. Avanzaban rápido, pero como la longitud del fiordo era enorme, daba la impresión de que apenas se movían. El silencio se fue haciendo más profundo, como si el sonido hubiese muerto congelado y las auroras boreales danzasen sobre su tumba. Algunos copos de nieve seca cayeron del gran cielo estrellado. El frío seguía mordiendo como antes. A Skafloc le parecía que aquella calma era la del animal de presa a la espera de lanzarse contra su víctima, con los ojos glotones y meneando la cola. De alguna manera, sabía que estaban siendo observados. 239 Lentamente, el bote giró alrededor de los entrantes y salientes del fiordo y de esta manera pudieron divisar el interior. En una ocasión, Skafloc oyó el ruido de algo que salía arrastrándose de la tierra y que parecía seguirlos. El viento aullaba sobre la parte superior de los acantilados, tan alto que casi parecía soplar entre las estrellas. Resultaba extraño ver la imagen de Fand, que seguía danzando, adentrarse en Jötunheim. Finalmente, el bote llegó a un lugar donde una aspera y empinada pendiente bajaba de una montaña cuya cima estaba coronada por la Estrella Polar. Un glaciar corría a lo largo de la pendiente, reluciente en aquella incómoda semioscuridad, para desembocar en el mar. —Al parecer, debemos desembarcar aquí —dijo Manannán. Algo silbó entre los bloques de hielo que se daban la vuelta en uno de los flancos del glaciar. —Me parece que antes tendremos que vencer a un centinela —dijo Skafloc. Él y su compañero se prepararon, vistiendo loriga y yelmo, sin olvidar echarse las pieles por encima para resguardarse en lo posible del frío demoledor. Cada uno asió escudo y ciñó espada. Skafloc llevaba otra espada desenvainada en la mano enguantada, mientras que Manannán empuñaba su larga lanza, cuya punta reflejaba la escasa luz reinante con fulgor lunar. El bote tocó tierra con suavidad en una playa de hielo y esquistos. Skafloc desembarcó sin tener que mojarse en aquella agua sucia. Tiró del casco y lo encalló en la arena seca sin perder tiempo, mientras Manannán montaba guardia, aguzando la vista para horadar la tiniebla que los envolvía. Después se oyó un sonido estridente, como si algo, de enorme peso, se arrastrase sobre las piedras. —Nuestro camino es tenebroso y huele a maldad —recalcó el Rey del Mar—; pero la indecisión no nos dará seguridad. Y comenzó a andar entre los fragmentos de hielo y roca, tan grandes como casas. La negrura se espesó hasta el punto de que los viajeros tuvieron que caminar a tientas, a la luz de las pocas estrellas que brillaban entre los desgarrones de las nubes. El hedor se hizo insoportable, aureolado en aquellos momentos de una sensación de intenso frío, a la que se añadían silbidos y 240 ruidos cada vez más fuertes. Cuando pasó por encima de una hondonada que conducía hacia el glaciar, Skafloc vio dentro de ella una forma larga y pálida, y sus dedos apretaron con más fuerza la empuñadura de su espada. La cosa se deslizó fuera de su escondrijo y se lanzó contra él. El grito de guerra de Manannán resonó en la pendiente. Acosó con su lanza a la amenazante forma. —¡Fuera de nuestro camino, gusano blanco! —gritó. La cosa silbó y atacó a Skafloc. Sus anillos se apoyaron en las piedras y las lanzaron a gran distancia. Skafloc se echó a un lado y, cuando la cabeza plana golpeó donde él se encontraba un instante antes, atacó con su espada. La fuerza del golpe repercutió en su espalda y el monstruo se lanzó contra él, con las fauces desencajadas. Y aunque en aquella oscuridad casi no podía ver a la criatura, intuyó que podría engullirle entero. Manannán clavó su lanza en el pálido cuello. Skafloc lanzó otro golpe a la cabeza. El olor a matadero se aferró a su garganta; respirando hondamente para llenar de aire los pulmones, reanudó su ataque. Una gota de sangre, o de veneno, le salpicó, perforándole la cota de malla y quemándole el brazo. Lanzó una maldición y descargó con furia nuevos golpes sobre la serpenteante cabeza. Entonces sintió que se quedaba sin espada, ya que había comenzado a disgregarse por efecto de la sangre de la criatura, y oyó romperse el astil de la lanza de Manannán al entrar en ella. Desenvainando las espadas que llevaban a la cintura, el Rey del Mar y el hombre avanzaron de nuevo. El gusano retrocedió, y ellos lo persiguieron hasta el glaciar. Era algo terrible de ver. Sus espiras llegaban ondulando hasta la mitad de la pendiente, blancas como la lepra y más gruesas que un caballo. La cabeza de serpiente se mantenía oscilante, en lo alto, goteando sangre y ponzoña. La lanza rota de Manannán estaba clavada en uno de sus ojos; el otro relucía amenazante, mirando hacia el suelo. La lengua entraba y salía de sus fauces, imposible de distinguir a simple vista, silbando como el viento en un vendaval. Skafloc resbaló en el hielo. El gusano se lanzó contra él. Pero Manannán fue más rápido, y pudo cubrir con su escudo al hombre caído, al tiempo que 241 golpeaba al monstruo con su espada. La hoja hirió las abiertas fauces. Skafloc se puso en pie e hirió a su vez. El gusano los zarandeó con uno de sus anillos. Skafloc salió rodando y chocó contra un montón de nieve acumulada por el viento. Manannán quedó aprisionado entre sus espiras, pero, antes de que el monstruo pudiese triturarlo, había clavado su espada entre dos de sus costillas. Aquello era demasiado para el gusano, que salió huyendo hacia el mar, deslizándose sobre la nieve. Jadeantes y temblorosos, los viajeros se sentaron durante largo tiempo bajo las auroras boreales,- antes de reanudar su marcha. —Las espadas de repuesto también estan inservibles —dijo Skafloc—. Deberíamos ir a coger otras nuevas. —Ni lo pienses. El gusano puede estar acechándonos en la orilla y, si no, el vernos de nuevo podría suscitar su furia —replicó Manannán—. Las armas que tenemos resistirán hasta que nos hayamos hecho con la espada rúnica. Escalaron lentamente el resbaladizo glaciar, que relucía misteriosamente. Delante de ellos, la montaña negra ocultaba la mitad del cielo. El viento les traía el resonar de un martillo casi imperceptible. Avanzaron hasta que sintieron sus pulmones a punto de estallar y sus corazones al borde del colapso. A menudo tenían que reposar, e incluso descabezar un sueño allí mismo, en el glaciar, por lo que se felicitaron de haber salido del bote con víveres. El hielo tenía partes muy afiladas y traicioneras. Nada se movía ni parecía vivir entre aquellos hielos, pero el martillear les llegaba cada vez con más fuerza. Finalmente, Skafloc y Manannán llegaron a la cima del glaciar, que se encontraba a medio camino de la montaña coronada por la Estrella Polar. Un estrecho sendero, accidentado y sembrado de piedras, que apenas se veía en la oscuridad, se dirigía hacia el Oeste, contorneando un precipicio que parecía insondable. Los viajeros se ataron el uno al otro y treparon por él. Después de muchas caídas, en las que cada uno de ellos salvó la vida al otro al agarrarse fuertemente a las rocas, llegaron a una cornisa que iba a dar a la entrada de una cueva. De las profundidades llegaba el sonido del hierro. Un enorme perro de pelaje rojizo había sido encadenado a la entrada. Aulló y se lanzó contra ellos. Skafloc alzó su espada, dispuesto a matarlo. 242 —No —dijo Manannán—, tengo el presentimiento de que intentar matar a esta fiera nos traería una gran desventura. Lo mejor será que intentemos pasar por delante de él. Y eso hicieron: se taparon con los escudos que habían juntado y caminaron como cangrejos, cogiéndose con el brazo derecho a la pared rocosa. El perro se lanzó contra ellos con todo su peso y sus dientes rozaron el borde de sus escudos. El aullido retumbó en sus cráneos. A muy duras penas consiguieron mantenerse a mayor distancia que la que le proporcionaba la cadena al perro. Se encontraron rodeados de tiniebla; cogiéndose de la mano, bajaron dando tumbos por un túnel en declive, tantearon el terreno para evitar los pozos y, con mucha frecuencia, acabaron golpeándose contra estalagmitas o hiriéndose con ellas. El aire estaba menos frío que fuera, pero la humedad se encargaba de que pareciese lo contrario. Oyeron el rumor de unas aguas tumultuosas y pensaron que debían de pertenecer a alguno de los ríos que recorren las entrañas del infierno. A medida que avanzaban, el batir del martillo se iba haciendo más fuerte y más cercano. En dos ocasiones les llegó un ladrido que suscitó innumerables ecos y que tuvo como resultado que se aprestaran al combate. Más tarde se sentaron encima de algo grande y pesado, que se comió parte de sus escudos. Consiguieron acabar con aquello a pesar de estar a oscuras, pero no pudieron saber qué forma tenía. Poco después vieron un resplandor rojizo, como el de la estrella que brilla en la constelación del Cazador. Ap resuraron el paso y llegaron, después de un tiempo más largo de lo que hubieran deseado, a una vasta sala cubierta de hielo. Y acto seguido entraron en ella. Estaba iluminada débilmente por el fuego poco vivo de una forja de considerable tamaño. En aquella luz, que casi tenía el color de la sangre medio coagulada, consiguieron distinguir, aunque vagamente, algunos utensilios de tamaño gigantesco que sólo podían pertenecer a un herrero. Pero quien se inclinaba sobre el yunque era un Jötun. Era enorme, tan alto que casi no conseguían ver su cabeza en aquella fétida penumbra, y tan robusto que parecía rechoncho. Sólo llevaba un mandil de escamas de dragón encima de su peludo cuerpo, tan nudoso como un viejo 243 tronco de árbol y tan musculoso como un nido de serpientes. Sus negras cabellera y barba le llegaban a la cintura. Sus piernas eran cortas y arqueadas, cojeaba de la derecha y tenía una joroba tan enorme que podía tocar el suelo con las manos. Cuando Skafloc y Manannán entraron, volvió hacia ellos su rostro terrible, de gran nariz y boca ancha, lleno de arrugas y cicatrices. Bajo sus pesados arcos superciliares había dos cavidades negras: le habían arrancado los ojos. Su voz repetía el estruendo y los siseos de los ríos que recorren el infierno. —¡Jo, jo, jo! Durante trescientos años Bolverk ha estado trabajando solo. Ahora la hoja debe ser forjada —y tomó aquella con la que estaba trabajando y la arrojó en mitad de la cueva. El estruendo metálico que hizo al caer repercutió en las paredes durante un tiempo considerable. Skafloc se echó hacia delante para encontrarse con aquella mirada vacía y dijo: —Te traigo un nuevo trabajo que a la vez te resultará antiguo, Bolverk. —¿Quiénes sois? —gritó el Jötun—. Puedo oler a los hombres mortales, pero aquí siento algo más que una pizca de tufillo a Faerie. El otro es un semidiós, pero no pertenece a los Ases ni a los Vanes —y buscó a tientas, a su alrededor—. No me hacéis gracia ninguno de los dos. Acercaos para que pueda despedazaros. —Estamos cumpliendo una misión que no te atreverás a estorbar —dijo Manannán. —¿Cuál? —la pregunta de Bolverk resonó por las cavernas hasta acabar perdiéndose en el interior de la tierra. Entonces Skafloc declamó: Desde su oscura prisión, cansado y atormentado, Asa-Loki ya desea ver el juego de la espada. He aquí el arma tremenda que el guerrero empuñara. El azote de los héroes, 244 ¡oh, Bolverk, fórjalo ya! Y abrió el envoltorio de piel de lobo, dejando que los dos trozos de la espada cayesen a los pies del gigante. Las manos de Bolverk palparon los trozos. —¡Sí! —dijo, entrecortado—. Recuerdo bien esta hoja. Dyrin y Dvalin me buscaron a mí cuando tuvieron que hacer esta espada para que Svafrlami los liberase, pero también para vengarse de él. En ella forjamos hielo, muerte y tormenta, poderosas runas y encantamientos, y el vivo deseo de hacer el mal —esbozó una mueca—. Muchos guerreros han buscado esta espada, porque trae la victoria. No hay nada que no pueda morder y jamás pierde su filo. En su acero hay veneno, y las heridas que inflige no curan con medicinas, magias u oraciones. En esto consiste su maldición: cada vez que sea desenvainada deberá beber sangre y acabará siendo la perdición de quien la empuñe. Y dio un paso hacia ellos. —Por eso —dijo pausadamente—, Thor la quebró hace mucho tiempo, pues en todos los Nueve Mundos nadie, sino él, tenía el poder de hacerlo; desde entonces ha permanecido olvidada en el mundo de los hombres. Pero ahora..., ahora, si Loki llama a las armas, como tú dices, será porque es necesaria. «Yo no he dicho eso —murmuró Skafloc—, aunque quisiera que lo pensaras.» Pero Bolverk no le oyó. El Jötun miraba al vacío con mirada ciega, mientras sus dedos acariciaban la espada. —Así que es el fin —susurró—. Se acerca el ocaso final del mundo, cuando dioses y gigantes devasten la creación entera, mientras se matan entre sí; cuando Surt disperse las llamas que llegarán a los muros del cielo, los cuales crepitarán al arder; cuando el Sol se oscurezca, la tierra se precipite en el mar y las estrellas caigan. ¡Mi esclavitud está a punto de acabar! ¡Ciego y enterrado en una montaña, acabará en una llamarada de fuego! ¡De acuerdo, mortal, forjaré la espada! Y cumplió su palabra. El clamor llenó la cueva, las chispas volaban, los fuelles soplaban, y mientras trabajaba pronunciaba hechizos que hacían 245 temblar las paredes. Skafloc y Manannán se guarecieron en el túnel que había antes de llegar a la cueva. —Esto no me gusta, y preferiría no haber venido jamás —dijo el Rey del Mar—. Él mal está a punto de cobrar vida. Nunca dijeron de mí que fuese un cobarde, pero te aseguro que no tocaré esa espada; y, si fueses sabio, harías lo mismo. De lo contrario, acabará convirtiéndose en tu propio destino. —¿Y qué más da? —replicó Skafloc, de mal humor. Oyeron el ruido como de entrar en ebullición que hacía la hoja al ser forjada con veneno. Los humos que se desprendían en el proceso quemaban como un latigazo cuando tocaban la piel desnuda. El siniestro cántico de Bolverk resonaba en las cavernas. —No malgastes tu vida por un amor perdido —fue el ruego de Manannán—. Aún eres joven. —Todos los hombres nacen para morir —dijo Skafloc, y la discusión pareció zanjada. El tiempo pasó —aunque no pudieron comprender cómo el gigante pudo hacer tan deprisa su trabajo, ciego como estaba y sin ayuda— hasta que oyeron la voz de Bolverk, que gritaba: —¡Entrad, guerreros! Avanzaron en la luz rojiza. Bolverk tenía la espada en alto. La hoja aparecía resplandeciente, era como una lengua azul, con unas diminutas llamas desplazándose alrededor de sus filos. Los ojos del dragón de la empuñadura relucían y el oro de su cuerpo parecía arder con el rubor que le es propio. —¡Cógela! —exclamó el gigantea. Skafloc empuñó el arma. Era pesada, pero la fuerza fluyó de ella hacia su brazo. Estaba tan maravillosamente equ ilibrada que se convirtió en parte de sí mismo. Describió con ella un arco que hendió el aire, y golpeó una roca. La piedra se partió en dos. Skafloc dio un alarido de triunfo y giró el arma alrededor de su cabeza. Brillaba en la penumbra con el fulgor del rayo. —¡Ja, ja, ja! —se rió a carcajadas. Y comenzó a declamar: ¡Veloz transcurre el juego de la espada! 246 Los enemigos pronto escucharán el sibilante canto de las armas. ¡Cuan sedienta está la espada embrujada! Aullando en su ansia de apagar la sed desgarra el hierro, lo penetra y canta entre los cráneos destrozados, para saciarse en el torrente de mil sangres. Las risotadas de Bolverk se unieron a las suyas. —Eso, empúñala con alegría —dijo el Jötun—. Aplasta a tus enemigos... dioses, gigantes, mortales, no importa. ¡Ahora la espada es libre y el fin del mundo se aproxima! Y entregó al hombre una vaina recubierta de pan de oro. —Mejor será que la enfundes —dijo—, y que no la saques de su vaina si no es para matar —hizo una mueca—. Pero siempre encontrará la manera de obligarte a desenvainarla en el momento equivocado... y, al final, no lo dudes, se volverá contra ti. —Con tal de que abata antes a mis enemigos —replicó Skafloc—, poco me importará lo que ocurra después. —Quizá te importe... entonces —dijo Manannán, en voz baja. Y, levantando la voz, añadió—: Vamonos. Éste no es lugar para hablar. Y se fueron. El rostro ciego de Bolverk pareció seguir sus pasos. Cuando hubieron salido —el perro encadenado se hizo a un lado, con un gemido, para dejarlos pasar—, comenzaron a descender hacia el glaciar, con paso apresurado. Cuando estaban cerca de su final, oyeron un ruido sordo y miraron hacia atrás. Negras, recortándose contra la estrellas, más altas que una montaña, eran las tres formas que bajaban a su encuentro. —Creo que Utgard-Loki ha descubierto de alguna manera tu truco y no desea que sigas el juego a los Ases, cualquiera que sea. No nos resultará nada fácil salir de aquí —dijo Manannán, momentos antes de echar a correr hacia el bote. 247 248 CAPITULO 23 a guerra que Manannán Mac Lir y Skafloc, el Ahijado de los Elfos, llevaron a cabo en Jötunheim bien valdría la pena ser contada. También habría que hablar de su lucha contra las enloquecidas galernas y la bruma inmóvil, contra la resaca y los escollos, contra los témpanos de hielo y contra un cansancio tan profundo que sólo la imagen de Fand, brillando en medio de la noche interminable, podía aportarles consuelo. También su bote, el mejor de todos, se habría merecido una banda de oro y una canción. Muchos fueron los encantamientos con que los Jótuns intentaron aniquilar a quienes habían ido a visitarl os, y la fortuna adversa hizo que éstos sufrieran sus efectos. Pero el hombre y el dios utilizaron los pocos hechizos que resultaban válidos en aquel lugar, y no sólo contrarrestaron buena parte de la magia de los gigantes, sino que suscitaron contra ellos tormentas que con sus vientos huracanados azotaron la tierra e hirieron las laderas de las montañas donde residen los Jótuns. Jamás intentaron luchar abiertamente contra ellos —aunque, en dos ocasiones, cuando alguno se atrevió a acercárseles, le dieron muerte—, pero 249 se defendieron de los monstruos marino s y terrestres que azuzaron en su contra. Con mucha frecuencia escaparon de sus perseguidores por muy poco, sobre todo cuando se dirigieron al interior en busca de comida, durante los largos períodos de viento adverso, y cada una de las aventuras que les ocurrieron entonces podría dar lugar a una historia. También habría que hablar de la incursión efectuada en una enorme granja, con objeto de robar caballos. Después de hacerse con un botín, en el que los corceles no eran la parte más importante, la incendiaron. Los animales que se llevaron eran sólo los ponis más pequeños de aquella tierra, pero en el mundo de los hombres habrían sido clasificados entre los garañones más enormes y pesados, por sus voluminosas formas, de pelaje hirsuto y negro, sus ojos ardientes y sus corazones malvados. Pese a ello, se mostraron dóciles con sus nuevos amos y se estuvieron quietos en el bote, donde escasamente había espacio para ellos. Y, lo que es más importante, no se asustaban de la luz del día ni del hierro, ni siquiera de la espada de Skafloc, y jamás acusaban cansancio. Debiera decirse que no todos los Jótuns eran gigantes, lo mismo que tampoco eran horrendos ni aborrecibles. Después de todo, algunos de los suyos habían llegado a ser reyes de Asgard. Un agricultor perdido en el campo podía dispensar una buena acogida a huespedes que le eran totalmente desconocidos, sin hacerles demasiadas preguntas. No pocas hembras eran de estatura humana, bien favorecidas y bien dispuestas. Manannán, el de la lengua suelta, comprobó que la vida del proscrito no era del todo desagradable. Pero Skafloc jamás miraba dos veces seguidas a aquellas hembras. Habría muchas otras cosas de qué hablar: del dragón que tenía un enorme tesoro de objetos de oro, de la Montaña de Fuego, del Abismo Insondable y de la Reina de las Gigantas. Habría que contar lo que les ocurrió cuando fueron de pesca a uno de los ríos del Infierno, y lo que pescaron en él. Las historias de la Batalla Interminable y de la Bruja del Bosque de Hierro y de la canción que oyeron cantar en voz baja a la aurora boreal, en el secreto de la noche... serían igualmente dignas de escucharse, pues cada una de ellas es como una saga. Pero dado que no forman parte de la trama principal de la historia, habrán de ser consignadas en los anales de Faerie. Bástenos saber que Skafloc y Manannán abandonaron Jötunh eim y pusieron proa al Sur, hacia 250 las aguas de Midgard. —¿Cuánto ha durado nuestra ausencia? —preguntó el hombre. —No lo sé. Más de lo que aquí nos ha parecido —el Rey del Mar se deleitó con el olor de la fresca brisa y alzó la mirada hacia un límpido cielo azul—. Ya es primavera —quedó en silencio unos instantes, y añadió—: Ahora que tienes la espada... y que ya la has alimentado con sangre... ¿qué piensas hacer? —Intentaré unirme al Rey de los Elfos, si es que aún sigue vivo — Skafloc miró torvamente al frente, por encima de las olas viajeras, hacia la imprecisa línea del horizonte—. Déjame en el continente, al sur del Canal y partiré en su busca. ¡Que los trolls se atrevan a detenerme! Cuando los hayamos barrido de Alfheim, desembarcaremos en Inglaterra y la reconquistaremos. Por último, iremos hasta las madrigueras en donde viven y aplastaremos con nuestro pie a su maldita progenies. —Sí podéis —dijo Manannán, frunciendo el ceño—. Aunque, desde luego, debéis intentarlo. —¿Nos ayudarán los Sídh? —Esa decisión compete al Consejo Supremo, aunque es casi seguro que no mientras queden trolls en Inglaterra, ya que nuestro país podría ser saqueado mientras sus guerreros están en otra parte. Pero en cuanto se fueran de ella, sí que os ayudaríamos, no sólo por la lucha y la gloria, sino por eliminar para siempre una amenaza a nuestro flanco —el Rey del Mar alzó orgullosamente la cabeza—. ¡Pero pase lo que pase..., por la sangre que hemos derramado juntos, las fatigas, la navegación tan arriesgada, los peligros que arrostramos en compañía, y todas las vidas que nos debemos el uno al otro, Manannán Mac Lir y su hueste estarán contigo cuando entres en Inglaterra! Se estrecharon las manos en silencio. Y poco después, Manannán desembarcaba a Skafloc y a su caballo Jötun, y ponía rumbo a Irlanda... y a Fand. Skafloc, a lomos de su negro corcel, cabalgaba al encuentro del distante Rey de los Elfos. El caballo estaba enflaquecido y, aunque no demostrase el 251 cansancio que sentía, el hambre se alojaba en su vientre. La apariencia de Skafloc tampoco era mucho mejor, con sus ropas desgarradas y descoloridas, su yelmo y escudo llenos de abolladuras y polvo, y el manto que llevaba echado sobre los hombros, gastado por el uso. En el transcurso de sus viajes había perdido peso y sus poderosos músculos estaban a flor de piel, tensa sobre sus robustos huesos; pero, a pesar de todo ello, cabalgaba erguido sobre la silla, más altanero que nunca. Innumerables arrugas surcaban su rostro, que había perdido toda su juventud y parecía el de un dios proscrito. En muy pocas ocasiones mostraba una fina ironía, ya que por lo general se comportaba con altanera reserva. Sólo la cabellera rubia agitada por el viento seguía siendo joven. En suma, parecía Loki, cabalgando por la llanura de Vigrid en el último ocaso del mundo. Se dirigió a las colinas, mientras la naturaleza renovada le rodeaba. Había llovido por la mañana y el terreno estaba lleno de fango, pozas y arroyuelos que resplandecían al sol. La hierba crecía deprisa, de un frío color verde claro hasta donde llegaba la vista; y en los árboles despuntaban las yemas y sus ramas se estremecían con nueva vida, en claro augurio del verano. Aún hacía frío; entre las colinas soplaba un fuerte viento, que hacía que a Skafloc se le enrollara el manto alrededor del cuerpo. Pero era un viento de primavera, picaro y escandaloso, que hacía que la sangre expulsase la pereza invernal. El cielo aparecía sin brumas y completamente azul, el sol brillaba a través de nubes blancas y grises, y las lanzas de su luz herían la hierba húmeda, suscitando reflejos y destellos. El trueno resonaba por el oscurecido sudeste, pero entre aquellas masas de nubes humeantes relucía el arco iris. De lo alto llegaba la llamada de los gansos salvajes, las aves migratorias que regresaban a casa. Un tordo ensayaba su canción en un bosquecillo y dos ardillas jugueteaban en un árbol, como si le recorrieran llamaradas rojas. No tardarían en llegar los días cálidos y las noches claras, los bosques llenos de verde y las flores moviéndose en sus tallos. Algo se agitó dentro de Skafloc mientras cabalgaba, el abrirse de una ternura enterrada y casi olvidada. «¡Oh, Freda, si estuvieses conmigo....'» El día iba desapareciendo hacia Poniente. Skafloc seguía montado en su caballo incansable, sin molestarse en pasar desapercibido. Aunque marchaba 252 al paso, para que el negro garañón Jötun pudiese ir mordisqueando la hierba mientras avanzaba, la tierra temblaba bajo aquellos tremendos cascos. Estaban entrando en las tierras de Faerie, más específicamente, en los dominios continentales de Alfheim, y se dirigían hacia las soledades montañosas donde se suponía que aún resistía el Rey de los Elfos. Skafloc y su cabalgadura ya se habían encontrado con los inequívocos signos de la guerra —granjas incendiadas, armas rotas, huesos descarnados...—, que se desvanecían con la rapidez típica con que lo hacían las cosas de Faerie. De vez en cuando, aparecía la pista fresca de algún troll y Skafloc se relamía. Llegó la noche, que le resultó extrañamente cálida e iluminada después de las regiones en que había estado. Siguió adelante, cerrando los ojos en algún momento mientras cabalgaba, pero sin dejar de tener el oído despierto. Mucho antes de que los jinetes enemigos se cruzasen en su camino, ya los había oído y se había calado el yelmo. Eran seis, poderosas formas negras a la luz de las estrellas. Al verlo se quedaron estupefactos: un mortal, vestido y pertrechado como un elfo, pero también como alguien de los Sídh..., cabalgando un corcel parecido a los suyos, pero mucho más grande y peludo. Le cerraron el paso y uno de ellos gritó: —¡Alto en nombre de Illrede, Rey de los Trolls! Skafloc espoleó su montura y cargó, al tiempo que desenvainaba la espada. La hoja resplandeció en la noche con un azul maligno. Cayó todo lo deprisa que pudo sobre sus enemigos y, antes de que hubiesen llegado a darse cuenta, había partido en dos el yelmo, con el cráneo dentro, a uno, y descabezado a otro. Un troll, a su izquierda, le golpeó con una maza, y otro, a su derecha, con un hacha. Guiando el caballo con las rodillas, colocó su escudo entre él y el primero. Su espada dio un salto para encontrar al segundo, clavándose en su pecho después de haber atravesado el astil de su hacha. Girando la espada alrededor de su cabeza, Skafloc abrió en canal, desde |os hombros a la cintura, al troll que estaba a su izquierda. Con un dedo tiró de las riendas. Su monstruoso caballo se alzó sobre las patas traseras y lanzó con las delanteras una violenta coz que reventó el cráneo del quinto troll. El que quedaba gritó y emprendió la huida. Skafloc le lanzó su espada, 253 como si fuese un refulgente relámpago, clavándosela al troll en la espalda, con tanta fuerza que le salió por el pecho. Skafloc siguió cabalgando, en busca del sitiado Rey de los Elfos. Poco antes del alba se detuvo a la orilla de un río para descabezar un breve sueño. Le despertó un ruido de hojas y el leve temblor del suelo. Dos trolls avanzaban a hurtadillas hacia él. Se puso en pie de un salto, desenvainando la espada, sin tiempo de hacer nada más. Los trolls se acercaron. Al primero le alcanzó en el corazón, después de atravesar con su espada escudo y pecho. Liberando rápidamente la hoja empapada en sangre, la mantuvo ante sí, de suerte que el segundo troll no pudo detenerse a tiempo y se clavó en ella. Skafloc resistió el tremendo impacto de aquel cuerpo gracias a la fuerza ultraterrena que fluía de su arma. —Casi ha resultado demasiado fácil —dijo—; pero estoy seguro de que aún no ha venido lo bueno. Y, montando en su caballo, reanudó la marcha. Cerca del mediodía, encontró una cueva con varios trolls dentro, durmiendo. Los mató y se comió sus provisiones. Poco le importaba ir dejando tras de sí un reguero de cadáveres, que cualquiera podría seguir. ¡Que lo intentasen! Cuando comenzaba el ocaso, llegó a las montañas. Eran altas y bellísimas, con picos nevados flotando en el cielo del atardecer. Se oía el canto de las cascadas y el murmullo de los pinos. Pensó lo extraño que resultaba que aquel lugar tan pacífico y bello fuera escenario de la matanza. En justicia, debería haber estado allí con Freda, disfrutando de su amor, y no con un tétrico caballo negro y una espada maldita. Pero así estaban las cosas. ¿Qué habría sido de ella? Subió una pendiente y cruzó un glaciar que resonó bajo los cascos de su corcel. La noche se iba extendiendo por el cielo, clara y fría en aquellas alturas, mientras una luna, casi llena, mudaba las cumbres en fantasmas. Poco después, Skafloc oyó, lejano e irreal en las apacibles soledades que le envolvían, el sonido grave de un lur. El corazón le dio un brinco. Espoleó su caballo, que se lanzó al galope, de risco en risco, sobre los ventosos abismos. El aire aullaba en sus oídos y los ecos de sus herraduras resonaron entre las montañas. ¡Alguien estaba luchando! 254 El áspero bramido de un cuerno troll llegó hasta él, y también, aunque de manera paulatina y disminuidos por la distancia, los gritos de los guerreros y el resonar de las armas. Una flecha silbó cercana. Hizo una mueca y se agachó en la silla. No había tiempo para ajustarle las cuentas al arquero; presas de mayor tamaño se hallaban ya a la vista. Superó una cresta y a la luz de la luna divisó el campo de batalla. Cualquier hombre sólo habría visto una cumbre azotada por los demonios de las nieves, que se encarga n de suscitar los torbellinos, y quizá le habría extrañado la singular nota que parecía escucharse en el viento. Pero la Vista Encantada de Skafloc era capaz de ver más allá. La cima de la montaña era un castillo de altas murallas, engalanado de hielo, cuyos torreones llegaban hasta las estrellas. En las pendientes más altas, y rodeándolo, se habían montado las negras tiendas de un numerosísimo ejército troll. En uno de los pabellones, de mayor tamaño que los demás, ondeaba una enseña negra; desde el torreón más alto del castillo flotaba al viento el estandarte del Rey de los Elfos: los poderosos señores de Faerie se encontraban al fin frente a frente. Los trolls, aullando todo el tiempo, habían emprendido el asalto a la fortaleza. Era tal su número que ocultaban la base de las murallas, mientras apoyaban las escalas e intentaban subir por ellas. Disponían de muchas y muy variadas máquinas de guerra: maganeles, que vomitaban bolas de fuego sobre los parapetos; torres móviles de asalto, que lanzaban sobre las murallas oleada tras oleada de guerreros; arietes que golpeaban las puertas; catapultas que enviaban sus piedras contra la muralla... Los gritos, el ruido del ir y venir de soldados y caballos, el golpear de los metales, el rugido de los cuernos y los lures, llenaban la noche con una tormenta de sonidos que desencadenaba demoledoras y humeantes avalanchas y hacía vibrar los campos de hielo más cercanos. Los elfos, que se habían hecho fuertes en sus bastiones, conseguían repeler a los trolls. Las espadas relucían, las lanzas y las flechas oscurecían la luna, el aceite hirviendo se derramaba de los calderos, las escalas se daban la vuelta y caían... Pero los trolls no dejaban de afluir y los elfos eran muy pocos. El asedio estaba llegando a su fin. Skafloc desenvainó la espada. La hoja silbó cuando abandonaba su vaina, brillando con reflejos ondulantes bajo la luz de la luna. 255 —¡Hai, ha! —gritó, espoleando su caballo y bajando la pendiente envuelto en una nube de nieve. No le importó el barranco que le cerraba el paso. Cuando se le acabó el camino, sintió que los músculos de su caballo entraban en tensión y, antes de darse cuenta, estaba volando por los aires, rodeado de estrellas. Cuando cayó al otro lado, el choque le hizo castañetear los dientes; pero se recuperó al momento y se lanzó hacia la ladera de la montaña. El campamento de los trolls estaba casi vacío. Skafloc tiró de las riendas, y su caballo se detuvo a oler el viento. Él se agachó para coger de una hoguera una tea medio apagada. La velocidad del galope avivó el tizón, mientras cabalgaba incendiando las tiendas. Poco después, muchas ardían y sus llamas se propagaban a las demás. Skafloc se dirigió hacia las puertas del castillo, armándose completamente para el encuentro. Como siempre, cogía el escudo con la mano izquierda y la espada con la derecha, guiando su caballo con las rodillas y con su voz. Antes de que los trolls que se encontraban en la puerta norte se dieran cuenta de su presencia, ya había dejado fuera de combate a tres y su bestial caballo había hecho lo propio con otros tantos. Entonces, la mayor parte de sus enemigos se volvió contra él. Su espada subía y bajaba, girando y silbando, hendiendo una y otra vez yelmos, cráneos y lorigas, carne y hueso. Jamás parecía terminarse su danza de la muerte mientras segaba trolls como trigo maduro. Le rodearon, pero ninguno podía tocar el hierro que le cubría, por lo que muy pocos de sus golpes le alcanzaron. Pero él no los sintió... como siempre que empuñaba aquel arma. Lanzó un tajo de izquierda a derecha, y una cabeza cayó rodando de unos hombros. Otro más, y a uno de los jinetes le abrió el vientre. Un tercero cortó yelmo, cráneo y cerebro. Un guerrero a pie intentó herirle con una lanza y le arañó en el brazo. Skafloc se agachó y le hizo morder el polvo. Pero lo cierto es que la mayor parte de los infantes murieron por las coces y los mordiscos del caballo Jötun. El estruendo y el chillido de los meta les heridos llegaba hasta la luna. La sangre humeaba en la nieve que ya estaba empapada de ella, llena de cadáveres nadando en innumerables pozas. El garañón negro, su jinete y la 256 terrorífica hoja dominaban la escena, abriéndose camino hacia las puertas. —¡Hiere, espada, hiere! El pánico se abatió sobre los trolls, que salieron huyendo. Skafloc gritó: —¡Hai, Alfheim! ¡El Padre de la Victoria cabalga esta noche con vosotros! ¡Salid, elfos, salid y matad! Un anillo de fuego, el del campamento que había sido incendiado, rodeaba el campo de batalla. Los trolls lo vieron y desmayaron en su intento. Además, sabían reconocer un caballo Jötun y una espada embrujada nada más verlos, así que todos se preguntaban quién era aquel ser que combatía contra Trollheim. Skafloc hizo caracolear a su caballo delante de las puertas. La sangre que manchaba su cota de malla brillaba a la luz de la luna y del fuego. Sus ojos relucían con el mismo tono azulado de su espada. Desafiaba a sus enemigos e invitaba a los elfos a efectuar una salida. Un susurro de espanto corrió entre las filas de los desesperados trolls: —... Es Odín, ha venido a hacer la guerra... No, tiene dos ojos, es Thor... Es Loki, que se ha liberado de sus cadenas, el fin del mundo está próximo... Es un mortal, poseído por un demonio... Es la Muerte... Los lures sonaron, las puertas se abrieron de par en par y un grupo de elfos a caballo salió por ellas. Eran muchísimo menos numerosos que los trolls, pero una nueva esperanza animaba sus rostros demacrados y daba vida a sus ojos. A su cabeza, sobre un caballo blanco como la leche, con la corona brillando a la luz de la luna y la barba y los cabellos flotando sobre su loriga y su capa azul oscura, iba el Rey de los Elfos. —No esperábamos verte con vida, Skafloc —gritó, entre el tumulto. —Y sin embargo, aquí me tenéis —contestó el hombre, sin dar muestra alguna de su antigua reverencia..., pues pensaba que nada podría atemorizar a quien había hablado con los muertos y navegado más allá de los confines del mundo, y a quien, por otra parte, ya no le quedaba nada que perder. Los ojos del Rey de los Elfos se posaron en la espada runica. —Ya sé qué arma es esa —murmuró—. Ignoro si será bueno para Alfheim que esté en nuestro bando. Bi en... —y levantó la voz—: ¡Adelante, elfos! Sus guerreros cargaron contra los trolls; muy cruenta fue la batalla. 257 Espadas y hachas subían y bajaban, goteando sangre; el metal gritaba mientras se partía; las lanzas y flec has oscurecían el cielo; los caballos pisoteaban a los muertos o relinchaban al ser heridos; los guerreros luchaban, perdían el resuello y caían a tierra. —¡Aquí, Trollheim! ¡A mí, a mí! Illrede reagrupó a su gente y organizó a unos pocos en una formación en cuña que debía partir en dos, y dejar aisl adas, las filas de los elfos. Su corcel de ébano resoplaba como un trueno, mientras su hacha jamás descansaba ni erraba sus blancos, por lo que los elfos comenzaron a retroceder ante él. A la luz de la luna, y confundiéndose con su cota de escamas de dragón, su rostro parecía de hielo verdoso, era un maelstrom de rabia; los zarcillos de su barba se retorcían, los ojos le ardían como un fuego negro. Skafloc le vio y aulló como un lobo. Hizo dar media vuelta a su caballo y lo lanzó contra Illrede. Su espada gritó y restalló, abatiendo enemigos como si fuera un leñador talando árboles jóvenes, como una confusa llama azul en la noches. —¡Ah! —rugió Illrede—. ¡Dejádmelo! ¡Es mío! Skafloc e Illrede cabalgaron el uno hacia el otro a lo largo de un camino súbitamente despejado de contendientes. Pero cuando el troll vio la espada rúnica, perdió el aliento y tiró de las riendas. La risa de Skafloc pareció un ladrido. —En efecto, ha llegado tu fin. La tiniebla se abate sobre ti y tu maldita raza. —Los males de este mundo no hay que achacárselos siempre a los trolls —dijo Illrede, con voz pausada—. Me parece que tú has cometido un acto mucho más malvado que cualquiera de los míos al traer a este mundo esa espada de nuevo. A pesar de la naturaleza de los trolls, que nunca pedimos, sino que nos fue adjudicada por las Nornas, nosotros nunca habríamos hecho una cosa semejantes. —¡Porque no os habríais atrevido! —se mofó Skafloc, y se lanzó sobre él. Illrede luchó valientemente. Su hacha hi rió en el codillo al caballo Jötun. No caló mucho, pero sí lo suficiente para que el garañón relinchase y se encabritase. Cuando Skafloc intentaba mant enerse en la silla , Illrede intentó 258 herirle. El hombre interpuso su escudo, que se partió en dos, aunque consiguió mantener lejos de él la afilada hacha; Skafloc se agitó en su silla por efecto del golpe. Illrede se acercó más, dispuesto a destrozarle la cabeza. El yelmo se desarmó y sólo la fortaleza sobrenatural que le prestaba la espada impidió a Skafloc desvanecerse. Illrede levantó el hacha de nuevo. Aún sin haberse recobrado del todo, Skafloc le golpeó, sin mucha energía. Sin embargo, espada y hacha se encontraron entre una lluvia de chispas, y con un gran estruendo el hacha se partió en dos. Skafloc agitó la cabeza para despejarse. Se rió y le cortó a Illrede el brazo izquierdo. El Rey de los Trolls titubeó. La hoja de Skafloc volvió a caer, llevándose el otro brazo. —No es propio de guerreros jugar con el enemigo inerme —dijo Illrede, con un gemido—. Es la espada quien hace esto, no tú. Al oír aquello, Skafloc le dio muerte. Entonces, el miedo hizo presa en los trolls, que se retiraron en desorden. Los elfos se lanzaron furiosamente contra ellos. El estruendo de la batalla resonó entre las montañas. A la vanguardia de los elfos, su rey combatía sin dejar de incitarlos; pero era Skafloc quien, cabalgando por todas partes y cosechando guerreros con la espada que no sólo parecía gotear sangre, sino fuego azul, infundía en sus enemigos el más hondo de los espantos. Al final, los trolls se desbandaron y huyeron. Los elfos, implacables, les dieron caza, abatiéndolos y obligándolos a regresar al campamento incendiado. No se salvaron muchos. El Rey de los Elfos refrenó su caballo cuando comenzaban a despuntar las primeras luces del alba y contempl ó la espantosa carnicería que rodeaba los muros del castillo. Una fría brisa ondul aba sus cabellos, libres ya del yelmo, las crines y la cola de su caballo. Skafloc cabalgó a su encuentro, demacrado y derrengado, manchado de la sangre y los sesos del enemigo, aunque sin haber perdido sus ansias de venganza. —Ha sido una gran victoria —dijo el Rey de los Elfos—. Sin embargo, somos el último bastión de los elfos. Los trolls han recorrido a sus anchas todo Alfheim. 259 —Algo que no podrán seguir haciendo —replicó Skafloc—. Los atacaremos de nuevo. Como ahora se encuentran muy dispersos, todos los elfos que no se sometieron a ellos y que aceptaron vivir como proscritos se unirán a nosotros. Por lo menos, podremos armarlos con lo que les quitemos a los trolls que vayamos matando. La guerra será ardua, pero mi espada nos dará la victoria. Además —prosiguió, pausadamente—, tengo un nuevo estandarte que alzar a la vanguardia de nuestro ejército, y espero que sirva para espantar a nuestros enemigos —y entonces levantó en alto la lanza en donde había clavado la cabeza de Illrede. Los ojos sin vida parecían mirarlo y la boca esbozar una mueca amenazantes. El Rey de los Elfos dio un respingo. —Tu corazón es implacable, Skaf loc —dijo—. Estas muy cambiado desde la última vez que nos vimos. De acuerdo, será como deseas. 260 CAPITULO 24 n la madrugada de aquel día de invierno, Freda llegó a las tierras de Thorkel Erlendsson. El granjero acababa de levantarse y de salir a ver qué tiempo hacía. Por un instante no dio crédito a sus ojos: una joven vestida de guerrero, con armas y cota de malla de un metal desconocido, del color del cobre, y ropajes igualmente extraños, que avanzaba dando tumbos, como una ciega... no, no podía ser. Hizo ademán de coger una lanza que estaba detrás de la puerta, pero desistió cuando volvió a mirar a la joven, ya más de cerca, y reconoció a Freda: cansada y abatida. Quien se dirigía hacia la casa era Freda, la hija de Orm. Thorkel la condujo al interior. Aasa, su mujer, se apresuró a ayudarla. —Has estado fuera mucho tiempo, Freda —dijo—. ¡Bienvenida a casa! La joven intentó responder, pero de su boca no salió ninguna palabra. — ¡Pobre niña! —murmuró Aasa—. ¡Pobre niña perdida! Vamos, te ayudaré a meterla en la cama. Audun, el hijo de Thorkel que iba detrás del primogénito Erlend, asesinado como se recordará, entró en la casa. —En el corazón de una doncella de noble cuna no hace tanto frío como 261 afuera —comentó y, al ver a la joven, preguntó—: ¿Quién es? —Freda, la hija de Orm —contestó Thorkel—, que ha vuelto, no sé cómo. Audun se inclinó sobre ella. —¡Vaya, es maravilloso! —dijo, lleno de alegría. Y la cogió por el talle pero, antes de que pudiera besarla, la muda angustia de ella le caló en el corazón, haciéndole desistir—. ¿Pero qué ocurre? —preguntó. —¿Ocurrir? —dijo Aasa, bruscamente—. Mejor sería preguntar qué es lo que no le habrá ocurrido a esta pobre infeliz. Y ahora, patosos y cegatos de hombres, salid fuera y dejadme que la meta en la cama. Freda permaneció despierta durante largo rato, mirando a la pared. Cuando finalmente Aasa le llevó de comer y le obligó a tomar algo, murmurando palabras de aliento y acariciándole el cabello como habría hecho una madre con su pequeña, Freda se echó a llorar. Largo fue el caudal de sus lágrimas, aunque silencioso. Aasa la tuvo cogida todo el rato, dejando que echase fuera toda su pena. Y de tal suerte, ya calmada, Freda se quedó dormida. Más tarde, a petición de Thorkel, aceptó quedarse a vivir entre ellos durante un tiempo. Aunque su recuperación fue rápida, ya no era la muchacha alegre que todos recordaban. Thorkel le preguntó qué le había sucedido y, como ella bajó la mirada, al tiempo que palidecía, se apresuró a añadir: —No, no tienes que hablar si no quieres. —No tengo ningún motivo para ocultar la verdad —dijo, tan bajo que apenas se la oyó—.Valgard nos llevó, a mí y a Asgerd, hacia el Este, en su barco, para entregarnos a un rey pagano y que hiciera con nosotras lo que quisiera. Apenas habíamos desembarcado cuando... otro vikingo cayó sobre él, haciendo huir a sus guerreros. Valgard escapó y Asgerd murió en la refriega. El otro guerrero me llevó con él. Finalm ente, como tenía, creo..., que hacer negocios en tierras lejanas y no me podía llevar..., me dejó en la granja de mi padre. —Vas vestida de forma extraña. —Todo lo que llevo encima es del vikingo. No sé de dónde lo sacaría. En más de una ocasión luché a su lado. Era un buen hombre, a pesar de ser 262 pagano —Freda miró al fuego del hogar de la habitación en donde estaban sentados—. Es cierto. Era el mejor, el más bravo y el más amable de los hombres —apretó los labios—. ¿Y por qué no iba a serlo? Venía de buena familia. Se levantó y salió de la casa con paso vivo. Th orkel la siguió con la mirada, mientras se mesaba la barba. —No ha dicho toda la verdad —dijo, en voz alta—, pero creo que será lo único que oigamos de sus labios. Ni siquiera al sacerdote que la confesó Freda le contó más cosas. Después se alejó, sola, y se detuvo en una elevada colina, a mirar el ciclo. El invierno se estaba acabando y hacía un día espléndido, sin asomo de frío. La blanca nieve relucía sobre la blanca tierra, mientras, encima de su cabeza, ninguna nube alteraba el azul del cielo. Freda dijo para sí en voz baja: «Ahora estoy en pecado mortal, por no haber confesado que había yacido con él sin estar casados, y además siendo su hermana. Cargaré sobre mi alma ese peso que llevaré hasta la tumba. Padre Omnipotente, Tú sabes que nuestro pecado era demasiado maravilloso y sincero para ser enlodado con el nombre más feo. Castígame a mí, pero perdónale a él, que no conocía tu ley —se le subieron los colores a la cara—. Además, creo que debajo de mi corazón llevo algo que a ti, María, no te habría resultado ajeno... No permitas que reciba un nombre infame por lo que hicieron sus padres. Padre, Madre e Hijo, haced conmigo lo que queráis, pero perdonad al inocente pequeño.» Cuando regresó se sintió más serena. El aire frío besaba la sangre de sus mejillas, los rayos del sol se mudaban en bronce y cobre al caer sobre sus cabellos, y sus ojos grises refulgían. Había una sonrisa en sus labios cuando se encontró con Audun Thorkelsson. Aunque poco mayor que ella, era alto y fuerte; experto en la labranza, parecía que también se le diera bien el juego de las armas. Sus rizos rubios resplandecían sobre un rostro que se ruborizaba y sonreía malicioso, por turnos, como el de una muchacha. Al ver a Freda, salió a su encuentro. —Te... estaba buscando..., Freda —dijo. —¿Por qué me buscabas? ¿Querías algo de mí? —preguntó ella. —No, bueno... sí, te buscaba... para hablar contigo —dijo, finalmente. Y 263 echó a andar a su lado, mientras de vez en cuando le echaba una mirada furtiva. —¿Qué vas a hacer? —se decidió a preguntarle a Freda. La serenidad la abandonó. Echó una mirada al cielo y otra al campo. Desde allí no se veía el mar, pero el viento aún era lo suficientemente fuerte para hacerle llegar su voz, incansable, inquieto. —No lo sé —dijo—. No tengo a nadie... —¡Oh, sí que lo tienes! —exclamó. Quiso seguir hablando y no pudo decir nada más, por mucho que se maldijese en su fuero interno. El invierno fue quedándose poco a poco exangüe bajo las alegres armas de la primavera. Freda aún seguía en casa de Thorkel. Nadie había hecho alusión alguna al hecho de su hijo ilegítimo, pues pensaban que lo extraño hubiera sido lo contrario, después de todo lo que había debido de pasar. Gracias a su fortaleza y a su estado de salud, y quizá porque aún aleteaba a su alrededor algo del hechizo de los elfos, casi no sufría náuseas, lo que le permitía trabajar duro e irse a dar largos paseos cuando no había nada que hacer, preferiblemente sola, aunque con mucha frecuencia Audun se ofreciese a acompañarla. Aasa estaba contenta de tener a alguien que la ayudase y una amiga con quien poder hablar, ya que no tenía hijas, y porque en su casa trabajaban pocas mujeres, al contrario de la de Orm. Pero ella era la que más hablaba, pues Freda se limitaba a contestar educadamente cuando le preguntaba... siempre, claro, que hubies e estado atendiendo a lo que decía la otra. Al principio, el paso del tiempo la había torturado, menos por el peso de su pecado y la pérdida de los suyos —eso podía soportarlo, pues la nueva vida que crecía en su interior la consolaba— que por la ausencia de Skafloc. Ni un signo, ni una palabra, ni una pista de él desde aquella última mirada cargada de desolación cerca de la tumba de Orm, en el amanecer invernal. Se había ido, acorralado por sus enemigos, hacia la más siniestra de las tierras, en busca de lo que acabaría trayéndole el infortunio. ¿Dónde estaría en aquel momento? ¿Seguiría vivo, o yacería rígido en el suelo, con los cuervos comiéndole esos ojos que habí an brillado al contemplarla? ¿Deseaba la muerte con la misma intensidad con que tiempo atrás había deseado a Freda? ¿ O había olvidado lo que le resultaba tan duro de recordar, perdiendo 264 su humanidad en el frío olvido de los besos de Leea...? No, eso no podía ser, jamás podría olvidar su amor mientras siguiese con vida. Pero, si estaba vivo..., ¿dónde estaba, y durante cuánto tiempo más podría seguir con vida? Una y otra vez soñaba con él, como si se encontrase vivo a su lado, con su corazón latiendo al unísono con el suyo, y la estrechase entre sus brazos, fuertes y al mismo tiempo tiernos. Le murmuraba cosas al oído, se reía, le recitaba un poema de amor, y el juego se convertía en amor... Pero todo acababa con el despertar de ella en la oscuridad y en el aire denso de la habitación cerrada. Freda había cambiado. Vivir entre seres humanos le parecía aburrido y miserable después de los encantos de la corte de los elfos y de los días locos, ¿por qué no?, y alegres, en que salían a cazar trolls en medio de las soledades invernales. Y como Thorkel sólo se había bautizado para que los ingleses se aviniesen a comerciar con él, ella tenía pocas ocasiones de ver a un sacerdote..., lo cual, conociendo el pecado que se albergaba en su corazón, la alegraba. Por otra parte, las iglesias le parecían tétricas, después de los bosques, las colinas y el rumoroso mar. Aún seguía amando a Dios —pues, ¿no era la tierra entera Su obra, mientras que una iglesia era, a lo más, obra de unos pocos?— pero no se decidía a invocar Su nombre con frecuencia. A veces no podía resistirse a levantarse de la cama en mitad de la noche, coger un caballo y cabalgar hacia el Norte. Con su Vista Encantada podía vislumbrar algo de Faerie... un gnomo vivaracho, un buho que no había nacido de huevo, un navío negro que bordeaba la costa. Pero aquellos a los que se atrevía a llamar huían de ella, por lo que nada podía saber de la marcha de la guerra. Sin embargo, aquel mundo vagamente vislumbrado, irreal y lunar, era el mundo de Skafloc. Y durante un tiempo, milagrosamente breve, también había sido el suyo. Siempre estaba haciendo algo para no pensar demasiado, y su cuerpo joven y sano florecía. Cuando las semanas se convirtieron en meses, sintió dentro de sí el mismo impulso que a los pájaros les hacía volver y a los árboles echar brotes tan hermosos como puños de niños recién nacidos. Se miró en las aguas de un estanque y vio que, dejando atrás la niñez, de repente se había 265 hecho mujer... La figura esbelta estaba más llena, el seno turgente y en aumento, la sangre corriéndole más asentada, justo bajo la piel. Si él pudiese verla en aquellos momentos... No, no, mejor que no venga. Pero le amo, le amo tanto... El invierno se esfumó entre lluvias y truenos. La primera nota de verde, de tonos suaves, se esparció sobre árboles y prados. Los pájaros regresaban a casa. Freda vio una pareja de cigüeñas, que le resultaban conocidas, volando en círculos, desconcertadas, alrededor de las tierras de Orm. Siempre habían anidado en el tejado de su casa. Lloró en silencio, como hacen las últimas lluvias de la primavera. Se sentía con el corazón vacío. No, no era eso, se estaba llenando de nuevo, pero no con la antigua alegría desenfrenada, sino con una felicidad más reposada. Su hijo crecía en su interior. En él —o en ella, daba lo mismo—, renacían todas las esperanzas perdidas. Se detuvo en el crepúsculo, debajo de las flores de un manzano, mientras los pétalos le caían encima a cada soplo de brisa. El invierno se había ido. Skafloc vivía en la primavera, en las nubes y en las sombras, en el alba y en el crepúsculo, y en la luna que cabalgaba alta, hablándole entre el viento y riendo con la brisa del mar. Y por más que volviese el invierno una y otra vez, en la grande e interminable danza circular de los años, supo que siempre llevaría el verano en el corazón, aquel año y todos los que le deparase el futuro. Thorkel estaba haciendo los preparativos para un viaje al continente, con el propósito de comerciar, y quizá para hacer alguna pequeña incursión a la antigua usanza vikinga, siempre que se le presentara la ocasión. Él y sus hijos llevaban planeando desde hacía mucho tiempo este viaje, pero a Audun se le habían quitado las ganas de viajar, por lo que finalmente le dijo a su padre: —No puedo ir. —¿Cómo? —exclamó Thorkel—. ¿Tú, que soñabas con el viaje más que todos nosotros, ahora quieres quedarte? —Bueno... Es que creo que alguien debería quedarse. —Tenemos buenos vigilantes. Audun apartó la mirada, incómodo. —También los tenía Orm. —Esta granja es mucho más pequeña que la de Orm, y por eso linda con 266 más gente. ¿Acaso has olvidado que todos nuestros vecinos decidieron tener guardias después de lo ocurrido? —los ojos perspicaces de Thorkel miraron fijamente a su hijo—. ¿Qué te ocurre, muchacho? Di la verdad. ¿Tienes miedo de luchar? —Bien sabes que no —contestó Audun, acalorándose—, y aunque no lleve sobre mí la mancha de la sangre soy capaz de matar a cualquiera que lo afirme. Pero es que ahora no quiero ir, y eso es todo. Thorkel asintió con la cabeza, lentamente. —Entonces es por Freda. Lo imaginaba. Pero ella no tiene parientes. —¿Y eso qué importa? Las tierras de su padre serán suyas. Yo mismo conseguiré un poco de dinero cuando me haga a la mar el próximo verano. —¿Y el hijo que espera de ese vagabundo, de quien nunca habla pero en quien no deja nunca de pensar? Audun miró al suelo, furioso. —¡Otra vez la misma historia! —murmuró—. No fue culpa suya. Ni del pequeño. Sería feliz si pudiera sentarle en mis rodillas. Ella necesita a alguien que la ayude..., sí, que la ayude a olvidar al hombre que la abandonó de manera tan inconsiderada. ¡Si diese con él, ya verías si tengo o no miedo de luchar! —De acuerdo... —dijo Thorkel, encogiéndose de hombros—. Podría obligarte a que vinieras conmigo, pero veo que realmente no lo deseas —y, haciendo una pausa, añadió—: Tienes razón, tanta tierra no debe quedar sin producir. Y ella será una buena esposa, capaz de traer al mundo muchos hijos robustos —sonrió, aunque podía leerse la turbación en sus ojos—. Entonces, cortéjala y conquístala, si es que puedes. Espero que tengas más suerte que Erlend. Después de la siembra, Thorkel se hizo a la mar con sus demás hijos y otros jóvenes. Y, como tenían pensado visitar bastantes tierras en las costas más lejanas del Mar del Norte, nadie esperaba su regreso hasta finales del otoño o comienzos del invierno. Audun, un tanto melancólico, siguió con la mirada el barco que se iba. Pero, al volverse y ver a Freda a su lado, se sintió bien pagado por todos sus desvelos. —¿De verdad que sólo te has quedado para ocuparte de la cosecha? — preguntó. —Supongo que tú intuirás la verdad —dijo con valentía, a pesar del 267 tremendo calor que sentía en las orejas. Freda apartó la mirada y no dijo nada. Los días fueron haciéndose más largos y la tierra pareció crecer en plenitud: la tibieza del viento, el grito de la lluvia, el cantar de los pájaros, el bramido de los ciervos, el resplandor plateado de los peces en los ríos, las flores y la claridad de las noches... y los pataleos, cada vez más frecuentes, del niño que Freda llevaba en su vientres. Y siempre, con una constancia igual de creciente, Audun estaba a su lado. Pero siempre, en un acceso de infelicidad, Freda le echaba de su lado. Y siempre, la expresión de pena que veía en su rostro le hacía sentir remordimientos. No dejaba de volver a la carga una y otra vez, con palabras poco afortunadas, a las que ella prestaba poca o ninguna atención. Escondía el rostro en la fragancia de los ramos de flores que él le entregaba y le veía sonreír a través de los pétalos, tímido como un perrillo... ¡Qué extraño, un joven tan grande y seguro que era más débil que ella! Si se casaban, sería él quien se entregase a ella, y no a la inversa. Pero no era Skafloc, sólo Audun. ¡Oh, amado inolvidable! El recuerdo de Skafloc se estaba convirtiendo en un verano a punto de terminarse y dejar paso a un nuevo año. Templaba su corazón sin producirle quemaduras, y la nostalgia que sentía por él era como un tranquilo lago de montaña sobre cuya superficie comienzan a bailar los rayos del sol. Sentir un dolor interminable era un signo de debilidad, indigno por otra parte de lo que habían compartido. Audun le gustaba. Sería un buen escudo para el hijo de Skafloc. Una tarde, cuando ella y Audun estaban en la playa, con las aguas que murmuraban a sus pies y el crepúsculo rojo y oro a su espalda, el joven la tomó de las manos y, con una firmeza aprendida desde hacía poco, dijo: —Freda, sabes que te amaba desde antes de que se te llevaran. En las últimas semanas he intentado conseguir tu mano de manera franca. Al principio no quisiste escucharme, y después no quisiste responderme. Ahora te pido una respuesta sincera y, si tal es tu voluntad, dejaré de molestarte. Freda, ¿quieres casarte conmigo? Ella le miró a los ojos, y su respuesta fue pausada y clara: 268 -Sí. 269 CAPITULO 25 finales del verano, el clima de las tierras septentrionales comenzó a tornarse lluvioso. Durante días y noches enteros el viento azotó las Colinas de los Elfos, cubriéndolas con un velo gris, desgarrado solamente por los relámpagos. Los trolls no se atrevían a dejar Elfheugh, pues las bandas de sus enemigos sin patria habían crecido en número, en recursos, en astucia y en el arte de hacer emboscadas. Bajos de moral y de energías, bebían, jugaban, discutían y volvían a beber. En aquella atmósfera cargada y temerosa, la menor palabra podía terminar en una pelea a muerte. Mientras tanto, las hembras de los elfos que se habían convertido en sus amantes se habían hecho tan perversas, que no pasaba un día sin que alguien perdiese la amistad, y frecuentemente la vida, por culpa de una de ellas. Por los oscuros corredores se oían cosas inquietantes. Se decía que Illrede..., ¡ay!, había sucumbido, y que su cabeza, enarbolando una mueca inmutable, descansaba en un barril de salmuera hasta poco antes de la batalla, momento en que se convertía en el estandarte del enemigo. Guro, el nuevo rey, era incapaz de mantener la cohesión entre las diferentes fuerzas de los 270 trolls, al contrario que el antiguo, y cada vez que lanzaba un contraataque era rechazado. Un demonio, montado en un caballo gigantesco, con una espada y un corazón salidos del Infierno, conducía a los elfos a la victoria sobre un enemigo que les doblaba en número. Wendland había caído, murmuraba alguien, y el terrible caudillo de los elfos había cercado y exterminado a los trolls de la guarnición, sin perdonar a ninguno. Se decía que podría haberse recorrido aquel campo de batalla de un extremo a otro sin dejar de pisar los cuerpos de los trolls. Las fortalezas de Noruega, Gotaland, Svealand y Dinamarca habían sido tomadas por asalto, comentaba otro: a pesar de ser castillos de los elfos, construidos con la minuciosidad propia de aquel pueblo para hacer imposible su asalto, habían caído con la misma rapidez con que se rindieran anteriormente a los trolls, y, con esa misma rapidez, sus guarniciones habían sido pasadas por la espada. En el golfo de Jutlandia, los elfos habían capturado una flota entera, que era la que estaban usando para hacer incursiones sobre la mismísima Trollheim. Los aliados y los mercenarios, de los pocos que habían sobrevivido, los estaban traicionando. Se decía que una compañía de shen se había rebelado en Gardharíki contra sus compañeros trolls, acabando con ellos. Una revuelta de los goblins había supuesto la caída de tres ciudades —o cinco, o una docena, ¡qué más daba!— de Trollheim. Los elfos se estaban adentrando en Valland, llevándose por delante a los trolls en retirada..., una retirada que se convirtió en desbandada y finalmente, con el mar a la espalda, y entre los cromlechs y menhires del Pueblo Antiguo, en una carnicería. En el castillo, todo eran consejas en lo concerniente a aquel espantoso caballo, que quitaba la vida a los guerreros con sus coces, y al arma que era mucho peor que él, pues traspasaba los metales como si fuesen simples telas, sin sufrir mella en su doble filo. Valgard, cada vez más enjuto, torvo y lacónico, a medida que pasaban los meses, intentó levantarles la moral. —Es cierto que los elfos se han reagrupado —dijo—, y que han adquirido cierto poder; pero, ¿acaso no habéis visto nunca a nadie debatirse antes de morir? Están gastando sus últimas energías, que no les valdrán de nada. 271 Lo que los trolls sabían muy bien era que cada vez llegaban menos navíos del otro lado del Canal o de los mares orientales, pero que las noticias que les contaban hablaban de derrota. Por eso Valgard tuvo que prohibirles que hablaran con sus tripulaciones. También sabían que los elfos proscritos, al mando de Flam y de Lanzadefuego, iban creciendo en osadía, al punto de que ni siquiera un ejército podía estar a salvo de sus flechas furtivas, ni de sus relampagueantes incursiones a caballo o de sus inopinados desembarcos; que los Sídh de Irlanda se estaban armando co mo si fueran a ir a la guerra; y, finalmente, que el cansancio, la deses peración y la envidia crecían entre sus propias filas, alimentadas con las insidias de las hembras de los elfos. Valgard, incansable, recorría el ca stillo de arriba abajo, desde las más altas torres, donde hacen su nido chovas y azores, hasta las más profundas mazmorras, escondrijo de la araña y el sapo. Maldiciendo continuamente, en ocasiones golpeaba a alguien, e incluso llegaba a matarlo si era presa de un acceso de rabia. Sentía que se ahogaba, encerrado en aquellos muros de niebla azulada por los proscritos del exterior, por las fuerzas crecientes del Rey de los Elfos y por la vida que había llevado hasta entonces. Y nada podía hacer para remediarlo. Carecía de sentido salir afuera, pues era como luchar contra las sombras: de los furtivos no quedaba ni rastro, pero, de repente, sin que nadie supiese de dónde había salido, una flecha se clavaba en la espalda de un troll, una cuerda se enroscaba alrededor del cuello de otro, un foso con agudísimas estacas en el fondo engullía a un caballo y a su jinete. Ni siquiera en la mesa se podía estar seguro, pues de vez en cuando moría uno de sus guerreros, con síntomas evidentes de envenenamiento, y ninguna de las melifluas sirvientas ofrecía pista alguna, dando a entender que podría haber sido obra de otro troll, impulsado por el rencor. Los elfos se mostraban astutos y pacientes, convirtiendo su debilidad en fortaleza mientras esperaban momentos mejores. Los trolls no conseguían comprenderlos, por lo que, poco a poco, comenzaron a temer a la especie que habían derrotado. Pero ahora eran los elfos quienes les infligían derrota tras derrota, pensó Valgard con tristeza. Y si en la medida de lo posible intentaba ocultar a sus guerreros aquel hecho, en cambio no conseguía impedir los cuchicheos y las 272 disputas. Así pues, no podía hacer otra cosa que sentarse en el sitial de Imric y beber copa tras copa de su ardiente vino. Leea le servía, y su copa jamás estaba vacía. Él se iba apagando en silencio, con los ojos en blanco, sin ver, hasta que se derrumbaba en el suelo. Sin embargo, cuando no estaba demasiado bebido y podía caminar, como aquella tarde, levantaba lentamente su poderoso cuerpo. Vacilando levemente, atravesaba la sala donde los jefes de los trolls yacían entre porquerías y vómitos, tomaba una antorcha y bajaba por una escalera tallada groseramente en la roca. Apoyándose en la fría y resbaladiza pared, llegaba hasta la puerta de una de las mazmorras y la abría. El blanco cuerpo de Imric, lleno de tiznones y de coágulos de sangre, relucía en la penumbra, por efecto de la luz de los carbones encendidos bajo sus pies. Los diablillos que cuidaban de aquel fuego lo mantenían continuamente encendido. Mientras, el Conde seguía colgado de los pulgares, sin comida ni bebida. Tenía el vientre hundido, la piel tensa sobre las arqueadas costillas, la lengua negra..., pero seguía siendo un elfo y aquello no era suficiente para acabar con él. Sus almendrados ojos, azules y nebulosos, se posaron fijamente en Valgard, con esa mirada impenetrable que tanto le desazonaba. El berserkr disfrazó su miedo con una mueca. —¿Adivinas el motivo de mi visita? —preguntó. Su voz era engolada, pero él estaba a punto de perder el equilibrio. Imric no contestó. Valgard le abofeteó en la boca, y el golpe sonó muy fuerte en aquel silencio y suscitó múltiples ecos. El diablillo se echó a un lado, con los ojos y las garras brillándole en la oscuridad. —Sí que lo adivinas, a no ser que el cerebro se te haya secado en el cráneo —dijo Valgard—. Ya he venido en otras ocasiones, y volveré más veces. Cogió un látigo de un gancho de la pared y peinó con sus dedos las largas tiras de cuero. Le relucían los ojos mientras se pasaba la lengua por los labios. —Te odio —susurró. Y acercó su rostro al de Imric—. Te odio por traerme al mundo. Te odio por robarme mi herencia. Te odio porque eres lo que 273 nunca podré ser... ni a pesar de que lo deseara, ¡elfo maldito! Te odio por tus artes malvadas. Te odio porque tu condenado hijo adoptivo no está al alcance de mi mano y tengo que contentarme... ¡contigo! Levantó el látigo. El diablillo salió corriendo hacia un rincón, lo más deprisa que pudo. Imric no emitió ningún sonido, ni hizo movimiento alguno. Cuando a Valgard se le cansó el brazo, usó el otro. Cuando también se le cansó, arrojó el látigo y se fue. Se le estaba pasando el efecto del vino, dejando en su lugar una sensación de frío y de dolor de cabeza. Cuando se acercó a una ventana escuchó el ruido de la lluvia. El verano, tan odiado por los trolls, y por el que tanto había estado suspirando a la espera de poder descansar en verdes valles y en las márgenes de risueños ríos, que había malgastado en fútiles salidas contra los elfos o permaneciendo encerrado dentro de aquellos muros, se estaba desvaneciendo. Pero lo mismo le pasaba a Trollheim. En Valland se había hecho el silencio. La última noticia que se tenía de ella hablaba de una tremenda batalla que había terminado en una matanza. ¿Es que nunca iba a dejar de llover? Sintió un escalofrío ante el hálito de humedad que entraba por la ventana. Un relámpago zigzagueó blancoazulado, y los huesos le temblequearon en espera del trueno. Subió las escaleras, con paso vacilante, y se dirigió a sus aposentos. El troll de guardia estaba tirado en el suelo, hecho un ovillo, completamente ebrio... ¡Ja! ¿Sería cierto que todos eran unos borrachos y que se asesinaban unos a otros? ¿Es que entre toda aquella horda, maloliente y alborotadora, no habría nadie a quien poder abrirle su corazón? Llegó al dormitorio y se detuvo, imponente y encorvado, en el umbral. Leea se levantó del lecho. Al menos ella, pensó, un tanto embotado de ideas, no se portaba como una cualquiera, al igual que las demás hembras del castillo, y le confortaba cuando no se encontraba bien consigo mismo. Relampagueó de nuevo. El trueno hizo estremecerse las paredes. El viento aulló, lanzando la lluvia contra la ventana. Los tapices se agitaron y las velas parpadearon en la corriente de aire frío. Valgard se sentó pesadamente a un lado de la cama. Leea le pasó los brazos alrededor del cuello, mientras le miraba fijamente con sus fríos ojos 274 lunares; la sonrisa, la sedosa suavidad y el olor que desprendía eran fascinantes, aunque desprovistos de calor. Le habló dulcemente mientras, fuera, seguía la tormenta: —¿Qué has hecho, mi señor? —Lo que ya sabes —musitó—, y me pregunto por qué no has intentado impedírmelo nunca. —El más fuerte hace lo que quiere con el más débil —deslizó una mano bajo la ropa de él, indicando a las claras lo que podría hacer con ella; pero Valgard no prestó atención. —Es cierto —dijo, apretando los dientes—. Esa ley es buena cuando quien la aplica tiene la fuerza. Pero ahora los trolls están cediendo, pues Skafloc (en todo lo que oigo aparece Skafloc) ha regresado con un arma que le da la victoria. Y me pregunto si esa ley sigue siendo la correcta. Se volvió para mirarla, con expresión sombría. —Pero lo que no consigo comprender —añadió— es la caída de las grandes fortalezas. Incluso un ejército elfo, victorioso a campo abierto, debiera haber perdido su filo al chocar contra sus murallas. Algunas de estas fortalezas siempre se mantuvieron en poder de los elfos a pesar de todo lo que enviamos contra ellas. A otras las conquistamos por el hambre; pero la mayoría se rindieron sin lucha, como ésta. Las hemos abastecido con una tropa numerosa y con todo tipo de suministros y armas... y las hemos perdido en cuanto una tropa del Rey de los Elfos se ha lanzado a su asalto —movió la desgreñada cabeza—. ¿Por qué? Abrazó sus delicados hombros con su s enormes manos, y continuó con aquella especie de monólogo: —Elfheugh no caerá. ¡No puede caer! La mantendré en mi poder hasta que los mismísimos dioses entren en liza contra mí. ¡Ja! Anhelo combatir..., pues sólo eso puede animarme y acabar con el aburrimiento de mi gente. Y los aplastaremos, ¿me oyes? Les haremos retroceder y entonces pondré la cabeza de Skafloc, clavada en una pica, en lo alto de estas murallas. —Sí, mi señor —murmuró Leea, sonriendo por lo bajo. —Soy fuerte —dijo Valgard, con voz ronca—. Cuando era un vikingo, les rompía los huesos a los hombres con las manos desnudas. Y no tengo miedo, pues soy astuto. He ganado muchas victorias, y todavía ganaré muchas más. 275 Dejó caer las manos encima de la s rodillas; los ojos se le habían ensombrecido. —Pero, ¿por qué? —murmuró—. ¿Por qué soy así? Porque así me hizo Imric. Me moldeó a imagen del hijo de Orm. Si estoy vivo no es por otra razón, y mi fuerza, mi apariencia y mi cerebro son los de... Skafloc. Se levantó, se quedó absorto, mirando al vacío como un ciego, y exclamó: —Pues, ¿qué soy yo, sino la sombra de Skafloc? El relámpago dio un brinco, llameante, fuego del infierno perdido en el cielo. El trueno le siguió. Arreció el viento. La lluvia caía a mares sobre los cristales de las ventanas. Una ráfaga de viento que venía de algún sitio apagó las velas. Valgard titubeó, avanzando a tientas en la oscuridad iluminada por los relámpagos de la tormenta. —¡Le mataré! —masculló—. Le sepultaré en lo más hondo del mar. Mataré a Imric, a Freda, y a ti, Leea..., a todo el que sepa que no estoy realmente vivo, que soy un fantasma encerrado dentro de una carne moldeada a imagen de un hombre vivo... Carne viva, mis manos están frías... Las ruedas del carro del trueno seguían rodando en los cielos. Valgard aulló. —¡Eso, sigue descargando tu martillo a tu alrededor! ¡Haz ruido mientras puedas! ¡Abrazaré con mis frías manos las columnas de la Sala de los Dioses y provocaré su hundimiento! ¡Pisotearé el mundo con mis pies! ¡Liberaré las tormentas, las tinieblas y los hielos del Norte, no dejaré tras de mí más que cenizas! Pues soy... ¡la Muerte! Alguien llamó desesperadamente a la puerta, pero apenas se oyó debido a la tormenta. Valgard dio un alarido bestial y abrió. Sus dedos buscaron el cuello del troll que se encontraba ante él, sucio y cansado. —Comenzaré contigo —dijo. Los labios se le llenaron de espumarajos. El mensajero intentó resistir, pero ni siquiera la fuerza de un troll era suficiente para liberarse de aquel abrazo. Cuando le dejó caer al suelo, muerto, la berserkirgangr abandonó a Valgard. Débil y tembloroso, se apoyó en una de las jambas de la puerta. 276 —¡Ha sido un desatino! —dijo, entrecortado. —Quizá vinieran otros más con él —dijo Leea. Salió al rellano y llamó—: ¡Eh, aquí! ¡El Conde desea hablar con los que acaban de llegar! Un segundo troll, igual de cansado y de sucio que el que le había precedido, con una cuchillada en la me jilla, que le sangraba, se dejó ver, aunque sin hacer ademán de subir por las escaleras. —Cuando salimos éramos quince —gimió—. Sólo quedamos Hru y yo. Los proscritos han estado acechándonos a lo largo del camino. —¿Qué mensaje me traéis? —inquirió Valgard. —Los elfos han desembarcado en Inglaterra, señor. Y también hemos oído que los Sídh de Irlanda, capitaneados por el mismísimo Lugh Brazo Largo, están en Escocia. Valgard asintió con su rostro demacrado. 277 CAPITULO 26 provechando la protección de una tormenta de otoño, Skafloc condujo a través del Canal a lo más selecto de los guerreros elfos. Él era el jefe de aquella hueste, pues el Rey de los Elfos se había quedado al mando de las restantes fuerzas que intentaban expulsar a los trolls de los dominios continentales de Alfheim. Reconquistar Inglaterra, le había advertido su rey, no sería tarea fácil; y si los trolls rechazaran su ataque, entonces Britania podría convertirse en el punto de reunión de sus fuerzas dispersas y, más tarde, en su principal base para el contraataque. Skafloc se encogió de hombros. —La victoria acompaña a mi espada —dijo. El Rey de los Elfos le miró fijamente antes de responderlo. —Ten cuidado con esa espada. Hasta ahora nos ha servido de ayuda; sin embargo, es traicionera. Antes o después, está destinada a volverse contra el que la empuña, quizá cuando más se la necesite. Skafloc prestó poca atención a estas palabras. No deseaba morir a cualquier precio —a fin de cuentas, todavía le quedaban por hacer muchas cosas en este mundo—, y, además, ¿quién sabía si no le faltarían aún muchos 278 años? Pasara lo que pasase, todavía no tenía intenciones de deshacerse de la espada. Le daba lo que nadie más podía darle. Cuando la empuñaba en la batalla no se convertía en un berserkr todo lo contrario: su conciencia de las cosas era más nítida, su ingenio más pr onto y más asentado. Pero se sentía como una llama que subiese hacia lo alto, como si abandonase su propio cuerpo y dejase de estar solo, siendo uno con lo que había hecho y con lo que iba a hacer. Así podía sentirse como un dios. Y así, aunque de manera diferente, se había sentido cuando estaba con Freda. Reunió navíos, guerreros y caballos en unas playas de Armórica, ocultas a la vista. Envió mensajes a los jefes de los elfos de Inglaterra diciéndoles que ya podían comenzar a reagrupar a su gente. Y de noche, cuando las tempestades cubrían con su manto el mundo septentrional, cruzó el Canal con su flota. La cellisca caía de un cielo que era negro excepto cuando parecía que los relámpagos lo partiesen en dos; entonces, las gotas que acababan de caer sobre la tierra, ya viniesen del cielo o de las hojas de los árboles, relucían por unos instantes con un intenso color blanco. En el mar, los truenos avanzaban y rugían a través del clamoroso y embravecido aire. Las olas hervían, blancas de la espuma y del rocío marinos, precipitándose hacia el Oeste y llegando muy lejos, entre gruñidos, a cualquier playa. Ni siquiera los elfos se atrevieron a izar las velas, por lo que hicieron su recorrido a fuerza de remo. La lluvia y el mar salpicaban sus rostros y manchaban sus vestiduras. Fuegos azules reptaban sobre los remos y las oscilantes cabezas de dragón de las proas. A través de la tiniebla, surgió Inglaterra. Los elfos remaron hasta que les pareció que los músculos les iban a estallar. La resaca golpeaba entre gritos la playa y los arrecifes. El viento zarandeó los navíos, intentando que se despedazaran contra las rocas o que chocaran entre sí. Skafloc enseñó los dientes y dijo, para que todos le escucharan: Gélidos y lujuriosos son las besos que las hijas de Ran, las de alabastrinos brazos, nos otorgan, elfos, mientras gritan y se ríen, 279 agitando así sus trenzas, blancas y llenas de sal, y muestran sus firmes pechos. Desde la proa de su navío largo, que seguía balanceándose por las olas, vio el promontorio hacia el que se dirigían; y, por un momento, la nostalgia estuvo a punto de vencerle. Para conjurar su pena, declamó: De vuelta a casa, el ululante viento de granizo engallado me ha traído —¡cuán ardua fue, en verdad, la travesía!— muy cerca de la adorada Inglaterra. Ella vive detrás de aquella playa: ¿Volveré, acaso, a verla alguna vez? ¡Ay de mí, aquella rubia mujer nunca abandonará mis pensamientos. Pero luego tuvo que dedicar toda su atención a la maniobra para doblar el cabo. Cuando todos los navíos de la flota hubieron ejecutado aquella operación, llegaron a la rada donde debían desembarcar. Una pequeña flotilla vigiló la operación mientras los demás navíos, uno tras otro, siguiendo un orden, embarrancaban en la arena y eran arrastrados posteriormente a tierra firme y amarrados. A continuación, las tripulaciones se aprestaron a formar. Uno de los capitanes le hizo una pregunta a Skafloc: —No nos has dicho quién tiene que quedarse de guardia para vigilar las naves. —Nadie —contesto—. Necesitamos a todos los guerreros en las tierras del interior. —¿Cómo? ¡Los trolls podrían llegar hasta aquí y quemar la flota entera, y entonces no tendríamos posibilidad alguna de retirarnos! Skafloc miró hacia la playa, iluminada por los relámpagos. —Para mí sí que no hay retirada —d ijo—. No abandonaré Inglaterra, ni 280 vivo ni muerto, hasta que los trolls sean expulsados de ella. Los elfos le miraron con algo que no era el temor reverencial que inspiraba su fama de guerrero. Ni siquiera parecía un mortal, alto y cubierto de hierro, con la demoníaca espada a la cintura. En el azul líquido de sus ojos chispeaban unos destellos verdosos que recordaban los de la mirada de un lobo. Los elfos pensaron que estaba condenado. Se montó en su caballo Jötun. Su orden resonó en el viento: —Tocad los lures. ¡Esta noche cabalgaremos al encuentro de nuestra presa! El ejército se puso en marcha. Un tercio estaba formado por tropas de a caballo. Los demás esperaban poder conseguir pronto cabalgadura. Cuando los elfos tenían que luchar en tierra, preferían hacerlo a caballo, como los franceses y los normandos, y no como los ingleses o los daneses. La lluvia caía sobre ellos, las hojas muertas crujían bajo sus pies, los relámpagos crepitaban y el frío viento se abría paso con el primer hálito del nuevo invierno. Poco después escucharon el remoto y broncíneo sonido de los cuernos de batalla de los trolls. Los elfos empuñaron las armas y sonrieron a la luz de los relámpagos. Asieron los escudos, que rezumaban lluvia, y los lures sonaron de nuevo. Skafloc cabalgaba en la punta de la formación en cuña. En aquel momento no sentía ninguna alegría. El pensamiento de una nueva carnicería le hacía sentir náuseas y desánimo. Y sin embargo sabía que pensaría de otra manera cuando desenvainase su espada, por lo que apenas podía esperar a dar la señal de comenzar el combate. Entonces aparecieron los trolls, una masa oscura sobre las grandes colinas onduladas. Debían de haber sentido la presencia de los recién llegados y despachado fuerzas de alguno de los castillos próximos, posiblemente del de Alfarhoi. Su número no era despreciable, aunque bastante inferior al de los elfos. La mitad iba a caballo, y Skafloc oyó a alguien, cerca de él, comentar alegremente: —Aquí es donde voy a procurarme cuatro patas para ir más cómodo. El jefe que estaba a su derecha se mostró menos animado. —Los sobrepasamos en número —dijo—, pero no lo suficiente para derrotarlos. No sería la primera vez que unos bravos guerreros hacen morder el 281 polvo a huestes más numerosas. —No tengo miedo de que vayan a derrotarnos —replicó Skafloc—; sin embargo, sería una desgracia que matasen a muchos de los nuestros, porque entonces el siguiente asalto podría ser el último —su rostro se volvió amenazador—. ¡Maldición! ¿Dónde está el grueso de los elfos de Inglaterra? Ya deberíamos haber establecido contacto con ellos... A no ser que nuestros mensajeros hayan sido capturados por el camino. Los cuernos de los trolls dieron la señal de ataque. Skafloc desenvainó su espada y la hizo girar alrededor de su cabeza. Los relámpagos arrancaron de su hoja un brillo cegador, que despedía un fuego azulado. —¡Adelante! —gritó, y espoleó su caballo. La gloria del poder brotó en su interior. Lanzas y flechas volaron sobre sus cabezas, sin que la tormenta permitiese verlas u oírlas. El viento lacerante impedía hacer puntería, por lo que el choque de las armas no tardó en comenzar. Skafloc se echó hacia delante, apoyándose en el estribo y comenzó a herir a sus enemigos. Un troll le golpeó, pero su espada le cortó los brazos. Otro se le acercó, con el hacha en vilo. La hoja gritó y le alcanzó en el cuello. Un piquero lanzó su arma; la punta rebotó en el escudo de Skafloc, quien partió en dos su astil, mientras su cabalgadura pisoteaba al troll, incrustándole en el fango. ¡Hacha y espada! ¡Estruendo y raudal de estrellas! ¡Metal hendido, carne abierta, guerreros cayendo al suelo, diabólica danza de los relámpagos! Skafloc cabalgaba entre el estruendo de las armas, golpeando una y otra vez. El impacto de sus mandobles repercutía en su cota de malla y en sus propios huesos, de suerte que sus hombros recibían de rebote cada golpe que daba. Las armas le rodeaban y eran detenidas por el escudo o desviadas por la espada. El grito de ave de presa de su hoja se podía escuchar a través del viento y del trueno. Nadie podía hacerle frente. Condujo a sus guerreros a través de las líneas de los trolls y se volvió para cubrir su retaguardia. Sin embargo, los trolls seguían luchando obstinadamente. Formaron varias bolsas y mantuvieron sus posiciones, lanzándoles una lluvia de flechas. Los caballos que cargaban sobre ellos acababan en la empalizada de lanzas. Los elfos caían bajo las hachas y las mazas. ¿Dónde estaban los refuerzos? 282 ¿Iban a llegar alguna vez? Como respondiendo a aquella muda pregunta, se oyó un cuerno... y otro, y un tercero... y un grito de guerra , una granizada de proyectiles... ¡y una avalancha de cientos de elfos cubiertos de harapos se desató en la noche! —¡Viva Alfheim! Lanzadefuego galopaba en la vanguardia. La sangre goteaba de su lanza lo mismo que la lluvia de su yelmo. La alegría brillaba en su rostro. A su lado, con el hacha mellada por mil batallas, iba Flam de las Orcadas. También acudían a la batalla otros jefes elfos, como si hubiesen salido de la tierra para vengarse de quienes los habían expoliado. A partir de entonces no resultó difícil acabar con los enemigos, y al poco tiempo los cadáveres eran los únicos ocupantes del terreno. Skafloc, Lanzadefuego, Flam y el resto de los comandantes celebraron consejo sin bajar de sus cabalgaduras. —Vinimos lo más deprisa que pudimos —dijo Lanzadefuego—. Tuvimos que detenernos en Runehill para ocupar la fortaleza, ya que nuestras amigas nos habían abierto sus puertas y dentro sólo quedaban unos pocos trolls. ¡Qué bien se comportaron las valientes! Espero que, al ver que casi toda la guarnición se ha quedado en el campo de batalla, hayan puesto Alfarhói a punto para nosotros. —Bien —asintió Skafloc. Acabada la batalla y envainada ya la espada, volvía a acusar el cansancio. La tormenta estaba muriendo sobre sus cabezas, entre gruñidos y centelleos, el viento había decaído y la lluvia lavaba enérgicamente un cielo resplandeciente. —Los Sídh de Erin también están combatiendo —dijo Flam—. Lugh ha desembarcado en Escocia, y Manannán está expulsando a los trolls de las islas y aguas más al Norte. —¡Ah!... ¡Ha mantenido su palabra! —Skafloc enarboló una cálida sonrisa—. Manannán es un verdadero amigo. Y el único dios de quien puedo fiarme. —Pero sólo porque es un semidiós que ha perdido la mayor parte de sus poderes, poniéndose al nivel de Faerie —murmuró Lanzadefuego—. No es prudente tener tratos con dioses... o gigantes. 283 —Bueno, mejor será que nos movamos y así lleguemos antes del amanecer —dijo Flam—. Hoy podremos dormir en Alfarhói. ¡Oh, cuánto hace que no duermo en uno de nuestros castillos al lado de una de nuestras damas! Los labios de Skafloc se contrajeron, pero se mantuvo en silencio. Aunque el otoño de aquel año hubiese llegado con tanta animosidad, no tardó en sosegarse y seguir así durante un período insólitamente largo. Era como si la tierra diese la bienvenida a sus enamorados de antaño. Algunos yacían con ella para siempre, y los arces los recordaban en el color de sus hojas. Otros árboles se estremecían con mil colores de oro y bronce, sobre colinas brumosas que se levantaban bajo un cielo de ensueño. Las ardillas se movían por todas partes, recogiendo su pequeña cosecha; los ciervos movían los cuernos y bramaban orgullosos; el lejano grito de los gansos que se dirigían al Sur bajaba hacia el suelo, lo mismo que las hojas. De noche, incontables, las estrellas brillaban como nunca, tanto que parecía que pudiera cogérselas con la mano y arrancarlas de la cristalina negrura en que estaban prendidas. Y la fortuna de los elfos seguía siendo buena. Al Norte y al Sur, al Este y al Oeste, sus enemigos eran rechazados con pérdidas insignificantes para ellos. Pues no sólo tenían aliados temibles, sino que, como estaban mejor equipados y podían disponer de los refuerzos que les llegaban semana tras semana desde que el Rey de los Elfos hubo comenzado a limpiar el continente, estaban recobrando sus cantillos con gran fa cilidad. Los trolls, por su parte, se habían quedado completamente aislados desde que Manannán mantenía con mano fuerte el bloqueo. Hacia el fin de la estación, los elfos comenzaban a lamentarse de lo difícil que resultaba encontrar a alguien con quien luchar. Pero aquello no alegraba a Skafloc, pues sabía a qué era debido. En cuanto Valgard comprendió que sus tropas irían cayendo poco a poco en el campo de batalla, comenzó a llevarlas a Elfheugh lo más deprisa que pudo; algunos grupos permanecieron donde estaban, para impedir que los elfos pudiesen atacar contingentes más nutridos. Pero Skafloc no ponía en duda que sería capaz de vencer aquella última resistencia, por alto que fuese el precio que pagar. No es que le preocupase en exceso, sino que ofendía su sentido del perfeccionismo, por lo que no hacía más que sopesar distintos planes para terminar aquel asunto cuanto antes. Pero sus pensamientos no iban tan 284 deprisa como antaño, debido a la segunda cuestión que le roía por dentro, y cada vez más desde que la paz estaba al alcance de la mano. Las batallas campales dieron paso a escaramuzas, a encuentros de poca importancia, a una marcha sin incidentes. Durante días, que se convirtieron en semanas, su espada durmió en su vaina. Entonces se le avivaron los recuerdos. En cierta manera, había esmerado que la herida de lo más profundo de su ser se le hubiese cerrado con el tiempo. Pero descubrió que no había sido así. Y ya no fue capaz de decir qué le desconsolaba más: si sus largos insomnios o sus sueños. En aquella tesitura en que se encontraba, el otoño se fue convirtiendo en invierno. Pero éste se acabó la noche en que, estando en el Danelaw, Lanzadefuego —a quien Skafloc no había contado más que a los demás, dejándole creer que se había cansado de su compañera humana, o que la había llevado a las tierras de los hombres para su seguridad— fue a su encuentro para decirle: —Quizá te interese saber que, cuando cabalgaba en el crepúsculo por una granja que no está muy lejos de aquí, vi a una joven que muy bien podría ser Freda, la hija de Orm. Estaba embarazada, y me dio la impresión de que no sólo soportaba el peso del niño, sino el de una gran pena. Aquella tarde, Skafloc salió a pasear solo. El negro garañón iba al paso... no más deprisa que un corcel mortal. Las hojas caídas crujían bajo sus cascos, después de bailar ante él en el frío viento. Las que aún colgaban de las ramas de los árboles todavía estaban brillantes, como si quisieran instar al jinete a que se hiciese una corona con ellas. El crepúsculo descendió cargado de bruma, mientras atravesaba bosques que a su jinete le resultaban conocidos. Skafloc no acusaba el peso del yelmo, de la loriga y de la espada de empuñadura en forma de dragón. Sus cabellos se movían, largos y sueltos, bajo el bonete que los cubría. Su rostro, de rasgos muy marcados y de piel curtida por las inclemencias del tiempo, era impasible. Sin embargo, su corazón latía y latía, y la sangre le zumbaba en los oídos, las manos le sudaban y tenía la boca seca. La penumbra se convirtió en una oscuridad llena de sonidos. Vadeó un 285 arroyuelo de aguas susurrantes y frías como el hielo, y con su Vista Encantada distinguió las hojas muertas que flotaban hacia el mar como oscuras barquichuelas. Oyó el ulular de un buho y el crujido de unos árboles... pero, sobre todo, el silencio no exento de melodía en que vivía su corazón. ¡Oh, Freda, Freda! ¿De veras estás tan cerca? Muchas estrellas habían comenzado ya su parpadeo cuando Skafloc llegó a la granja de Thorkel Erlendsson. Silbó una fórmula que obligó a los perros a salir corriendo sin ladrar y sin hacer ruido al pisar en el suelo. La granja estaba a oscuras, salvo el débil resplandor de un fuego que se filtraba por la rendija inferior de la puerta principal de la casa. Desmontó. Le temblaban las rodillas. Tuvo que hacer un esfuerzo de voluntad para llegar a la puerta. Habían corrido el cerrojo, lo que le obligó a detenerse para preparar el hechizo que le abriría la puerta. Como Thorkel era un terrateniente y no un jefe guerrero, el salón de su casa no era grande; nadie dormía en él, excepto cuando había huéspedes. Freda, aún despierta, se hallaba sentada cerca del fuego del hogar, como era su costumbre. Audun entró en la sala, desde la puerta trasera. Los ojos le brillaban más que la llaman. —No puedo dormir —dijo—. Los demás duermen... ¡y cómo!... Así que me he vestido y me he venido hasta aquí, con la esperanza de poder hablar sin que los demás nos estén mirando. Se sentó en el banco, muy cerca de ella. La luz se reflejaba con colores rojizos en los cabellos de Freda. No los llevaba recogidos en una redecilla a la manera de una esposa, sino en una trenza. —Casi no puedo creer en mi buena fortuna —dijo Audun—. Mi padre regresará un día de éstos, y entonces nos casaremos. Freda sonrió. —Déjame, al menos, que antes tenga a mi pequeño y que me restablezca un poco —replicó—. Creo que puede venir en cualquier momento —y, con expresión seria, preguntó pausad amente—: ¿No tendrás nada contra mí... o contra él? —¿Por qué iba a tenerlo? —dijo Audun—. ¿Cuántas veces tengo que decírtelo? Es tu hijo. Eso es suficiente para mí. Será como si fuese mío. Y la tomó entre sus brazos. 286 El cerrojo se desplazó hacia un lado. La puerta se abrió y el viento de la noche entró en la estancia. Freda distinguió la alta figura recortándose sobre la oscuridad. No podía hablar. Se levantó y retrocedió, medio encogida, hasta que la pared se lo impidió. —Freda —dijo Skafloc, como con un graznido, sobreponiéndose a los leves silbidos del fuego y a su crepitar. Fue como si una banda de hierro rodease fuertemente el pecho de Freda, quien levantó los brazos, que cayeron inertes a sus costados, con las manos vueltas hacia dentro. Como un sonámbulo, Skafloc se acercó a Freda. Y ella comenzó a andar hacia él, primero dio un paso y luego otro. —¡Detente! —la voz de Audun rompió el silencio. Ante él se extendía, vacilante, la enorme sombra. Tomó una lanza que descansaba en un rincón y se interpuso entre Skafloc y Freda. —¡Detente...! ¡Te digo... que te detengas! —balbució—. ¿Quién eres? ¿Qué quieres? Skafloc trazó un signo en el aire y musitó un ensalmo. Los que estuviesen en la parte posterior de la casa no se despertarían mientras él se hallase dentro. Lo había hecho sin pensar, como si espantara una mosca. —Freda —insistió. —¿Quién eres? —gritó Audun, con voz cascada—. ¿Qué quieres? —al ver cómo se miraban los dos, de un modo que no comprendía, lanzó un gemido de dolor. Skafloc miró por encima del hombro del joven, casi sin fijarse en él. —Freda —dijo—. Mi amada, mi vida. Ven conmigo. Ella negó rotundamente con la cabeza, aunque, al mismo tiempo, abrió los brazos. —Me fui a Jötunheim y volví para guerrear, pensando que el tiempo y las espadas podrían hacer que te olvidara —dijo Skafloc, dolorido—. Pero no sirvió de nada. No mientras lleve conmigo esta portadora de muerte, que no obedece a leyes ni a dioses, ni a nada de lo que se encuentra en los Nueve Mundos. ¿Pero qué nos importan a ti y a mí? Ven conmigo, Freda. Ella inclinó la cabeza, con el rostro desencajado por la lucha que tenía lugar en su interior. Sollozó en silencio, mientras sus costillas parecían a punto de quebrarse y los ojos se le llenaban de lágrimas. 287 —¡La estás haciendo sufrir! —gritó Audun. Y lanzó un golpe con su lanza, que, por lo inesperado, resbaló sobre la parte de la loriga que cubría el pecho de Skafloc y salió desviada hacia arriba, hiriéndole en una de las mejillas. El Señor de los Elfos resopló como un lince y se llevó la mano a la espada. Audun repitió el golpe. Skafloc se echó a un lado, inhumanamente rápido. La espada silbó, s-s-s-s-s, mientras abandonaba su vaina, y cortó el astil de la lanzan. —¡Apártate de nuestro camino! —gritó Skafloc, entrecortándosele las palabras. —¡No mientras viva mi esposa! —Audun estaba fuera de sí de cólera y de miedo (no de miedo a la muerte sino a lo que había visto en los ojos de Freda). Se echó a llorar. Desenvainó el puñal e intentó herir a Skafloc en el cuello. La espada llameó en lo alto, silbó al caer y cantó en huesos y cerebro. Audun se derrumbó en el suelo y chocó contra una pared, quedando apoyado en ella, horriblemente inerte. Skafloc, inmóvil, miró fijamente la ensangrentada hoja que tenía en la mano. —No quise hacerlo —dijo, entre susurros—. Sólo intentaba golpearle de plano. Olvidé que esta cosa tiene que beber cada vez que es desenvainada... Miró a Freda, quien le miraba boquiabierta, temblorosa, como si fuese a gritar. —¡No quise hacerlo! —gritó—. Pero, ¿qué importa? ¡Ven conmigo! Ella intentó decir algo. Al final lo consiguió, aunque con voz medio estrangulada: —Vete. Ahora mismo. Y no vuelvas más. —Pero... —Skafloc avanzó hacia ella, envarado. Freda se detuvo y tomó el puñal de Audun, que relampagueó en su mano. —Vete —dijo—. Acércate más y te lo clavo. —Me gustaría que lo hicieras —replicó. Se detuvo, tambaleándose un poco. La sangre le corría por la mejilla herida y goteaba en el suelo. —O me mato yo, si es necesario —le dijo Freda—. Tócame si te atreves, criminal, pagano, que te gustaría yacer con tu propia hermana, como un animal 288 o un elfo; tócame y me clavaré este puñal en el corazón. Dios olvidará el pecado más leve si consigo evitar el más grave. La rabia hizo presa en Skafloc. —¡Eso, llama a tu dios, salmodia tus oraciones! —dijo—. ¿Es eso todo lo que sabes hacer? Estabas dispuesta a ve nderte por comida y un tejado, lo que no es sino una forma de prostitución, por mucho que la bendijeran todos tus sacerdotes..., después de lo que me prometiste antaño —alzó la espada—. Preferiría ver muerto a mi hijo antes de nacer, que en manos de ese dios tuyo. Freda permaneció de pie, ante él. —Hiere si quieres —dijo, desafian te—. Hombres jóvenes, mujeres y niños a punto de nacer... ¿son esos todos tus enemigos? Skafloc bajó la gran hoja y, de repe nte, sin limpiarla, la devolvió a su funda, con un sonido metálico. Entonces la furia le abandonó, dando paso a la debilidad y a la angustia. Se encogió de hombros. —Así que reniegas de mí... —dijo pausadamente, negando con la cabeza—. La espada está maldita. No era yo quien decía esas locuras ni quien ha matado a ese pobre muchacho. Te amo, Freda, te amo tanto, que el mundo resplandece cuando estás cerca y se oscu rece cuando te vas. Entonces... soy como un mendigo... Por eso te pido que vuelvas. —No—repitió ella, entre sollozos—. ¡Déjame! ¡Vete! —gritó—: ¡No quiero volver a verte! ¡Vete! Él se volvió hacia la puerta. Le temblaban los labios. —En una ocasión te pedí un beso de despedida —dijo con voz queda—, y no quisiste dármelo. ¿Querrás ahora? Freda se acercó a la figura inerte de Audun, se arrodilló a su lado y rozó sus labios con los suyos. —Cariño mío, cariño mío —gimió, mientras acariciaba el ensangrentado cabello y cerraba los ojos sin vida—. Que Dios te lleve hacia Él, Audun mío. —Entonces, adiós —dijo Skafloc—. Quizá te vuelva a pedir un beso otra vez, pero esa vez será la última. No creo que me quede mucho tiempo de vida, ni me importa. Pero te amo. Y se fue, cerrando la puerta tras sí, en el viento de la noche, y llevándose sus hechizos. La gente de la granja fue despertada por los ladridos de los perros y el ruido de cascos de caballo que parecían dirigirse hacia los confines 289 del mundo. Cuando llegaron a la habitación que estaba tras la entrada principal y vieron lo ocurrido, Freda les dijo que un proscrito había intentado secuestrarla. En la oscuridad que precedía al amanecer, se cumplió su destino. El niño que llegaba era grande y estrecho de caderas. Aunque Freda se quejó bien poco, sus penas fueron largas y dolorosas. Con un criminal rondando cerca, no podían salir a buscar un sacerdote con la debida urgencia. Las mujeres ayudaron a Freda lo mejor que pudieron; pero Aasa seguía con el ceño fruncido. —Primero Erlend y ahora Audun —se decía en voz baja—. La hija de Orm no trae buena suerte. Cuando se hizo de día, los hombres salieron en busca del criminal. No encontraron nada, y a la puesta del sol regresaron a sus casas, diciendo que al día siguiente uno o dos de ellos podrían ir a la iglesia, ya que había desaparecido el peligro. Mientras tanto, Freda ya había dado a luz un niño sin tacha, que gritaba a pleno pulmón, except o cuando bebía, hambriento, de su seno. Poco antes del atardecer, Freda, temblorosa y exhausta, yacía en la habitación que le habían asignado, con su hijo entre los brazos. Sonrió a la criatura. —Eres un niño precioso —dijo, casi cantando; todavía no había regresado de aquella tierra de sombras donde últimamente estuviera, y nada le parecía del todo real, excepto lo que apretaba contra su seno—. Eres pelirrojo, pecoso y hermoso. Así debía de ser tu padre. Se le saltaron las lágrimas, dulces como el agua de una fuente en medio del bosque, pero la boca le sabía a sal. —Le amo —dijo en un susurro—. Que Dios me perdone, siempre le amaré. Tú eres lo único que queda de lo que hubo entre nosotros. Poco antes de abismarse en la negrura, el sol ardió con el color de la sangre. Una luna gibosa parecía volar a través de nubes empujadas por un viento cortante. Aquella noche habría tormenta; el largo otoño que diera la bienvenida a los elfos ya había pasado y el invierno se acercaba al galope. La granja estaba ovillada bajo el cielo. A su alrededor, los árboles gemían. El atronar del mar era perfectamente audible. A medida que avanzaba la noche, el viento se convirtió en un vendaval, 290 empujando ante sí montones de hojas muertas. De vez en cuando, el granizo tamborileaba en el tejado, como si algún espíritu nocturno bailase un zapateado en la viga maestra. Freda estaba despierta. Cerca de la medianoche, le pareció escuchar la lejana llamada de un cuerno. Al oírlo, algo recorrió su cuerpo. El recién nacido lloró y ella lo atrajo hacia sí. El cuerno volvió a sonar, más fuerte, más cerca, a través del fragor del viento y del insistente choque de las ol as. Freda oyó ladridos, pero diferentes a los usuales. Un estruendo de cascos resonó a través de la noche, llenando el cielo con el estrépito de su galopada y haciendo temblar el suelo. La Cabalgata de Asgard, la Caza Salvaje... Freda se quedó inmóvil, cubierta por un sudario de pánico. ¿Por qué nadie de la casa parecía oír aquel ruido? Su hijo lloraba encima de su pecho. El viento azotaba los postigos de la ventana. Entonces oyó un tremendo ruido de cascos de caballo en el patio. El cuerno volvió a sonar de nuevo, como si fuese a tirar abajo la casa. El clamor de los perros inundó las paredes, como una música de hierro y bronce. En la habitación de Freda había una puerta que daba al exterior. Alguien estaba llamando en ella. El cerrojo se desplazó hacia atrás y la puerta se abrió de par en par. El viento recorrió toda la habitación, haciendo ondear el manto de quien acababa de entrar. Aunque no ardía ninguna luz, pudo verle. Debía de estar inclinado sobre ella bajo las vigas. La punta de su lanza relucía igual que su único ojo. Barba y cabellos del mismo color que un lobo gris parecían caer de debajo del sombrero de ala ancha que mantenía su rostro entre tinieblas. Habló con la voz del viento y el mar, y también del profundo cielo: —Freda, hija de Orm, he venido a recoger lo que juraste que me darías. —Señor... —ella intentó protegerse. Sólo tenía una manta por escudo. Si Skafloc estuviera...—. Señor, mi ceñidor está en ese arcón. Odín rió en la noches. —¿Piensas que yo quería un somnífero? No, lo que me tenías que dar era lo que estaba detrás del ceñidor, o sea, el infante que ya llevabas en tu seno. 291 —¡No! —apenas oyó su tremendo grito, llevó a la criatura, que había comenzado a llorar, a su espalda—. ¡No, no, no! —se incorporó en la cama y cogió el crucifijo que estaba colgado encima de su cabeza—. ¡En el nombre de Dios, de Cristo, te ordeno que desaparezcas! —Con eso no me asustas —dijo Odín—, porque al comprometerte conmigo renegaste de su ayuda. ¡Ahora dame el niño! La empujó suavemente con uno de sus brazos y cogió al recién nacido con el otro. Freda salió, arrastrándose, del lecho y se echó a sus pies. —¿Para qué lo quieres? —preguntó, entre gemidos—. ¿Qué vas a hacer con él? El Vagabundo respondió desde una altura inconmensurable: —Su destino es grande y terrible. La partida entre los Ases, los Jótuns y los nuevos dioses no ha terminado. Aún brilla Tyrfing en el ajedrez del mundo. Thor la rompió por miedo a que fuese a herir las raíces de Yggdrasil; pero yo la recogí más tarde y se la entregué a Skafloc, porque Bolverk, el único que era capaz de forjarla de nuevo, habría desestimado la petición de un As o de un elfo. La espada era necesaria para rechazar a los trolls —a quienes Utgard- Loki estuvo ayudando en secreto—, para que Alfheim no fuese gobernada por un pueblo que era amigo de los enemigos de los dioses. Pero Skafloc no podrá guardar inactiva durante mucho tiempo aquella espada, porque lo que se encuentra encerrado en ella le inducirá a aniquilar a los trolls; y eso es precisamente lo que los Jótuns no pueden permitir, por lo que efectuarán un movimiento, y entonces los dioses tendremos que salir a su encuentro, y el fin del mundo estará al alcance de la mano. Skafloc debe sucumbir, y este niño, nacido gracias a todo lo que urdí, habrá de empuñar algún día la espada y conducirla a la consumación de su destino. —¿Skafloc debe morir? —Freda dio un golpe en el suelo—. ¿También él? ¡Oh, no, oh, no! —¿Por qué habría de seguir viviendo? —preguntó Odín, con frialdad—. Si fueses a Elfheugh, a su lado, adonde ahora se dirige, y volvieses a unir lo que se quebró en el túmulo, él estaría encantado de deponer las armas. De otro modo, se halla condenado. La espada le matará. Con un ondear de su manto, el Cazador Salvaje desapareció. Su cuerno sonó, sus perros ladraron y aullaron, el sonido de los cascos se alejó, y todo 292 pareció perderse en la noche. Después sólo quedó el hueco silbido del viento, el tumulto de las olas y el llanto de Freda. 293 CAPITULO 27 algard estaba en la estancia superior de la torre más alta de Elfheugh y veía cómo se iban reuniendo las fuerzas del enemigo. Tenía los brazos cruzados, el cuerpo inmóvil como una roca, y el rostro como esculpido en piedra. Nada en él parecía vivo, excepto sus ojos. A su espalda se encontraban los otros jefes del castillo y de los ejércitos en fuga que se habían refugiado en aquel último y poderosísimo bastión. Estaban cansados y abatidos, heridos la mayor parte, y todos ellos miraban temerosos las huestes de Alfheim. A la derecha de Valgard, Leea resplandecía bajo la luz de los rayos que la luna decaída arrojaba a través de las troneras, y que también dejaban entrar la brisa que agitaba su vestido de seda de araña y enmarañaba sus cabellos. En sus labios enarbolaba un asomo de sonrisa y sus ojos resplandecían con el azul apagado del crepúsculo. Bajo los muros de Elfheugh, las empinadas pendientes se veían blanquecinas por el rocío y la claridad lunar. Por ellas avanzaba el ejército de los elfos. Las armas entrechocaban, las cotas de malla tintineaban, los lures mugían, los caballos suscitaban sonidos de campanas al pisar la tierra helada, 294 los escudos devolvían los rayos lunares, y las hachas y las puntas de las lanzas brillaban frías bajo las estrel las. Los elfos estaban montando el campamento; sus tiendas ceñían el castillo y sus fuegos florecían rojizos. Por todas partes se movían las umbrosas formas de los guerreros. Una especie de trueno sacudió las colinas. Apareció un carro de guerra, tan brillante como el sol. Las llamas aleteaban por las espadas de los cubos de sus ruedas. Cuatro enormes caballos blancos tiraban de él, arqueando sus cabezas de sedosas crines y resoplando como vientos tempestuosos. El que estaba de pie, armado de lanza, detrás del auriga, superaba a los demás en estatura. Sus cabellos negros enmarcaban un rostro majestuoso y torvo. Sus ojos ardían con luz propia. Un troll dijo, inquieto: —Ése es Lugh Brazo Largo. Condujo a los Tuatha Dé Danann contra nosotros. Nos ha segado como si fuésemos grano. Los cuervos de Escocia oscurecían la tierra, demasiado ahitos para volar, y no escaparon con vida ni cien trolls. Valgard siguió con su silencio. Con un manto rojo sobre la loriga plateada, Lanzadefuego hizo caracolear a su caballo ante los muros del castillo. Brillante y hermoso era su rostro, aunque cruel, porque jamás abandonaba su rictus burlesco, y su lanza se levantaba alta, como si con ella quisiera empalar las estrellas. —Era el jefe de los proscritos —murmuró alguien—. Sus flechas llegaban a todas partes. Salían de noche para atacarnos, dejando tras de ellos muerte y fuego. Valgard seguía sin inmutarse. En la bahía bañada por la luna, los cascos de los navíos de los trolls humeaban o yacían sobre la playa destrozados. Los navíos largos de los elfos echaban el ancla, con sus escudos y lanzas reluciendo en ellos. —Flam de las Orcadas capitanea los prisioneros a quienes liberó Manannán Mac Lir —dijo un jefe troll, con voz acerba—. Los mares se hallan libres de nuestros navíos. Sólo uno consiguió romper su bloqueo para informarnos de que las costas de Trollheim habían sido saqueadas e incendiadas. Valgard podría haber sido una estatua esculpida en piedra negra. 295 Los elfos comenzaron a levantar un pabellón mayor que los demás. Un hombre se dirigió hacia él, montado en un caballo negro de tamaño descomunal, para plantar allí su estandarte: una lanza en cuya punta había sido clavada la reseca cabeza de Illrede. Los ojos muertos miraban fijamente a los de la torre. Un troll dijo con voz desfallecida: —Aquel es su jefe, Skafloc el Mortal. Nadie puede resistírsele. Nos llevó hacia el Norte como a un rebaño de ovejas, matando a nuestra gente. La espada que empuña, lo mismo penetra una simple tela que piedra o metal. Me pregunto si es realmente un hombre y no un demonio salido del infierno. Valgard se sobresaltó. —Le conozco —dijo con voz queda—, y quiero acabar con él. —Señor, no puedes. Esa arma suya... —¡Silencio! —Valgard se volvió para echarle al troll una mirada capaz de dar con él en el suelo y azotarle con sus palabras—. ¡Locos, cobardes, lacayos! Los que tengan miedo de luchar que se vayan al matadero, así morirán rápidamente. En lo que a mí se refiere, combatiré con él, aquí en Elfheugh. Su voz se hizo más profunda, casi tanto como la de los carros de guerra de afuera. —Este castillo es la última plaza fuerte que nos queda en Britania. Ignoro cómo cayeron las demás. Cuando los nuestros no tuvieron más remedio que retirarse, sólo vieron los estandartes de los elfos ondeando por encima de ellos. Pero nosotros sabemos que este castillo, que nunca ha sido tomado, está guarnecido ahora de guerreros que superan en número a los de fuera. Está protegido contra la magia y cualquier asalto directo. Nada, sino nuestra propia ineptitud, será la causante de su pérdida. Levantó por encima de la cabeza el hacha que jamás le abandonaba. —Lo único que han hecho esta noche ha sido levantar el campo. El alba no tardará en llegar. Mañana por la noche podrán comenzar el asedio, con un asalto, lo más seguro. Si lo hacen, los rechazaremos y saldremos a perseguirlos. Si no, seremos nosotros quienes ataquemos, con la fortaleza a nuestra espalda para retirarnos a ella si las cosas comenzaran a irnos mal. Los dientes le brillaban entre la barba. —Pero creo que podremos hacer que huyan ante nosotros. Somos más 296 que ellos y más fuertes, individuo por individuo. Skafloc y yo nos buscaremos el uno al otro, pues no hay amor entre nosotros. Le mataré y me haré con su espada victoriosa. Hizo una pausa y el jefe de los trolls de Escocia aprovechó para hacerle una pregunta. —¿Qué hay de los Sídh? —No son todopoderosos —comento rápidamente Valgard—. Cuando hayamos segado el suficiente números de elfos para que comprendan que su causa está perdida, los Sídh pedirán la paz. Entonces Inglaterra se convertirá en un enclave troll, defendiendo a nuestra patria de cualquier asalto hasta que hayamos reunido las fuerzas suficientes para atacar de nuevo al Rey de los Elfos. Su mirada sombría fue al encuentro de la de Illrede. —Y yo —murmuró para sí— me sentaré en su trono. Pero, ¿de veras me importa? ¿Acaso hay algo que tenga valor en este mundo? Poco después de que se hiciera la calma en aquella noche tan agitada, uno de los guardianes tuvo el valor suficiente para levantarse del lecho, encender una lámpara con las brasas del hogar y salir a ver lo que pasaba en la casa de Thorkel Erlendsson. Se encontró con la puerta de la habitación de Freda, la hija de Orm, abierta de par en par: su niño no estaba y ella yacía desvanecida y ensangrentada en el umbral. La metió nuevamente en el lecho. Poco después, Freda sufrió un acceso de fiebre y comenzó a gritar cosas que hicieron que el sacerdote, ya en la casa, moviese la cabeza y se santiguase. Nadie consiguió que contara lo sucedido. En los días que siguieron, intentó irse en dos ocasiones, pero en ambas hubo alguien que la vio y la obligó a volver; ella lo hizo, pues no tenía fuerzas para oponerse a nadie. No tardó en llegar la noche en que se despertó sin que nadie la vigilase, con la mente lúcida —o así se lo parecía— y con un poco de su antigua energía, que el reposo le había hecho recobrar. Durante unos momentos siguió echada, haciendo planes. Entonces se deslizó del lecho, apretando las mandíbulas, no le fueran los dientes a castañetear por el frío, y comenzó a buscar el arcón donde se guardaban sus vestidos. 297 Cuando dio con él, se vistió con una larga falda de lana y un manto con capucha, que había encontrado a tientas, y con el calzado en la mano se dirigió a la cocina para coger un poco de pan y queso que llevarse. Cuando volvió de nuevo a su habitación, se detuvo a besar el crucifijo que estaba colgado encima de la cama. —Perdóname si puedes —susurró—, porque le amo más que a ti. Soy mala, pero el pecado es mío, no suyo. Y salió a la luz de las estrellas. Eran innumerables y muy nítidas, pues no parpadeaban. La noche era silenciosa, salvo por el hielo que crujía bajo sus pies. El frío la mordió. Se dirigió hacia el establo. El castillo seguía bañado en sombras y en silencio mientras el día se acercaba al crepúsculo. Leea pasó las manos por debajo de uno de los brazos de Valgard, que cruzaba su seno. Lenta y cuidadosamente, lo puso sobre el colchón y se deslizó fuera del lecho. Él se dio la vuelta, murmurando en sueños. El vigor de antaño le había abandonado, dejándole un rostro que era el que correspondía a un cráneo revestido de piel llena de cicatrices y tir ante, salvo en dos sitios: los ojos y la mandíbula. Leea le miró. El puñal que había cogido de una cómoda brillaba en su mano. Sería fácil cortarle la garganta... No, estaban en juego muchas cosas. Si fallaba en lo más mínimo —y él tenía los reflejos de un licántropo, incluso cuando dormía—, todo estaría perdido. Po r eso se alejó, tan silenciosa como una sombra, cubrió su desnudez con un vestido y un ceñidor, y abandonó la habitación del Conde. En la mano derecha llevaba el puñal y en la izquierda las llaves del castillo, tomadas del escondrijo que ella misma sugiriera a Valgard. Por las escaleras se cruzó con otra hembra de su especie, que llevaba entre las manos una gavilla de espadas, posiblemente de la armería. No intercambiaron palabra alguna. Los trolls se agitaban en un sueño inquieto. De vez en cuando, Leea pasaba cerca de un guardia, que se limitaba a echarle una mirada de adulación. Resultaba frecuente que aquellas damas salieran a cumplir personalmente cualquier capricho que se les antojase a sus señores. 298 Leea llegó a las mazmorras y se dirigió a la puerta de la celda donde se encontraba Imric, abriendo su triple cerradura. El diablillo se quedó mirándola fijamente en la oscuridad rojiza que acababa de perder su silencio. Leea se abalanzó sobre él. Agitó las alas, pero antes de que pudiese gritar ya estaba en el suelo, con la garganta abierta. Leea apartó los carbones encendidos y cortó las cuerdas que mantenían atado a Imric, quien cayó pesadamente en sus brazos y permaneció inmóvil como un cadáver, cuando ella le depositó en el suelo. Acto seguido, grabó runas salutíferas sobre varios trozos de carbón apagado y las puso bajo la lengua y los pies de Imric, así como encima de sus ojos. Murmuró unos ensalmos y la car ne comenzó a crecer en los lugares que había abandonado, haciendo gemir de dolor al elfo, aunque sin conseguir arrancarle una queja. Leea extrajo algunas llaves del manojo y se las entregó a Imric. —Cuando te hayas recuperado —dijo en voz baja—, libera a los elfos cautivos. Han sido llevados a los torreones para proporcionarles a los trolls mayor seguridad. Las armas están escondidas en el viejo pozo detrás de la torre. No vayáis a cogerlas hasta que la batalla no esté en su culmen. —De acuerdo —dijo Imric, con la garganta reseca—. Iré a coger también agua, vino, y un trozo de carne... además de todo lo que me deben los trolls — el brillo de sus ojos estuvo a punto de estremecer a la mismísima Leea. Descalza, recorrió un pasaje subterráneo que la condujo a la torre de los astrólogos, por aquel entonces en desuso, que se levantaba sobre los muros externos de la parte este del castillo. Siguió subiendo las escaleras hasta llegar a los grandes instrumentos de latón y cristal. Desde allí se dirigió hacia un balcón circular. Aunque se encontraba entre sombras, el sol que iba hundiéndose en el horizonte casi llegaba a cegarla con su resplandor y a herirla con los rayos de la más terrible e invisible de las luces. Por eso casi no podía ver a quien estaba al otro lado de los muros, alto y vestido con una reluciente loriga, que acudía a la cita, tal y como ella pidiera en el mensaje que había enviado la víspera por mediación de un murciélago. Por más que lo intentase, no podía verle. Quizá era un guerrero de los Sídh, aunque quizá —el corazón le dio un vuelco— pudiera tratarse de Skafloc en persona. 299 Se apoyó en la barandilla y lanzó hacia fuera el manojo de llaves, que describió un arco brillante hasta que fue detenido por la punta de la lanza de quien permanecía al otro lado; en él estaban las llaves que abrían las puertas del castillo. Leea se apresuró a entrar en la confortable penumbra. Con la gracia de un pajarillo echó a correr hacia los ap osentos del Conde. Cuando apenas se había quitado la ropa y metido en el lecho, Valgard parpadeó, despierto. Se puso en pie y echó un vistazo por la ventana. —Ya ha comenzado a ponerse el sol —dijo—. Es hora de armarse para la batalla. Y cogiendo un cuerno de la pared, abrió la puerta que conducía a las escaleras y tocó una larga llamada. Los guardias que lo oyeron se pasaron el aviso, de suerte que, poco a poco, lleg ó a todos los del castillo..., sin saber que también era la señal para que todas las damas que en él estaban clavaran un puñal en el corazón del troll que había sido su dueño. Freda seguía desmayándose y recobrándose a cada instante, aunque sin llegar a caer del caballo, rodeada de un torbellino de tinieblas manchado de resplandores rojizos. Lo que le devolvía la lucidez era el dolor, tan agudo como una espada, que hería su cuerpo, aún no recuperado del todo, y que ella agradecía con palabras mudas que no podían brotar de sus resecos labios. Había cambiado dos veces de caballo, y aún exigía a sus cabalgaduras un esfuerzo sobrehumano. Colinas y árboles huían a su paso, como las piedras que uno contempla a través de las aguas de un río de rápida corriente. Incluso le llegaban a parecer cosas irreales, como pertenecientes al mundo de los sueños; nada era real excepto el tumulto que llenaba su mente. Recordaba que, en una ocasión, su caballo había tropezado, arrojándola a un arroyuelo. Cuando había salido de él, el agua se le había congelado en los cabellos y en el vestido mojado. Muchas eternidades después, cuando el sol seguía una vez más su curso descendente, tan rojo como la sangre, su segundo caballo se deslomó. El primero había muerto varios días antes. El otro tampoco se levantó. Freda se puso de pie, chocando con los árboles, porque sus ojos ya no podían verlos, 300 y se adentró entre los arbustos, cuyas ramas se le iban clavando. El clamor que oía en su interior se iba haciendo cada vez más fuerte. No sabía qué era, ni le preocupaba. Sólo le importaba una cosa: seguir avanzando hacia el Norte, hacia Alfheim. 301 CAPITULO 28 a cerca del ocaso, Skafloc ordenó tocar los cuernos de batalla. Sus elfos salieron de las tiendas y entraron en la penumbra, entre un fragor de metal y de gritos de venganza Los caballos coceaban y relinchaban, los carros retumbaban al correr sobre el suelo helado, y una floresta de l anzas se alzaba tras los ondeantes estandartes y la cabeza de Illrede. Skafloc montó en su corcel Jötun. La espada que se llamaba Tyrfing parecía estremecerse a su flanco Bajo el yelmo, su rostro parecía la consumida máscara de algún dios de la guerra, ya olvidado, pero aún implacable. —¿Oyes ese alboroto dentro del castillo? —preguntó a Lanzadefuego. —Sí —contestó el elfo, con una mueca—. Los trolls acaban de saber por qué cayeron tan fácilmente los demás castillos Pero no creo que consigan descubrir dónde se encuentran nuestras hembras, con tanto lugar secreto como hay en la fortaleza, antes de que hayamos acabado con ellos. Skafloc le entregó una de las llaves del manojo que llevaba a la cintura. —Tú conducirás el ataque por la parte posterior, con un ariete —le recordó, de manera innecesaria—. Cuando abramos la puerta norte, 302 atraeremos a tantos defensores que tú podrás entrar fácilmente por la sur. Flam y Rucca realizarán maniobras de diversión a derecha e izquierda, y después correrán en nuestra ayuda cuando entremos. Yo, con los Sídh y las tropas de la Guardia que nos ha enviado nuestro Rey, atacaré la puerta norte. La enorme luna llena salió del mar, po r el Este. Su luz suscitaba reflejos en el metal y en los ojos de los contendientes, que se tornaban espectrales al caer sobre los estandartes y los blancos caballos. Los lures dejaron oír su voz, y de la hueste brotó otro tipo de ruido que, tras resonar entre riscos y acantilados, llegó hasta las estrellas. Entonces, los elfos y sus aliados se pusieron en orden de combate. Un alarido se abrió camino a través de la noche. Los trolls debían de estar desalentados, porque un tercio ha bían sido asesinados mientras dormían y los supervivientes eran incapaces de dar con los autores de la fechoría, bien ocultos sin duda en el laberíntico inte rior de aquel castillo; pero eran guerreros valientes, y Valgard, rugiendo tras ello s, les recordaba su misión. Desde los muros, sus arqueros enviaban contra los elfos una lluvia incesante de flechas. Las saetas rebotaban, con un tintineo, en los escudos y las cotas; pero algunas conseguían abrirse camino hacia la carne. Muchos guerreros mordían el polvo, mientras los caballos relinchaban y bufaban, y los muertos y heridos se agolpaban en el camino hacia la cima de la colina. Esta era bastante escarpada, y sólo se podía llegar a la puerta norte siguiendo un camino muy estrecho. Los elfos no necesitaban ningún camino, porque, con su manera de caminar que casi no tocaba el suelo, saltaban sobre los taludes y las rocas resbaladizas por la helada, yendo de risco en risco, mientras lanzaban su grito de guerra. Algunos disparaban garfios, que se enganchaban en los remates de las paredes rocosas, y trepaban por las cuerdas que pendían de ellas; otros subían con sus caballos. De tal suerte, todos iban llegando al terreno explanado sobre el que se había levantado el castillo, y no perdían tiempo en lanzar flechas contra sus murallas. Skafloc se adelantó por el camino para guiar a los carros de los Tuatha Dé Danann, que retumbaban tras él de una manera espantosa, con ruedas que centelleaban y pulverizaban las piedras, y armaduras —las de sus ocupantes— que brillaban como si fueran de bronce en fusión. Aunque las flechas llovían sobre yelmos, lorigas y escudos, ni los guerreros ni sus aurigas sufrían daño 303 alguno. Lo mismo se podía decir de Skafloc, aún a lomos de su tenebroso caballo, a lo largo de un sendero de sombras y de engañosos reflejos lunares. En aquel momento, los elfos ya habían llegado a las murallas. Sobre ellos se desplomaba agua hirviendo, aceite inflamado y vitriolo, espeso por el frío, lanzas, piedras y el temible fuego griego. Los elfos aullaron cuando la carne se les cayó a pedazos de los huesos, y sus camaradas retrocedieron, gritando. Skafloc aullaba, deseoso de desenvainar la espada. Los elfos que le seguían trajeron un ariete de tortuga, que va montado en una especie de cobertizo sobre ruedas, y cubierto de esta forma llegó hasta las puertas. En la parte superior de las murallas, Valgard indicó a sus guerreros que hicieran uso de las máquinas de guerra. Antes de que las puertas forradas de bronce se doblegasen por los golpes del ariete, el cobertizo que lo protegía habría sido aplastado por las enormes piedras que, desde arriba, dejarían caer sobre él. Skafloc introdujo la primera llave en la cerradura y la hizo girar, musitando las runas apropiadas. Una segunda llave, una tercera... Valgard estaba a punto de cortar la cuerda que liberaría las piedras que pendían de lo alto de la muralla. Los trolls aguardaban el momento preciso. Siete llaves... ocho. Valgard estaba a punto de desatar un infierno sobre ellos. Nueve llaves... ¡y los cerrojo s dejaron de mantener cerrados los batientes! Skafloc obligó a su caballo a echarse hacia atrás, de suerte que sus patas anteriores dieron tal coz sobre los batientes que los hicieron añicos, permitiéndole entrar al galope en el estrecho y largo túnel que formaba la espesa muralla y que iba a dar al patio de armas, iluminado por la plateada luz de la luna. Tras él pasaron, suscitand o ecos en aquel pasaje, los carros de Lugh, Dove Berg, Angus Mac Oc, del Dagda, Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht, Mac Gréine, Manannán y de toda la hueste de los Sídh, entre un estruendo de cascos de caballo y de pasos a la carrera. ¡La puerta era suya! Los guardias se aprestaron a defenderse. Un hacha hirió en una de sus patas al caballo Jötun, que relinchó y coceó, convirtiendo a muchos guerreros en un despojo sangriento. Skafloc desenvainó su espada. La hoja llameó en aquella media luz con 304 el tono azulado del hielo, y entonó su canción de muerte, subiendo y bajando, hiriendo como una víbora. El clamor y el estruendo del metal llegaron hasta las estrellas, lo mismo que los gritos, el silbar de las hojas y el cataclísmico retumbar de las ruedas. Los trolls comenzaron a retroceder. Valgard aulló, con los ojos brillándole con el mismo color verdoso que el de los lobos, y guió a un grupo de sus guerreros que estaba en las murallas hasta el patio, atacando con decisión a los invasores por el flanco. Un elfo cayó bajo su hacha, liberó su filo y golpeó a otro, aplastando el rostro de un tercero con el extremo del mango... y de tal suerte, golpeando a diestra y siniestra, se adentró en la batalla. En la puerta sur comenzó a dejarse oír el golpear rítmico del ariete de Lanzadefuego. Los trolls lanzaron sobre él piedras, aceite hiriendo, lanzas, flechas y dardos, hasta que a sus espaldas surgió una tropa enjuta, ensangrentada y llena de harapos, pero que empuñaba armas sedientas de venganza: los prisioneros liberados por Imric, con él a la cabeza. Los trolls se volvieron contra lo que se les venía encima, y así Lanzadefuego pudo abrir las puertas. —¡Al torreón! —gritó Valgard—. ¡Al torreón! ¡En él nos haremos fuertes! Los trolls se abrieron camino para llegar hasta él. Formaron una muralla de escudos contra la que tintineaban las espadas de los elfos, y se dirigieron, aprovechando su peso y su fuerza, hacia la puerta del torreón. Estaba cerrada. Valgard se lanzó contra la puerta, que le rechazó, a pesar del violento encontronazo. Destrozó su cerradura con el hacha y penetró en el interior del torreón, seguido de sus guerreros. Los arcos cantaron en la oscuridad reinante. Muchos trolls cayeron. Valgard dio un salto hacia atrás, con u na flecha clavada en la mano izquierda. La voz de Leea se mofó de él: —¡Las hembras de los elfos guardan esta casa en nombre de sus amantes... bastante mejores que los que han tenido en los últimos tiempos, oh, imitación de Skafloc! Valgard se volvió, arrancándose la flecha de la mano. Aulló y comenzó a echar espuma por la boca. Volvió al patio, con el hacha que giraba y retumbaba mientras no dejaba de golpear a cualquiera que se interpusiera en su camino. 305 La berserkirgangr se había apoderado de él. Skafloc luchó aureolado de la fría gloria que le insuflaba la espada rúnica. Era fuego en su mano. A su alrededor todo era salpicar de sangre y sesos, rodar de cabezas sobre el empedrado, aplastar de tripas bajo los cascos de su caballo.... mientras él seguía luchando, incansable, gélidamente consciente y lúcido, aunque fuera de sí, de manera que era uno con la carnicería. Repartía muerte lo mismo que el sembrador grano, y en cualquier parte a la que se dirigiese las líneas de los trolls se venían abajo. La luna subió de las aguas donde había construido un puente —qué extraño que estuviesen tan tranquilas— y remontó las alturas del castillo. Su luz se derramó sobre aquel horror. Las espadas volaban, las lanzas se hundían en la carne, las hachas y las mazas golpeaban, el metal y los guerreros gritaban de dolor. Los caballos se encabritaban, relinchaban, coceaban, con las crines manchadas de sangre seca. La contienda iba y venía por encima de los muertos, pisoteándolos, hasta convertirlos en algo irreconocible. La luna siguió subiendo en el cielo, hasta que desde el patio parecía que una atalaya, al Este, le atravesaba el corazón. Entonces los trolls cedieron. Sólo quedaban unos pocos. Los elfos les dieron caza desde los cimientos del castillo hasta las blancas laderas de la colina, como si fueran animales. —¡A mí, a mí! —retumbaba la voz de Valgard sobre el moribundo fragor de la batalla—. ¡Aquí, trolls, venid y combatid! Skafloc le oyó y tiró de las riendas de su caballo para ir a su encuentro. Vio a su doble erguido y enorme ante la puerta, manchado de sangre, de los pies a la cabeza, rodeado de cadáveres de elfos. Una docena de trolls estaba intentando llegar hasta él y resistir a su lado hasta el fin. Él era el causante de todo aque llo... La sonrisa que apareció en los labios de Skafloc bien podría haber si do la de la espada Tyrfing. Valgard, Valgard..., ¡vas a encontrarte con tu destino! Y Skafloc espoleó su caballo. Mientras cabalgaba, le pareció ver por un momento que un halcón salía volando de algún sitio sobre el mar y se dirigía hacia la luna. Un escalofrío le recorrió los huesos, y supo, en alguna parte de su ser, que estaba condenado. Valgard le vio llegar y esbozó una mueca. Apoyó la espalda en el muro y levantó el hacha. El garañón negro se le echó encima. Golpeó con su hacha 306 como nunca lo había hecho. El arma partió en dos el cráneo del caballo. Aquel enorme peso sólo podría haberlo soportado el mismísimo muro. Cuando el garañón se derrumbó, las piedras se estremecieron. Skafloc saltó de la silla. Con la agilidad de un elfo, se dio la vuelta en el aire para caer de pie. Pero le fue imposible evitar el choque contra la pared y caer, de rebote, dentro del pasaje que había tras la puerta. Valgard recuperó su hacha y corrió para acabar con su enemigo. Skafloc se había arrastrado por el interior de la muralla y había ido a parar a la ladera de la colina que daba a la bahía y al mar. El brazo derecho colgaba de su costado, roto. Arrojó el escudo y empuñó la espada con la mano izquierda. La sangre le corría por el rostro herido, fluyendo hacia la hoja. Valgard se le acercó. —Muchas cosas se terminarán esta noche —dijo—, y tu vida es una de ellas. —Ambos nacimos la misma noche —contestó Skafloc. Un vómito de sangre abandonó su boca al mismo tiempo que las palabras—. No transcurrirá mucho tiempo entre nuestras muertes —y se burló—: Cuando yo me vaya, ¿cómo podrás seguir estando aquí, tú, que eres mi sombra? Valgard rugió y le atacó. Skafloc alzó la espada. El hacha Fratricida chocó contra la hoja y, con un estruendo, un crujido y una lluvia de chispas, se partió en dos. Skafloc retrocedió, titubeante, se recobró y alzó nuevamente la espada. Valgard avanzó con las manos desnudas hacia él, emitiendo un profundo aullido. —¡Skafloc! ¡Skafloc! Al oír aquel grito, el hijo adoptivo de Imric se volvió. Por el camino llegaba Freda, tambaleándose, exhausta, ensangrentada, en harapos, su Freda, que volvía a su lado. —Skafloc —llamó—. Amor mío... Valgard se abalanzó y arrebató la espada de la mano del enemigo que ya no le veía. La levantó, describiendo un amplio arco, y la abatió. Aullando, levantó la espada de nuevo. Relucía bajo la sangre que la cubría, con fuegos azulados que no eran de este mundo. —¡He vencido! —gritó—. ¡Soy el amo del mundo y lo pisoteo con mis 307 pies! ¡Venid, tinieblas! Pero sólo golpeó el aire. Su mano, resbaladiza por la sangre que había derramado, perdió su presa. La espada giró sobre sí misma y cayó encima de él, de punta. El peso enorme del arma le hizo perder el equilibrio, de suerte que, tras abrirse paso por su cuello, quedó clavada en la tierra. Y en ella se quedó clavado Valgard, con la espada brillando ante sus ojos mientras le robaba la vida por su garganta abierta. Intentó arrancarse la hoja, pero sólo consiguió que sus filos le abrieran las venas. Y aquel fue el fin de Valgard, el Hijo Cambiado. Skafloc yacía con espalda y pecho partidos. Su rostro estaba pálido bajo la luz de la luna. Pero, cuando Freda se inclinó sobre él, fue capaz de sonreír. —Esto se acaba, tesoro —susurró—. Eres demasiado bella para un hombre que va a morir. Y demasiado adorable para llorar. Olvídate de mí... —¡Jamás! ¡Jamás! —sus lágrimas cayeron sobre él como la lluvia de una mañana de primavera. —¿Me darás un beso de despedida? —preguntó. Sus labios ya estaban fríos, pero ella los buscó ávidamente. Y, cuando abrió nuevamente los ojos, Skafloc yacía muerto entre sus brazos. Las gélidas estrías de luz, las primeras del nuevo día, comenzaban a aparecer por Oriente, cuando Imric y Leea salieron del castillo. —¿Por qué curar a la joven y llevarla a su casa? —no había ningún eco de victoria en la voz de la dama élfica—. Mejor sería enviarla entre tormentos al Infierno. Fue ella quien mató a Skafloc. —Fue su destino —contestó Imric—. Y ayudarla es lo último que podemos hacer por él. Pues si nosotros, los elfos, no conocemos eso llamado amor, sí podemos hacer lo que habría alegrado a un amigo. —¿No conocemos el amor? —murmuró Leea, tan bajo que el no pudo oírla—. Eres sabio, Imric, pero hasta tu sabiduría tiene sus límites. Bajó la mirada hacia Freda, que estaba sentada en la tierra, blanca por el rocío, acunando a Skafloc entre sus br azos. Y, como si quisiera que se durmiera, le cantaba la nana que había pensado cantarle a su hijo. —Su hado fue más afortunado que el mío —dijo Leea. 308 Imric interpretó mal sus palabras, quizá inconscientemente. O quizá no. —Los hombres son más felices que los habitantes de Faerie... o que los dioses, si comenzamos a hacer comparaciones —dijo, asintiendo con la cabeza—. Mejor vivir con la brevedad de una estrella fugaz, cruzando brillante el cielo, que con una inmortalidad que no permite ver nada fuera de ella —miró la espada, que aún relampagueaba en la garganta de su presa—. Siento que mi fin se avecina —dijo en un susurro —. Siento que se acerca el día en que Faerie se desvanecerá, cuando el mismísimo Rey de los Elfos se convierta en un simple espíritu de los bosques y después en nada, y los dioses se oculten. Y lo peor de todo es que considero justo que los inmortales no vivan para siempre. Se acercó a la espada. —En cuanto a ésta —dijo a los enanos que le seguían, siervos suyos—, la cogeremos y la arrojaremos al mar, bien lejos de nosotros. Aunque no creo que sirva de mucho. La voluntad de las Nornas nunca puede ser cambiada, y la espada aún no ha realizado su última fechoría. Subió con los siervos en un bote, para cerciorarse de que cumplían correctamente su tarea. Mientras tanto, Manannán Mac Lir se había llevado a Freda y al cadáver de Skafloc, para oc uparse personalmente del bienestar de la primera y de los honores debidos al segundo. Cuando Imric estuvo de vuelta, él y Leea regresaron a Elfheugh, pues el alba invernal estaba a punto de despuntar, pero caminando muy lentamente. Y aquí termina la saga de Skafloc, el Ahijado de los Elfos. 309 310 POSFACIO DEL AUTOR A finales del año del Señor de 1018, Sighvat Thordarson viajó a través de Gotaland en cumplimiento de la misión que le encargara el rey Olaf de Noruega. La mayor parte de la gente con la que se encontró seguía apegada a sus antiguas costumbres. En cierta ocasión, la propietaria de un dominio rural no quiso dejarles, ni a él ni a su séquito, pasar allí la noche, porque todo estaba a punto para la celebración del sacrificio conocido como Alfarblót. Era un signo de los tiempos, de aquellos tiempos, que, en cualquier momento, un hombre instruido supiese improvisar. Y como Sighvat era un escaldo, habló así: «Para no suscitar de Odín la cólera, fuera habréis de estar», dijo la mujer. «Paganos somos y a punto de hacer un gran sacrificio, oíd, miserables.» La castellana, que así expulsó de sus tierras a tan cristiana gente, declaró hallarse a punto de ofrecer un sacrificio de sangre a los elfos. 311 O, al menos, eso dice el poeta Snor ri Sturlusson, un poco posterior a Sighvat Thordarson, en su Heimskringla. En otras obras de la misma época podemos leer que, cuando los «navíos largos», los barcos de guerra de los vikingos, regresaban a sus bases, se procedía a quitar de sus proas las cabezas de dragón que les servían de protección contra los monstruos marinos y también para anunciar que iban en son de guerra, no fuera que los elfos se diesen por ofendidos. Y es que estos seres aún seguían teniendo carácter divino. Naturalmente, cuando los escandinavos comenzaron a confiar sus conocimientos a los manuscritos, los elfos se habían convertido en una especie de divinidades tutelares y de dioses tópicos, como las dríades griegas o los kami de algunos ríos del Japón. Las Eddas sitúan a algunos de ellos en el Asgard, al servicio de los Ases. Pero la palabra «elfo» es utilizada para designar dos especies distintas que pueblan dos de los Nueve Mundos. Mientras que Alfheim es el hogar de los «elfos de la luz», altos y rubios, Svartalfheim, cuyo nombre significa literalmente «la patria de los elfos de la oscuridad», podría ser, aunque esta puntualización se halle sujeta a controversia, el lugar donde viven los enanos. Es interesante recalcar, dicho sea de paso, que estos últimos tienen un papel mucho más relevante que los primeros en todas las historias que han llegado hasta nosotros. La posterior sistematización realizada por los folkloristas disminuyó aún más la importancia de los elfos, convirtiéndolos en una especie de espíritus de poca monta, reduciéndolos de tamaño y olvidando su parentesco con los enanos, que no habían dejado de conservar su poder e importancia. Sin embargo, el fantasma de Alfheim se paseó por la Edad Media y el Renacimiento..., inspirando en muchos poet as la idea del reino de Faerie, la Tierra Encantada, cuyos habitantes, de aspecto humano, demuestran una jovialidad y un dominio de las artes mágicas que no son patrimonio de este mundo. En nuestros días, J. R. R, Tolkien, en su delicioso ciclo de la «Tierra Media», ha devuelto a los elfos un poco del esplendor de pasados tiempos, aunque no sólo los presentara bellísimos e instruidos, sino sabios, reposados, honorables, amables y llenos de bondad hacia toda criatura viviente... —en 312 suma, dotados de las mejores cualidades que podía imaginar—, de manera que sus elfos se parecen más a los habitantes del reino de la Gloriana de Edmond Spenser que a los que iban a acudir al sacrificio que se hacía en su honor en la lejana comarca de Gotaland. No hay necesidad de decir que en ello no hay nada de erróneo; de hecho, tal enfoque era necesario para que el profesor Tolkien consiguiera lo que se proponía. Pero hará ahora unos cuarenta años, un joven estudioso de estas materias, que se llamaba como yo, viajó con su imaginación hacia atrás en el tiempo —ni más ni menos que hasta el siglo noveno—, y comprobó que dioses y elfos tenían una naturaleza muy diferente de la que se suponía. Eran tiempos crueles, al menos en Europa. La crueldad, la rapiña y el desenfreno campaban por sus respetos. Los horrores que los vi kingos llevaran a Inglaterra y Francia no eran peores que los realizados anteriormente por Carlomagno, en el curso de sus numerosas incursiones a la patria continental de los sajones, ni que aquellos que los miembros de la Primera Cruzada perpetrarían en Jerusalén. Es indudable que la civilización del siglo veinte no ha recibido la gracia del Humanismo, pero aún tendría que recorrer, marcha atrás, un largo camino antes de tocar ese fondo que —Dios no lo permita— bien podría ser, a fin de cuentas, la regla, y no la excepción, de la Historia. Y como los hombres siempre tienden a hacer a dioses y semidioses a su propia imagen, el joven escritor se imaginó que elfos y Ases eran seres amorales... y completamente despiadados cuando se veían contrariados. Aquello cuadraba con lo que él había leído sobre tan interesante tema en Eddas y Sagas. Por lo demás, se divirtió introduciendo una pizca de racionalidad, a la manera de la estupenda revista Unknown Worlds. Le parecía de todo punto natural que los habitantes de Faerie estuviesen más avanzados tecnológicamente que sus contemporáneos humanos. Imagínense, si quieren, otras especies racionales capaces de practicar la magia, con la posibilidad, por ejemplo, de controlar mentalmente fenómenos externos gracias a medios que aún resultan desconocidos para la ciencia —ahí entrarían los recientes trabajos y especulaciones en lo tocante a la «parapsicología»—. Supongan que las susodichas especies pudieran vivir indefinidamente, cambiar de forma y otras cosas por el estilo. Un metabolismo tan diferente al nuestro también tendría sus 313 desventajas, como la imposibilidad de so portar la luz y las radiaciones solares, o las desastrosas reacciones electroquími cas que induciría en él el contacto con el hierro. ¿Por qué esos inmortales no iban a compensar sus desventajas descubriendo metales no ferrosos y las propiedades de sus aleaciones? Los navíos de los elfos, ¿no podrían navegar virtualmente «en alas del viento», siempre que hubieran obtenido cascos de rozamiento prácticamente nulo? En cuanto al tipo de castillo que tanto aparece en las películas de época, y que encontramos en la obra, hay que decir que no existía en la Europa de la época del rey Alfredo el Grande, pero la gente de Faerie podría llevar construyéndolo desde tiempo inmemorial. Del mismo modo, otros anacronismos aparentes no vendrían a ser sino los logros de especies más antiguas que el hombre. Y como una cultura guerrera y aristocrática, caracterizada por el conservadurismo que da una vida muy larga, no sentiría la necesidad de conseguir un gran desarrollo en lo que a ciencia se refiere, no tendremos que molestarnos en buscar entre las ruinas de Faerie máquinas de vapor o pertrechos bélicos a base de pólvora. The Broken Sword fue publicada en 1954 por la editorial Abelard- Schuman. Realmente, no había resultad o nada fácil encontrar un editor para ella. Más tarde, en 1971, gracias al profesor Tolkien, cuya noble obra ha hecho popular en todo el mundo el género de la fantasía heroica, Lin Cárter, por entonces Consultor Editorial de una colección de la editorial Ballantine Books, pensó reeditarla. Y aquello supuso para mí un dilema. Si antes hablé del autor de la novela como si se tratase de otra persona, no fue por afectación o extravagancia. La verdad era que nos separaba toda una generación. A principios de los setenta yo no habría escrito una obra tan larga, tan prolija y tan implacablemente feroz. Ya me había acostumbrado a trabajar más en la línea de Three Hearts and Three Lions. Aquel joven, ingenuo en muchos aspectos, que se llamaba como yo, podía dar, aun sin quererlo, una idea errónea de mi obra y de mi personalidad. Pero, al mismo tiempo, no me sentía con la autoridad suficiente para rechazar todo lo que había hecho, ya que ello supondría una injusticia con aquellas personas que hubieran oído hablar del libro en cuestión y que lo comprasen porque quisieran leerlo. Como así andaban las cosas, llegué a una especie de compromiso. 314 Redacté una especie de prólogo — posfacio en la presente edición— y después, sin cambiar la trama, realicé unos cuantos retoques. ¡Estoy seguro de que el joven autor se habría sentido agradecido de contar con la ayuda de un hombre más experimentado que él, no sólo en el campo literario, sino también en las técnicas del combate medieval! Como no lo rescribí de cabo a rabo, el estilo no es el mío. Sólo me limité a eliminar algunos adjetivos que me parecían redundantes y alguna que otra palabra áspera o gruesa, a corregir algunos errores e incongruencias, y a cambiar, por razones que sólo a mí competen, un personaje por otro, en una escena breve pero importante, que el lector avezado descubrirá. La presente edición española aparece después de que Baen Books publicase, en 1988, el texto de Ballantine, que conoció una reedición en 1973. Así que lo que acaban de leer ha sido la traducción de The Broken Sword, tal y como fuera concebida hace cerca de cuarenta años, sólo que levemente mejorada. Espero que les haya gustado. Y en cuanto a lo que les ocurrió a quienes aún seguían vivos al final de la novela, a la espada, y a la mismísima Faerie... —que obviamente ya no existe en la Tierra—, esa es otra historia y será contada en otra ocasión. Poul Anderson, otrora conocido en la Sociedad del Anacronismo Creativo con el nombre de Sir Bela de la Marca Oriental. 315 ÍNDICE Dedicatoria 5 Introducción: De espadas y aventureros: 6 —La fantasía de Poul Anderson— LA ESPADA ROTA Mapa 11 Glosario 12 Capítulo 1 17 Capítulo 2 20 Capítulo 3 23 Capítulo 4 26 Capítulo 5 30 Capítulo 6 37 Capítulo 7 41 Capítulo 8 47 Capítulo 9 53 Capítulo 10 59 Capítulo 11 68 316 Capítulo 12 74 Capítulo 13 80 Capítulo 14 84 Capítulo 15 90 Capítulo 16 97 Capítulo 17 101 Capítulo 18 107 Capítulo 19 113 Capítulo 20 122 Capítulo 21 130 Capítulo 22 135 Capítulo 23 145 Capítulo 24 152 Capítulo 25 157 Capítulo 26 162 Capítulo 27 171 Capítulo 28 176 Posfacio del autor 181 10HI 7IW Noa Digitized by the Internet Archive In 2022 with funding from Kahle/Austin Foundation https://archive.org/details/hardlywar0000choi DON MEE CHOI Wave Books Seattle and New York PUBLISHED BY WAVE BOOKS WWW.WAVEPOETRY.COM COPYRIGHT © 2016 BY DON MEE CHOI ALL RIGHTS RESERVED WAVE BOOKS TITLES ARE DISTRIBUTED TO THE TRADE BY CONSORTIUM BOOK SALES AND DISTRIBUTION PHONE: 800-283-3572 / SAN 631-760X LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA CHOI, DON MEE. [POEMS. SELECTIONS] HARDLY WAR / DOW MEE CHOI. PAGES ; CM ISBN 978-1-940696-23-2 (LIMITED EDITION HARDCOVER) — ISBN 978-1-940696-21-8 (SOFTCOVER) 1. TITLE. PS3603.H65A6 2016 811'.6-DC23 2015025698 DESIGNED AND COMPOSED BY QUEMADURA PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA : ny Ae et ae Jee ener 2 WAVE BOOKS 054 “*PLEASE!’’/SMOKEY THE BEAR POSTER APPEARS COURTESY OF THE VIETNAM CENTER AND ARCHIVE AT TEXAS TECH UNIVERSITY. r a new fo bizarre medium true on lof p k, a mod ption, 50 to spea erce here,” 0 tion, akelang is. 2 = ra r ‘fathe r “He FOR MY FATHER Hardly War RACE=NATION TAEDONG RIVER BRIDGE / FLIGHT OF REFUGEES / A LITTLE GLOSSARY WOE ARE YOU? 6.25 WITH HER BROTHER OW HER BACK / #1 REFUSE TO TRANSLATE 1950 JUNE 28: THE FALL OF SEOUL WITH MY BROTHER ON MY BACK / I WAS NARROWLY NARRATOR THE HYDRANGEAN CANDIDATE AUGUST 15, 1948 / A LITTLE MENU HYDRANGEA AGENDA SUICIDE PARADE THERE 1S NO SKY ONLY VISUAL AID A LITTLE CONFESSION DOUBLE HENCE UGLY=NATION PLEASE! / ONE DAY THE SOLDIERS DISCOVERED Purely Iliustrative NEW TARZON GUIDED BOMB / BOMB WITH A BRAIN THE TARZON’S GUIDE TO HISTORY / AGAIN A PERFECT BULL’S-EVE 3 5 6 9 30 32 REFUGEE GIRL / DAISY GIRL 1, LACK-A-DAISY DAISY SERENADE KITTY HAWK POSTCARD DADDY’S FLOWER BED: A LITTLE CHORUS SHITTY KITTY NEOCOLONY’S COLONY OPERATION PUNCTUM Hardly Opera MY FATHER IN SAIGON, MAY 1968 / A LITTLE PAPER CLOSET ACT 1: | WAS SURPRISED! ACT 2: WHAT’S GOING ON? OK OK ACT 3: EVERYBODY WAS THERE ACT 4: US AMBASSADOR’S GARDEN PARTY ACT 5: MADAM KIM! ACT G6: PYONGYANG EXCURSION 1950 ACT 7: FLOWER OF ALL FLOWERS Notes Acknowledgments 34 36 37 39 40 41 43 47 54 58 62 67 72 84 85 87 91 97 see RACE=NATION | was born in a tiny, traditional, tile-roofed house, a house my father bought with award money he received for his photographs of the April 19, 1960 Revolution. The student-led revolution overthrew the authoritarian South Korean president, Syng- man Rhee, installed by the US government in 1948. He tells me even elementary school students came out to join high school and college students in protest, their arms locked shoulder to shoulder. And what he cannot forget are the shoeshine boys, Korean War orphans who eked out a living on the streets of Seoul. Many of them gave up their lives in the uprising. Police opened fire, killing about 180 and wounding thousands. In 1972, the height of the US-backed dictatorship under Park Chung Hee, we bade farewell to the house | was born in. Even after several decades of living outside of South Korea, this is the house | still return to. It is my psychic and linguistic base, a site of perpetual farewell and return, a site of my political act— translation and writing. My early education in South Korea trained me to think of race as nation and of nation as race, hence race=nation. A Korean term, uri minjok—our race, our national identity—was imagined, a crucial construction and a mobilizing force in the anti- colonial, independence movement during the Japanese occupation, 1910-45. When Korea fell under the control of the US military government in 1945, a part of our race had split off as ppalgaengi, Reds or Commies. But really, anyone in “those white pajama things,” traditional pants, which the majority of the Koreans wore back then, was seen as a gook. This is how a gook=nation was born. Our race, our national identity, even our clothing became racialized and geopoliticized within the global class war. Therefore, when | was born in the tiny, tile-roofed house, | was al- ready geopolitically raced. Hence, me=gook. While | was growing up in Hong Kong, | saw more of my father’s photographs than of my father because he was always away in various war zones. He would bring back photographs of the wars he saw, then leave again. He also left us a map, a wall-sized map of Southeast Asia, framed and hung above our dining table, so we could track him across Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. What | am attempting to do with my poems and my father’s photographs is what | used to do as a child when | stared at my father’s photographs and maps. |’m trying to imagine race=nation, its language, its wars. | am trying to fold race into geopolitics and geopolitics into po- etry. Hence, geopolitical poetics. It involves disobeying history, severing its ties to power. It strings together the faintly remembered, the faintly imagined, the faintly discarded, which is to say race=nation gets to Speak its own faint history in its own faint language. Its mere umbilical cord is hardly attached to anything at all. Hence, hardly=war. 9%" 2 Re A LITTLE GLOSSARY “ee 2 =Gook =Gook Radish=Gook Flower=Gook Love Gook Hydrangea Beauty 5 petals ie) WOE ARE YOU? It was hardly war, the hardliest of wars. Hardly, hardly. It occurred to me that this particular war was hardly war because of kids, more kids, those poor kids. The kids were hungry until we Gls fed them. We dusted them with DDT. Hardly done. Reha- bilitation of Korea, that is. lt needs chemical fertilizer from the States, power to build things likea country. in the end it was the hardliest of wars made up of bubble gum, which Gls had to show those kids how to chew. In no circumstance whatever can man be comfortable without art. They don’t want everlasting charity, and we are not giving it to them. We are just lending them a hand until they can stand on their own two feet. A novel idea. This is why it occurred to me that this particular war was hardly war, the hardliest of wars. My father was hardly himself during the war, then | was born during the era that hardly existed, and, therefore, | hardly existed without DDT. Beauty is pleasure re- garded as the quality of a thing. | prefer a paper closet with real paper dresses in it. To be born hardly, hardly after the hardliest of wars, is a matter of debate. Still going forward. We are, that is. Napalm again. This is THE BIG PICTURE. War and its masses. War and its men. War and its machines. Together we form THE BIG PIC- TURE. From Korea to Germany, from Alaska to Puerto Rico. All over the world, the US Army is on the alert to defend our country, you the people, against aggression. This is THE BIG PICTURE, an official television report to the nation from the army. This is Korea! Is one thing better than another? These South Koreans are all right. Woe is you, woe is war, hardly war, woe is me, woe are you? My father is still alive, and this is how | came to prefer a paper closet with real paper dresses in it. Well, it’s morning in Korea. The most violently mountainous place on Earth. Every- one has been dusted, existence hardly done, whereas beauty has been regarded as the quality of athing. At Uncle Dann’s Huddle doughnuts and coffee are free and in case there are any, for there are many, the unescorted ladies are not permitted. The decision has been made in Tokyo for the hardliest of wars, an old soldier made it. The situation in Korea is so critical that we the Navy must give the Eighth Army prac- tical support. Do you remember how you began this day? How did you spend this morning? Woe are you? Well, pinecones fall every day. So why do we fail? Miles and miles of homeless refugees set adrift by the Red scourge. 1950 June 27: My father heard the sound of the engine of a North Korean fighter plane, the Yak-9. Foremostly and therefore barely consequently, he followed the sound, running toward the city hall. After all it was hardly war. The Yak-9, made in Russia, flew over the plaza of the city hall. Then in the most lowly, predictably, eth- ically unsound manner from the point of view of everything that is big and beautiful, the sound of the machine gun. My father missed the chance to capture the Yak-9 with his camera. That late afternoon the yet-to-be nation’s newspapers were in print, but no photos of the war appeared in any of them. After all it was hardly war, the hardliest of wars, neverthelessly Yak. And it turns out that one thing is better than another. Hence still going forward, napalm again. Always moving up to Chosin Reservoir. Always another hill, for in no circumstance whatever can man be com- fortable without art. Why that is so has nothing to do with the big problem—what to do with the orphans. And always the poor hungry kids. Now look at this and look at it and look at it. This is what the Republic of Korea is fighting for—miles and miles and miles of order words that are given in our society. Merry Christmas, Joe! Phos- phorus and flamethrowers. Fire them up!—burn them!—cook them! Beauty is pleas- ure regarded as the quality of a thing from the point of view of everything that is big and beautiful in the highest manner possible, and why that is so has nothing to do with hills and more hills, rivers and more rivers, and rice paddies and more rice pad- dies. How cold does it get in Korea? Brass-monkey cold. | refuse to translate | refuse to translate | refuse to translate | refuse to translate | refuse to translate 5=Over 1950 JUNE 28: THE FALL OF SEOUL | was cheerily cherrily red and merely merrily washed my face in the yard and looked up at the stars. | decided to go alone as far as | could go south, do and do and to. | passed the narrow alley and came to a big road. Neverthelessly Yak and Yak sounded fainter than last night. No one was on the road, so! ran really readily red, are you really red? The East Gate was still standing, but the police station was empty. The tracks shone under the stars but there were no trams to be seen. There were several ways to go south, do and do and to. It wasn’t safe to take the South Gate route where the governmental buildings and banks were, so | turned left do and do and to, to cross the stone bridge across Ch’onggye Creek and as | did so | felt compelled to raise a question most general in nature—Are you OK, ROK? 17 12 It was partly history. | say this as | watch the people pour out to the market to stock up on food, an old habit from the colonial occupation, so | say it was partly history as the ground trembled and a Russian-made tank crossed the bridge and | froze and stared up at the red star of the tank, which is also partly history. The tank aimed and fired a shot to the midpoint of Mount South and everyone scattered like crickets. | say it was partly history because in 1948, the year of liberation from Japan, a star of a different degree boasted that if war ever broke out they would be able to push back the North Korean People’s Army and have breakfast in North Korea’s city of Kaesong, lunch in the capital, Pyongyang, and dinner in Shinuiju all in a single day. So | say it was partly history as | watch the red star pass by, shitting more stars from its behind. | was narrowly narrator, yet superbly SO. : Naturally convincing BBC News reported: ited States Presid y S. Truman has : tep further a nations to go st invasion. : counterly The North Korean wi sion t- Wal ale exe) _ | wantonly resisted nothing i - yet superbly so a |wasnarrowly narrator: ee 14 THE HYDRANGEAN CANDIDATE Many years ago, when | was traveling about the country, | noticed magnificent hy- drangeas on the hills where the air drainage was perfect and very poor specimens or perhaps none at allin the valleys. Sway me—sway me—oh sway me—yes, ma’am. Mop-head hydrangeas, mother of all hydrangeas, are the fussiest. How do you know? Chunjin born two miles from here, Captain. Every place we’ve been in Korea, this joker was born two miles from it. Tricky. Swamp all around. Yards up, maybe quicksand. How do you know? Beauty=Nation is the kindest, bravest, warmest, most wonderful nation I’ve ever known in my life. From this, it might appear that the hydrangea is a fairly simple plant, but there are more complications. And they can happen because they do—so sway me—sway me—oh sway me—yes, ma’am— spring snow is prettier than winter snow—so allow me to introduce our American visitors, and | must ask you to forgive their somewhat lackadaisical manners, but | have conditioned them, or brainwashed them, which | understand is the new Amer- ican word, to believe that they are waiting out a storm in the lobby of a small hotel in New Jersey where a meeting of the ladies garden club is in progress. Yes, ma’am, Beauty=Nation is not an American word. Me=Gook, born miles from here. Non- sense, of course! Gh Mother’s mop head is marred by ring spots. How do you know? Yak dung. Yes, ma’am. Sway me—sway me—oh sway me—oh mother of all hydran- geas! My dear Yen, as you grow older, you grow more long-winded. Can’t we get to the point? Has the man ever killed anyone, or has he not? It is very interesting but the end of the nineteenth century and the twentieth century realized the beauty of publicity for its own sake as an end in itself, this is very interesting. Yes, ma’am— sway me—sway me—oh sway me—fun hydrangeas—how deranged—yes, ma’am, | think so—spring snow is prettier than winter snow—you just sit there quietly and cooperate—yes, ma’am—oh Mother’s mop head is marred by ring spots—we gig- gled we said that is optimism. 15 A LITTLE MENU Wieners Canned fruit Crackers Soluble coffee Milk powder Granulated sugar Tin of jam Cookie sandwich Fudge or Radish soup Birthday seaweed soup Pan-fried Spam with kimchi Strictly lard SO What did General Fatty eat? 17 HYDRANGEA AGENDA Beauty=Nation Ugly=Nation Ladies Garden in Progress The American Visitors The New American Word The Beauty of Publicity Mother’s Mop Head Ring spots Sway Me Yes, Ma’am Gossamer=Blouse Yankee=Blouse Yes, Ma’am Sway Me Father, nice to see you Major, it’s been a hell of a ride General M & General H Mother’s Mop Head | see ring spots That’s a good sight for my old eyes Yes, Ma’am Ray-Ban Sunglasses 18 So Sway Me Sway Me Oh Sway Me 1. Parade of the Japanese Colonial Government’s Monitors 2. Parade of the First Republic’s ROK Monitors 3. Parade of the DPRK Communist Monitors 4. Parade of the Joint ROK-UN Forces Monitors Yes, Ma’am Did | tell you | saw corpses piled up inside the well in Pyongyang? Did | tell you | helped the Communist Monitor who was also a Colonial Monitor, ROK Monitor, then later an ROK-UN Monitor drag the corpse of his brother? Monitor=For Life! General=For Life! President=For Life! However, | see buttons and ring spots Father, Hiroshima and Nagasaki Major, snap out of it. It’s August 15, 1948 He’s smiling at me Fun Hydrangeas Gossamer=Blouse and Yankee=Blouse Warmly greeted one another | see Ugly=Translators Yes, Ma’am Me=Gook 19 20 SUICIDE PARADE Father—Cyanide= Let’s take a closer look at the most feared weapon used by the US in the Korean War, a gelling powder composed of naphthalene and palmitate (hence napalm) 65% oleic acid + 390% coconut fatty acid + 5% naphthenic acid necessitates most arguably necessary clinging burning necessitates gasoline and stirring (hence gasstir) which is to say South Korean laborers funnel napalm powder into gasoline tanks Moisture is the greatest problem in mixing napalm Reds dead without a mark on them (hence hardly) Wooden warehouses and thatched-hut villages, common in Korea, were made to order for firebombs, as were Japan’s wooden cities (hence napalm) and (hence gasstir) and the respectable distance of the planes maintains a gusto of ring spots maintains Bombenbrandschrumpfleichen which is to say incendiary-bomb-shrunken bodies so the story of napalm is still being written in Korea (hence napalm) + (hence gasstir) double hence Daughter—Cyanide= A LITTLE CONFESSION | used to think that my father was a foreigner | wanted to grow up to be a foreigner like my father | eventually became a foreigner | no longer pretend to write in English Because English is a foreigner like me But | still pretend to be a foreigner—O rubbish! Because that is what | am in English Now | pretend to be a flower Scribble flower! Because | am not Eternal | scribble Because | am not Ovary | scribble Because | am not Anther | scribble Because | am not Petal | scribble Because | am not Beauty | scribble | am a foreigner who writes in English Because English is a foreigner like me | write prescriptions for the injured and the sick Scribble republic! O rubbish! Certainly not a daisy! Clozapine 23 24 DOUBLE HENCE Clozapine—clozapine, generic available, yes, orally disintegrating, reserved for pa- tients who have failed to respond to other standard medications or who are at risk for recurring suicidal behavior, prescription, yes, should be kept below 86 degrees Fahrenheit, dosing—dosing, is increased slowly until the optimal dose is found, an- imal studies suggest no important effects on the fetus, O fetus—fetus, slows the in- testine, muscles of the eye and bladder, is drowsiness, is increased salivation, is heart rate, is headache, is tremor, risking—risking, can be used in pregnancy if the physician feels that it is necessary, effects—effects, orally disintegrating, is se- creted in breast milk, besides—besides, himself—herself, neverthelessly neces- sary, if the physician feels that it is necessary, O tremor—tremor, going from a lying or sitting position to a standing position, that it is necessarily necessary, O milk— milk, then | was ready to take flight through the only window in my attic room where | hid alone with a pouch of cyanide in my pocket, then practically flew across the neighbors’ tiled roofs, narrowly escaping capture by the procolonial-communist- democracy-monitor-for-life, then | narrowly narrated to my daughter, a glass of wa- ter, aspoon, quietly locked her door, O narrowly—narrowly, necessary effects orally disintegrating, the muscles of the eye and bladder, O bladder—bladder, a condition in which the intestine stops working, then | narrowly narrated to my daughter, hy- drangeas daringly salivating, saluting the ladies garden in progress, O beauty of publicity, then an increased risk of death for unclear reasons, a glass of water, a spoon, quietly locked her door, going from a lying or sitting position to a standing position, narrowly necessarily UGLY=NATION Once upon a time, there was Ugly=Nation. It still is, mind you. The most violently mountainous place on Earth is no longer. The mountains were reduced to hills as everything depends on bombers and perspective if you happen to be nothing at all. In other words, the mountains were mere hills from the perspective of Beauty=Na- tion, which is endlessly lofty and correct. And it just happens that correctness has a great deal to do with beauty in general. If | may add, correctness is unbeatable beauty, which is why it is revered amongst skin crisp like fried potato chips. And so strategically speaking, nothing really matters in regard to Ugly=Nation since its ug- liness is so utterly unbearable that it might as well be scorched, stripped bare of pines and feathers, barren to its bones. Welcome to the meat grinder. Naturally, Ugly=Nation swam ina pool of DDT. A licey situation. A nation devoid of lice! Is that possible? Beauty=Nation is possible. Ugly=Nation eventually grew up to be some- what beautiful, but that was only from the perspective of its own kind, a perspective devoid of respectable distance. Patted with DDT powder, those azalea-pink beaks, bloated bellies, and stubby toes. Those utterlings. And they aren’t just Orientals, they are Communists. 25 26 = © off they went to a bigger and bette! dies. The soldiers x _. on eyes, > spray my furry ‘defo rmity. WN Note: “The soldiers discovered that rice is . . ”” is from the International War Crimes Tribunal in 1967, quoted in Gerard Greenfield’s article “Agent Blue and the Business of Killing Rice” (2004). Smokey Bear wildfire poster was appropriated by the US mil- itary during Operation Ranch Hand (1962-71). Nearly 20 million gallons of herbi- cides were sprayed on Vietnam as well as some parts of Laos and Cambodia. 27 Aes tee iY a i at en / i 7) r 1 } iE fo ONO” po ly Le t aes f LU, ae Pe Se Man NEW TARZON GUIDED BOMB HITS BUELL” SE YEU lox c a A secret new wonder bomb, the result of exhaustive testing and experimenta- tion, is dropped from a B-29 over a Se- cret proving ground somewhere in the United States. At first the bomb, called the Tarzon, merely seems to fall, then as if guided by an invisible hand, moves off to the right to follow the line below. At the end of the line is the target, which the bomb seeks out with an eerie, al- EE most human understanding. Watch this performance carefully, for you are wit- nessing a new concept of modern war- fare. Now the bomb holds fast to the f 1} Amerf(een volc?e ¢ n/N Ly L> Ne | fi. Vis ent fo Lord eer 0 a \ ike 9 a Cate, prov’ GS!EC pomore parcrorsan m a line. The AirEorce refuses to give details of the Tarzon’s operation and range it hits the bull’s-eye as the bombardier intended. That was a practice run.\Now, in actual combat in Korea, the guided bomb seeks out the underwater struc- ture of a dam vital to the Reds. Again a perfect bull’s-eye. Is the Tarzon in mass production? Is it used regularly in Korea? The irgiee aces Still more sen- sational films show the Tarzon seeking outa bridge\Loaded with an atomic war- head, the Tarzon could be the world’s most terrifying weapon.| ee for QO id yw uv te - i Le mm ente 9 ,VO U ted AD ’ buy Ai Nees tte BOMB WITH A BRAIN AKA IEE ST ARIZ ON CoURCDES is bh ik TO TARGETS America’s secret new wonder bomb, the Tarzon, is dropped over a hush-hush testing ground somewhere in the United States. At first glance, it appears to be rather like a V-1 rocket the Germans used to fire in southern England. But now it moves to the right to follow the road below as if guided by some invisi- ble hand. At the end of the long road Is the target, which the bomb seeks out with an uncanny, almost human under- standing. The target’s not far off now, and the bomb’s still holding fast to its path. The circular target area is below, and down goes the Tarzon. That was a practice run, but in action in Korea the bomb is released to seek out the under- water structure of a dam vital to the Reds. Another bull’s-eye. The American Air Force refuses to give any details of the Tarzon’s range and operation. Now the bomb attacks an enemy-held bridge. Loaded with an atomic warhead the Tarzon might well be one of the world’s most powerful weapons. 31 32 THE TAR ZON: S GUIDE TO Hise On. Like fried potato chips—| believe so, ut- terly so—The hush-hush proving ground was utterly proven as history—Hardly= History—| believe so, eerily so—hush hush—Now watch this performance— Bull’s-eye—An uncanny human under- standing on target—Absolute=History— loaded with terrifying meaning—The Air Force doesn’t say, hence Ugly=Narra- tion—That’s a good sight for my old eyes, he said—utterly so—looked down on the bodies of four young Korean soldiers—Purely=Utterly—so and so— to and to—hush hush—it’s not proper to be against human understanding— Another bull’s-eye—Hardly=World—by some invisible hand—as the bombar- dier intended—follow the line below— yes, ma’am—somewhere—nowhere— follow the road below—yes, ma’am—the origins of modern warfare—not far off now—follow the road—yes, ma’am—at first glance—it’s Germany—yes, ma’am —it’s southern England—follow the line —it’s United States—Absolute=Beauty —hush hush—at actual combat in Korea —the eerie human understanding is re- leased to seek out the underwater struc- ture of a dam that may be vital to— Hardly=Humans—no details to—Hardly =History—unload, if| may say so, utterly so—follow me AGAIN A Pere r bt, I: BULL’S-EYE 32 36 1, LACK-A-DAISY |, Lack-a-daisy, born two miles from here. Here is DMZ. In fact, |, Lack-a-daisy, born two miles from every place you’ve been. How orange—yes, ma’am. |, Lack-a-daisy, born two miles from every place you’ve been, which is known as the human core, which translates to born two miles from every flowering belly button. Here is DMZ. Mark-a-daisy. Every belly is a suspect. |, Lack-a-daisy, born two miles from every place, every suspect, every petal kicked open, am deeply moved by world memo- ries. There is no choice in the matter. What are world memories? It turns out that they are war memories. And what are war memories? They are orphan memories. Orphan memories are like the fetuses thrown out in bottles. Fishy-smelling blood clots. |, Lack-a-daisy, never saw the fetus-filled bottles with my own eyes, but when you are a little girl, what you hearis as good as seeing with your very own eyes. Here is DMZ. We talk about blood at great length. Fetuses captivate our imagination, par- ticularly orphan fetuses. After all, |, myself, was nearly an orphan fetus. Luckily, | happily survived. |, Lack-a-daisy, thank orphan memories. I’m bloody fetal. I’m purely petal. I’m hardly war. Now, ask me a difficult question. How orange—yes, ma’am. He’s my son. ma Bi UR i TO Ne oO Ne BNO) NOC Oe Oe a eae hm 9 DAISY SERENADE |, Lack-a-daisy=like a daisy=lack a daisy=like a daisy=l, Lack-a-daisy Nine nine=mind your daisy=9 9=paisley daisy Motherly stamen=style style=overly ovaries! O fear veer=you are my Schneewittchen Or 0?=Do you know?=0 or 5?=Do you know?=Yi Sang knows i style stigma=style anther=then sepal ovule=Over | sang=| sang=like a daisy | fugue=| fugue=like a daisy | nearly=narrowly=ovary=Over Paisley Daisy Oopsy Daisy Or Lyndon? Or Barry? Or Crazy? Oxeye Daisy? Or! Sang? Or London? Or Yoke? Or Vote? Or 18? Overly Overly We must love one another or die 37 38 Beauty) 8=18 18=18 {8-18} }8=18}48=1850-Nation Beauty=4=4=4=4=4=4=4=4=4=4=0=Nation . } ees Wi 9, Beauty=Me=Me=Me=Me=o=Nation Me=Over 39574 as ~ eS. ie Sse ‘ { ¥ SE ) a os Roger at <x ri oS a? x. 5 6 \ ~ a yy owe A e2aehe ‘ & * Wis .- O w "5 ne # SN A \y a re “WSN “Giod BuilBeyseq puepuess jo -aiq ‘mojebig F uenoig ) 2 } ava : a 7 ) ‘* x 3 Aim aS Ls \ gx Ss Uw i 4 > A »S 5 we > yp © c a 5 Po ae *€ a A x on a iw 2 dua) % mY 4 a. a f os eo Ps Pag te ir S Wee 8 aia AC ies na ie yj a » *, : y s ox a Pe | \ “s Ww ~ 4 =x > Aaa 4, a ha ane ° ~~} si \ &% @ ~~ an «fS ry 5 Raat anal xz 9 i $ ~~ Y~ OD AS = io) rat y HE ‘ NN , ged ~~ ‘ >> < ) Ne > 3 c ‘ 13595 a ek i WEG oa oe ene ee yar 8 lef > “ X md 8 es - > > Ma ow) i = . <=) . ‘ an a. ; @\ < “ a4 a\\ > a \v sy nn sae x x VU ~e = ¥ oes 4 . oe rem yA “ So MB >? a ay ya NX La P “AY - a 7 es =~ ae ¥ . x } 5 st SG aw 40 DADDY’S FLOWER BED PX TEM ESE Tae@ es WSs Rose moss blossoms Red balsam blossoms Me baby azalea look at flowers and think of Daddy Miss you, Daddy! Daddy said to me Let’s live together with flowers but Big Kitty says to me Translate me and I’ll kill you Rose moss blossoms Red balsam blossoms Me baby azalea don’t want to live at all Then place stamp here Yes, Daddy To Hanoi or Hai Duong Yes, Daddy SHITTY KITTY Here comes Shitty Kitty en route to the Gulf of Tonkin or en route to a race riot? That is the question and meanwhile discipline is the keystone and meanwhile did you see on TV helicopters being ditched into the sea? That is also my film and meanwhile all refugees must be treated as suspects. Looking for your husband? Looking for your son? That is the question and meanwhile she was the mother of the boy or that is what the translator said or Shitty Kitty or shall we adhere to traditional concepts of military discipline tempered with humanitarianism? That is the question and meanwhile South Korea exports military labor left over from the war. That is also my history or is that your history? That is the question and meanwhile (CHORUS: Dictator Park Chung Hee and his soldiers in Ray-Bans) How much? $7.5 million=per division er Binh Tai massacre=$7.5 million or Binh Hoa massacre=$7.5 million or Dien Nien—Phuoc Binh massacre=$7.5 million or Go Dai massacre=$7.5 million or Ha My massacre=$7.5 million or Phong Nhi & Phong Nhat massacre=$15 million or Tay Vinh massacre=$7.5 million or Vinh Xuan massacre=$7.5 million or Mighty History? 41 42 That is the question and meanwhile a riot began over a grilled cheese sandwich at Subic Bay. Discrimination or perception? That is the question and meanwhile the sailor refused to make a statement or translate? That is the question and meanwhile twenty-six men all black were charged with assault and rioting and meanwhile did you translate? That is my question and meanwhile lard or Crisco? Aye, aye, sir! (Anti-CHORUS: kittens in frilly white bonnets, bibs, and mittens) KIETY S.ONG |, aye-aye-sir! |, crazy-daisy-sir! |, export-quality-sir! |, grill-grill-sir! |, mMeow-meow-sir! |, kitty-litter-sir! NEOCOLONY’S COLONY You provide the prose poems, |’ll provide the war Aye, aye, Sir! Me translate, Sir! Me Binh Tai / Me been there, Sir! Me Binh Hoa / Me been high, Sir! Me Dien Nien—Phuoc Binh / Me 9 9-bow bow, Sir! Me Go Dai / Me good dad, Sir! Me Ha My / Me hate milk, Sir! Me Phong Nhi & Phong Nhat / Me flunky & fuck that, Sir! Me Tay Vinh / Me terrible, Sir! Me Vinh Xuan / Me VC no, Sir! Me Tiger, Sir! ME~OW 43 44 KiTtTEyY ST Ew Under the starry night Why, it’s practically a jungle Hello Fatty! Hello Kitty! Meow | love SPAM! SPAM patties Browned in lard or Crisco Leftover sour kimchi Don’t be a pussycat Jungle water Boil Boil Yummy! Miss you Mommy! CRESS ~~ www . Vietwet og skr — Ww — O tremor—tremor, going from a lying or sitting position to a standing position Are you OK, ROK? I’m dreaming of a white Christmas Just like the ones | used to know, Sir! | es L = ‘+ 6 SI, Sir! White Horse, Sir! Blue Dragon, Sir! May all your Christmases be white, Sir! Walking, crawling, or growing Children listen where the treetops glisten L Search and destroy, said = (Chorus of O) O dream—no face just a wide-open belly O fetus in the split womb O cut off the baby cord O war—breasts cut out and woman shot by ROK marines O US marines transport her to the hospital but she died soon O war—executed young women’s bodies O jungle leaves O pregnant woman’s forehead blown off O fetus all alone 46 O dream—tiger teeth scrambled O parade of operations O bonuses! Operation Flying Tiger, Sir! OPERATION PUNCTUM The television in The Deer Hunter is in Clairton, Pennsylvania. Everything is still at Welsh’s Lounge: the clouds, the sky, the unlit neon sign outside the window. All is calm, all is bright. | sing in English while my father is in Vietnam. American wives are in immeasurable pain and so is my mother. American soldiers are pushing a hel- icopter to the right side of the TV screen. Behind the soldiers is number 19. It stands for USS Hancock: its nickname, Fighting Hannah. Helicopter whirring. It sounds like Godzilla crying. My father is nowhere to be seen because he’s behind the camera, behind the lens. His eye’s filled with the green ocean. It zooms in on the soldiers, some in uniform, some shirtless, on the decks with number 19 behind them. They’re calm and bright, looking down at the flight platform below. Nobody is crying. Num- ber 19 goes beyond Yi Sang’s number 13. History is hysterical. The-13th-child-also- says-it’s-terrifying. 13+3+3. 19=13. A modest, shared hallucination. I’m still the 13th child. And Godzilla is still crying. Hannah ditches the helicopter in the sea. Now everything is happening on the left side of the screen. Nobody’s in the cockpit of the helicopter. The chopper blades tilt, making a diagonal line across the entire screen. That strange cry. It wants to go home—O like me, like my father. Now the helicopter and its blades are perfectly vertical to the South China Sea. The chopper is now engulfed by the sea, white with foam. Sayonara, Saigon! THIS SEEMS TO BE THE LAST CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICAN INVOLVEMENT IN VIET- NAM. Now everything appears in the center of the screen. Helicopter is everything. Hannah is everything. My father’s framing never sways even when flowers call to him. He edits as he films, he often told me. He’s still nowhere to be seen. Missing 47 48 in action somewhere in Cambodia, filming carpet bombing, my mother said. O the chopper’s belly convulses. O it’s in immeasurable pain. The chopper’s door opens and the pilot and men in white shirts and dark pants spill out. |T’?S ALSO BEEN THE LARGEST SINGLE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICA IT- SELF. The chopper’s blades are swirling in every frenzied direction. O suicidal lines. Sayonara, Saigon! HILARY BROWN, ABC NEWS ABOARD THE ATTACK AIRCRAFT CARRIER USS HANCOCK IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA. White with foam. Now| see buttons on History’s blouse. “Hardly Opera” is based on interviews I conducted with my father about his war ex- periences. As a child, I believed that the people and things that my father pho- tographed followed him and lived inside his camera. I wished that I, too, could follow my father and live inside his camera. I finally enact my wish in “Hardly Opera.” Per- haps in many ways the entire book is about the experience of the Photograph not as the Spectator or the Operator, to use Barthes’s terms, but as the daughter of the Op- erator living inside the Camera with Spectrum, with History. Everything and every- one inside the Camera are mad. They also enact their wish, the wish to return to the world. 49 a“« / HARDLY ey a" Y A LITTLE PAPER CLOSET Sconoole vonnet Scnbbvle blouse Scnbple nopon Scribble gloves foo many ugiies Scribble OF 57 58 Act 1. | was surprised! CAMERA ELMAR |-like-a I-like-a | take a look I-like-a A copy of L/FE magazine O-Pinkville O-like-Me As far as war is involved such a thing is happening anywhere any place any nation |-like-a CHORUS (DEAD ORPHANS OF THE WORLD) Anywhere any place any nation l-like-a! (repeat as an undertone, shaking pine needle branches in their hands Chorus is dressed in white—the color of death) CAMERA ELMAR One day | called my friend’s office O-like-Me O-seaweed | was Surprised! He was Sent to a military training camp | should have been drafted too but | was younger than he according to my family registry document When he came back after Seoul was regained he rushed to see his family He arrived with an M1 rifle wearing a helmet His neighbors cheered O-sway-me sway-me O-like-Me CRAZIES (OR ETERNITY) Two Reds! Terrible acts! Kill Them! (shaking red hydrangeas in their hands) CAMERA ELMAR O-told-me such a case His neighbors grabbed my friend and took him to the house 60 where the Reds were hiding Crushed the gate O-a-like-a-like-a CRAZIES Reds! Reds! (shaking red hydrangeas) CHORUS Hydrangea agenda! (repeat as an undertone) CAMERA ELMAR Q-crazy-daisy! His neighbors grabbed the Reds aman and awoman O-ring-spots! Dragged them to the town’s storehouse O-orphans! CRAZIES Kill them! Kill them! CAMERA ELMAR My friend worked for a third-rate newspaper | worked for a first-rate newspaper O-a-like-a-like-a O-now The man trapped in the storehouse worked for a second-rate newspaper O-bonnet! He was a sports editor! My friend knew him O-flower! CRAZ DES Kill them! Kill them! CAMERA ELMAR O-rose-of-sharon! Like-a-lily! Luckily, the sports editor didn’t recognize my friend so he shot the two Reds the sports editor and the woman O-lily-bang-bang! Otherwise the crazies 62 would have killed my friend Such a case countless cases O-lily-me CHORUS O-flower! O-flower! rantically shaking pine needle branches ) f ; Sl CRAZIES Sports editor! Sports editor! (repeat five times while Chorus and Crazies merge on stage, shaking red hydrangeas and pine needle branches ) Act 2. What’s going on? OK OK (a mass of pink Hydrangeas in paisley dresses with flowered hats sip tea, eat cake, smoke cigarettes through fancy holders, adjust bra straps, take notes, etc.) SWAYING HYDRANGEAS A funny story which is just another story There is only one road from south to north Dusty when dry Muddy when rainy CAMERA ELMAR One day during the war | came upon a story in Chosun Daily Only a front and back page for paper and ink were scarce At the bottom of the front page there is an editorial usually written by a top editor something humorous something political O-blouse SWAYING HYDRANGEAS Paisley-daisy, blousy-daisy (sip tea) CAMERA ELMAR An American Army major drove down from north to south 63 64 he himself alone He pulled over because he saw a funny-looking ceremony O-ribbon-bon-bon O-orphans! AMERICAN ARMY MAJOR What’s going on? WHITE HYDRANGEAS (in baggy white pajamas ) OK OK AMERICAN ARMY MAJOR What’s going on? SWAYING HYDRANGEAS OK-bang-bang! WHITE HYDRANGEAS OK OK CAMERA ELMAR O-bonnet-bon-bon! What’s happening was a wedding ceremony An old custom of Korean farmers a strange manner O-pajamas! The bridegroom is tied up by his feet and hands to a beam Village people whack him with sticks O-bon-bon O-bad-guy You steal a nice beautiful girl from our village It’s just a play O-madness SWAYING HYDRANGEAS Paisley-daisy, blousy-daisy AMERICAN ARMY MAJOR Why are you hitting him? WHITE HYDRANGEAS OK OK 65 66 AMERICAN ARMY MAJOR Is he a Communist? WHITE HYDRANGEAS OK OK SWAYING HYDRANGEAS OK-bang-bang! Yes, ma’am AMERICAN ARMY MAJOR A Communist! ’ll kill him WHITE HYDRANGEAS OK OK SWAYING HYDRANGEAS Yes, ma’am CAMERA ELMAR He pulled out a .45 O-Yankee-bon-bon! SWAYING HYDRANGEAS Yes, ma’am CAMERA ELMAR O-bonnet! Suddenly the whole world became quiet The major got back into his jeep and drove off O-OK-bon-bon OK was still the best word in Vietnam O-scribble! Act 3. Everybody was there ROSE OF SHARON (wearing Ray-Bans, very still, and beautiful) | am arose of sharon a lily of the valleys 67 68 a flower of heaven a kind of knight a cadet my pistil powder kind of immortal a kind of crocus a bridal sprig CAMERA ELMAR Just a few days after the May 16 coup d’état of 1961 | was delighted for a different reason If | made one Story for UPI | was paid one-quarter the salary of a bureau chief Two stories a half of a month’s salary Four stories then | would make the same as a bureau chief A section chief editor of a Korean newspaper made only 20 to 25 dollars O-lily-pomp-pomp At first | had no film camera Later | used a 35mm camera with a 100ft film-roll 35mm changed to 60mm then Movietone News was faded out They built a new system Television news O-Daddy! ROSE OF SHARON | fuss sever So faintly Pale bridal news Powder! Is it Coty powder? | pat dust jab sever Soa faintly Petaled starched petticoated Pomp bridal news Powder! Is it Coty powder? CAMERA ELMAR After the coup several hundred cadets in West Point—style uniform marched to the square of Seoul City Hall The Army Chief of Staff looked like a naughty boy a three-star general O-starched! He was giving a speech . About six generals stood behind him at the top of stairs O-petti-Coty! 70 CHORUS (orphans again: shoeshine boys shot dead during the 1960 Student Revolution) O-petti-coup! Who is General Park? (repeat five times in a whisper) CAMERA ELMAR O-pretty-shoes! Nobody knew AP photographer was there | was there Kim from another newspaper was there Everybody was there CHORUS O-rosy-posy! Is it Coty powder? CAMERA ELMAR ll go find out | had a heart of stone when | started working for the newspaper | wasn’t afraid of anything in this world even Syngman Rhee even General MacArthur O-anther! | walked up the stairs and saw a man with Ray-Bans O-Coty-hoity! Only two stars on his cap He didn’t look like a general at all Are you General Park? CHORUS But nobody knew O-bridal-shoes! CAMERA ELMAR O-news! Excuse me! | started rolling the film a close-up of General Park That day the AP photographer’s photo of the general was in Newsweek and the Washington Post Later the photographer became the Blue House Security Chief O-belt! Anyhow | made a story CHORUS O-petti-coup! You may powder! 71 cers CAMERA ELMAR | said to General Park Your men are in control of Kimpo Airport No news is allowed out of the country to New York, Washington (ha, | exaggerated!), or Tokyo He said Come to my office and let’s talk Of course | didn’t go One hour later! shipped my film to New York via Tokyo CHORUS O-pretty-shoes! Act 4. US Ambassador’s garden party (several days after the May 16 coup d’état) ~a waltz of flowers~ (Azalea in deep pink, its size varied by wide-angle lens, super-wide lens, telephoto lens) AZALEA (CAMERA ELMAR AS AZALEA) During the war a reporter from Seoul Daily came to find me in Pusan He said It is very hard to find you Why don’t you come back to Seoul work for the paper? | said What about the draft? He said It would be like serving in the military permanently! FOR SY TnitA:S (in yellow chiffon dresses scattering petals to the wind) Azalea, you may powder! AZALEA The reporter came back for my answer | said After the war and when !’m old how would | explain myself to my grandchildren? What | did during the war? He said What? Grandchildren? | said | would like to stay in Pusan 73 74 FORSYTHIAS (fluttering arms scattering petals across the map of Korea) Azalea, you may powder! SWAYING HYDRANGEAS How many stars were there? Yes, ma’am ROSE OF SHARON A four-star general! A three-star general! A two-star general! Over ten stars! O lovely brides! CHERRY BLOSSOMS (in clusters, snowing) Army Navy Air Force Marine commanders Rosy posy! They posed in front of the map not an ordinary map Whites flags hills mines pajamas EWAYTING HYORANGEAS How many shots? Yes, ma'am AT ALEM One shot! One flash! 0 beautiful picture! 0 ring spots! SWAYING HYD RANGEAS How many albums? Yes, ma'am 76 AZALEA A three-star general ordered one hundred photo albums from Japan! FORSYTHIAS (orbiting Azalea) General Kim wants to see you! AZALEA Overly ovaries! The general talked for a whole hour How to organize his old photographs Overly ovaries! He brought me two shoeboxes He grinned Overly ovaries! Photos of his service in the Japanese military! Overly ovaries! How overly! ROSE OF SHARON Year by year! | want modern style! No blemishes! FORSYTHIAS General Kim wants to have dinner with you AZALEA Thank you but | would like to go home to my baby son Petals fall and bloom again (all the flowers in a circle bow five times) ~end of waltz~ (chorus and flowers chant in unison— from top to bottom then bottom to top) 77 O-Daddy! O-Daddy! O-Daddy! O-Daddy! O-Daddy! O-LitysSir! 0-Petti-Sir! O-Coty-Sir! ROK, you are OK! 78 ~interlude~ CAMERA ELMAR O-him! Just before Syngman Rhee was ousted in 1960 General Kim became Defense Minister Nobody opened their mouths about the fraudulent election But the university students high school students even shoeshine boys protested O-mayhem! Ministers took off General Kim walked down the stairs and spoke with the foreign press | was operating a movie camera O-seaweed! He smiled O-parade-you-are-my-foreign-aid! ~téte-a-téte of flowers~ (still at the ambassador’s garden party in the middle of Seoul) ROSE OF SHARON How do you do Mr. Ambassador? 79 80 DECLASSIFIED FLOWER How do you do? Modern style? | do AZALEA Overly ovaries! General Kim How do you do? ROSE OF SHARON One shot! No spots! How many baby azaleas? UPI FLOWER Did something happen? The world wants to know ROSE OF SHARON Syngman Rhee has left for Hawaii Modern style of course! UPIPE ROWER Do petals fall and bloom again? UGLY FLOWER Tell the world We want Coty powder! CHERRY BLOSSOMS O totally tether! Does it tatter? GLAS SIFAE DORE OWEIRS O patter matter! Do you batter? 81 82 BABY AZALEA O Coty potty! Hoity naughty FOURS VanrArs O pat her met her! Does she natter? ROSE OF SHARON \’d rather batter BLUE HYDRANGEAS Yes, ma’am ~end of téte-d-téte~ (forsythias orbit on their own) (Baby Azalea’s babble) O Daddy’s signature squat! One second, two seconds One minute O Daddy’s still alive! Everyone ducked down except for Daddy One second, two seconds O Mekong delta! O Daddy duck! O Daddy in Pyongyang O angels! 83 84 Act 5. Madam Kim! MINISTER OF MINISTRY OF INFORMATION What’s your name in kanji? CAMERA ELMAR O-Colony! During the war | had to stay late for political events at the Chosun Hotel She remembered my name and kept asking for me | sat in the front next to the driver | had no idea what she was saying Something political something depressing O-Neocolony! She kept talking to me And | kept saying O-Overly! MERELY PONY O Beauty Colony! Motherly Stamen! Madam Kim! What is your name in kanji? Peony-my-only! O Beauty Colony! Motherly Stamen! Madam Kim! Did someone pee on me? Yes, ma’am (more babble) 18=Sepal 18=Sepal 18=Sepal 18=Sepal 18=Sepal O potty! Act 6. Pyongyang Excursion 1950 CAMERA ELMAR One morning | picked up a newspaper There was my name in kanji 85 A special government-sponsored assignment O-beauty-of-publicity! A total of nine men dispatched to Pyongyang the western front the central front the eastern front O-powder! NMIEIR Beye PE @iNby Shall we go out? There’s an old gate O marvelous! Taedong River O beautiful! Angel’s pagoda O marvelous! Shall we go out? American soldiers are waving to us We are wearing the same uniform Labor News bombed Nothing was left Shall we go out? Angel’s lotus pond O beautiful! | have my Leica camera You have your 35mm movie camera Americans are waving to us Film this People returning to Pyongyang Film this The gate the bridge O marvelous! Film this Angel’s panorama O beautiful! Film this Pyongyang destroyed O peony-my-only Lotus petals O beautiful! The gate the river the bridge O marvelous! Angels are waving to us Act 7. Flower of all flowers CAMERA ELMAR | speak as a flower— a rose of sharon— my eye’s filled with the green ocean— my tiny arm on your shoulder— | speak as a flower— swaying wildly as a hydrangea— hardly deranged— | must point out a simple truth— the more ground you take— the more ground you must defend— Korea Hilton on the hill— not a magnificent hill— 87 88 seventy miles from Panmunjom— flower of all flowers— Gl friends— you want peace— we want peace— | must point out a simple truth— my eye’s filled with the green ocean— swaying tender seaweed— hardly a flower— hardly anything at all— conveniently ground to a pulp— the smell of burnt corpses— on the outskirts of Saigon— | must point out a simple truth— I’m without a bonnet— or ribbons— swaying tender seaweed— crushed ovules— decapitated anthers— May 1968— my tiny arm on your shoulder— | speak as a flower— a rose of sharon— my eye’s filled with the green ocean— my tiny self hardly natters— Hello Gls— why must you die— when you have just begun to live?— | speak as a flower— a rose of sharon— my eye’s filled with the green ocean— | must point out a simple truth— the angels are waving to us— 89 NOTES “Race=Nation”: This was a talk for “Reading Race” at the Race & Creative Writing Conference 2014, University of Montana, Missoula. It was also previously pub- lished in Freely Frayed, 4=q, & Race=Nation (Wave Pamphlet #9, 2014). Taedong River Bridge / Flight of Refugees: My father (left) and his two colleagues on the Taedong River Bridge in Pyongyang, North Korea. My father used a self timer to take this photograph in November 1950, before the bridge was damaged in the air raids as the US-UN troops were pushed down from the north by the Chinese Red Army. The photo on the right is the same bridge, December 4, 1950: Flight of Refugees Across Wrecked Bridge in Korea by Max Desfor. “Woe Are You?” “6.25,” and “1950 June 28: The Fall of Seoul”: Lines from my father’s writing about the first few months of the Korean War; Korea: The Forgotten War (1987), a documentary made up of army footage and narration; “order words that are given in our society” is from “What Is the Creative Act?” by Gilles Deleuze in French Theory in America (2001); “Is one thing better than another?” and “Why do we fail?” from Poster Object (1988) by Allen Ruppersberg at the Henry Art Gallery in 2010; “Beauty is pleasure regarded as the quality of a thing” is by San- tayana and “In no circumstance whatever can man be comfortable without art” is by Ruskin. These quotes were part of the postcard series made to mark the 3 Days of Poetry organized by Wave Books at the Henry Art Gallery, Seattle, August 2009. The Wave Books poets offered suggestions for poetic interventions through- out the museum. Using the postcards as writing pads during my residency at the museum, I allowed interventions from the materials above and began working on Hardly War. With her brother on her back: From the US National Archives: “With her brother on her back, a war weary Korean girl tiredly trudges by a stalled M-26 tank at Haengju, Korea, 06/09/1951.” With my brother on my back /I was narrowly narrator: Photographed by my father at the house in Seoul. Some lines borrowed from BBC’s On This Day online, June 25, 1950. “The Hydrangean Candidate”: Various lines from The Manchurian Candidate (film, 1962) and Gertrude Stein’s Wars I Have Seen (1945). August 15, 1948: This photo by my father marks the Republic of Korea’s (South Ko- rea’s) first republic with its first president, Syngman Rhee. Front row, right to left: President Syngman Rhee, General MacArthur, General Hodge. “A Little Menu”: “Fatty” was a nickname given to the ROK Army General Chae Py- ong-dok by the Americans. “Hydrangea Agenda”: “That’s a good sight for my old eyes” was spoken by General MacArthur as he looked down at the dead bodies of young Korean soldiers. The quote is from the epigraph to R. A. K. Mason’s “Sonnet to MacArthur’s Eyes,” sent tome by Dougal McNeill, who teaches postcolonial literature at Victoria University of Wellington. “Me=Gook” is a pun on the Korean word for America. It means beautiful country, hence “Beauty=Nation.” “Suicide Parade”: Lines borrowed from “Fire Bomb,” in Naval Aviation News maga- zine, May 1951. “Ugly=Nation”: “Like fried potato chips” is in reference to the effect of napalm bombs on human skin in The Korean War (2010), by Bruce Cumings. “Welcome to the meat grinder” and “And they aren’t just Orientals, they are Communists” are from Pork Chop Hill (film, 1959). New Tarzon Guided Bomb / Bomb with a Brain: New Tarzon Guided Bomb (American voice-over) and Bomb with a Brain (British voice-over): narration borrowed from British Pathé 1952 newsreel. 92 Again a Perfect Bull’s-Eye: Photograph taken by my father in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War. He photographed civilian everyday life when he was not filming the war and would show the photographs to my mother late at night, projected onto our bedroom wall. Refugee Girl / Daisy Girl: The North Vietnamese Refugee Girl with a boy, photo- graphed by my father at the demilitarized zone. Daisy Girl is from Lyndon B. Johnson’s presidential campaign ad against Barry Goldwater. “Daisy,” developed by DDB, aired only once on NBC, September 7, 1964. “|, Lack-a-daisy”: Yi Sang (1910-1937) was an experimental poet during Korea’s colo- nial period under the Japanese rule. He created offensive wordplay with numbers in his poems and was able to get away with it despite the severe censorship. Zero pronounced as letter O sounds the same as number 5 in Korean. This wordplay is also tied to the five petals of the rose of Sharon, 4 3}, national flower for ROK. “Daisy Serenade”: ““We must love one another or die” is from “September 1, 1939,” by W. H. Auden. The “Daisy” ad features President Johnson’s voice-over: “... We must either love each other, or we must die.” Kitty Hawk Postcard: The postcard is from my father to us when we were little, but it was never mailed. He kept it in a photo album, beneath a layer of protective plas- tic. He used very simple language to explain the role of the Kitty Hawk in the Viet- nam War, instructing us to keep the card safe. “Daddy’s Flower Bed: A Little Chorus”: Based on a children’s song written right after the Korean War. “Shitty Kitty”: This was a nickname for the USS Kitty Hawk (CV-63) supercarrier. The “race riot” broke out on October 12, 1972. The riot-related lines are from Report by the Special Subcommittee on Disciplinary Problems in the US Navy, 92nd Con- gress, 2nd Session (1973). According to Bruce Cumings’s Korea's Place in the Sun (1997), in 1965 Lyndon Johnson asked Park Chung Hee for combat troops. In re- turn South Korea was paid approximately $7.5 million per division, totaling about 93 $1 billion in cash from 1965 to 1970. Kitty Litter was the samizdat antiwar news- paper published on the carrier. “Neocolony’s Colony”: This title is based on Remco E. Breuker’s “Korea’s Forgotten War,” in the online journal Korean Histories 1, no.1 (2009): “While Manchuria was the colony’s colony (at least in the popular imagination) during the Japanese colonial period, Vietnam became the colony’s colony during the period of US de- pendency in the late sixties and seventies.” The tiger photo is from the Vietnam ° Veterans of Korea website. “You provide the prose poems . . .” is from Citizen Kane (film, 1941). “White Christmas” was played on Armed Forces radio to alert US personnel, foreign nationals, and “at-risk” Vietnamese to be ready for evacuation from Saigon during its fallin April 1975. The Capital Division of the South Korean Army was also known as the Tiger Division, responsible for massacres of civilians in the Binh Dinh Province. White Horse is the Ninth Infantry Division of ROK and Blue Dragon is the Second Marine Brigade of ROK; both carried out many search & destroy operations in Vietnam. I wove into the poem dreams I had after learning about the massacres. “Operation Punctum”: “History is hysterical” is from Camera Lucida. “The-13th- child-also-says-it’s-terrifying” is a line from Yi Sang’s well-known poem, “Untitled No. 1,” which was published during the height of Japan’s colonial occupation of Korea. I first watched The Deer Hunter (film, 1978) with my father in a jam- packed movie theater in Hong Kong. My father may have mentioned it before, and I may have forgotten, but I found out only a few years ago that the news footage in the film is his. My father in Saigon, May 1968: The photos and drawings are meant to be a key to “Hardly Opera,” or that is how it functioned for me as I was writing it. While my father was in Vietnam, I was busy drawing and scribbling, making outfits for my paper dolls and pretending to write in English. My father in Saigon, May 1968 was photographed by his friend, Henri Huet, an Associated Press photographer. The film my father shot that day of the second attack on Saigon by North Vietnam, received the NPPA Spot News award. Two of the smaller, cropped photos are from the dedication page’s photograph, in which my father is running as he was filming in the Mekong delta during a search & destroy operation on March 27, 1967. That photo is by a friend of his, an “AP photojournalist.” Camera Elmar: The Elmar was a 35mm Leica favored by my father when he first worked for Dong-A Daily just before the Korean War. Prior to the Elmar he had a cheap camera, with which he took a photo of a Japanese woman with her chil- dren, at the Seoul Rail Station, hurrying to leave Korea during the last days of the Japanese occupation. This photo won him a prize and launched his career as a photojournalist. He kept cyanide in his pocket during the early part of the Korean War. He emphasized many times as he recalled his war experiences that the real victims of war are civilians. Now my father only photographs flowers. Photo of May 16, 1961, coup d’état in “Hardly Opera” is in the public domain of South Korea. The two generals are Chang Do Yong (the Army Chief of Staff) on the left and Park Chung Hee on the right. Below the photo is ROK’s national em- blem in the image of rose of Sharon. “Flower of all flowers”: I borrowed these lines from Pork Chop Hill (film, 1959): “I must point out a simple truth, the more ground you take the more ground you must defend”; “GI friends, you want peace, we want peace”; “Hello Gls, why must you die when you have just begun to live?” Heiner Goebbels’s Songs of Wars I have seen (2007), a musical composition that in- corporates Gertrude Stein’s texts from Wars I Have Seen, was the initial trigger for Hardly War. 95 / ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I am grateful to the editors of the publications in which some of the poems have ap- peared: Action, Yes, The Animated Reader (anthology), Argos Poetry Calendar 2014, Guernica, LIT, Matter, Poem-a-Day from the Academy of American Poets, Spiral Orb, The Squaw Valley Review, and XCP: Cross Cultural Poetics. My deepest gratitude to Joshua Beckman of Wave Books for his amazing vision and generosity. To Wave Books for giving me a writing residency at the Henry Art Gallery in 2010, which helped me to start working on Hardly War. To Brandon Shimoda for e-mail exchanges in which we shared our overlapping narratives of the bombs used against Japan and Korea. These occasional e-mails kept me on task. To Deborah Woodard for her enduring friendship and for reading all my drafts. To Melanie Noel for being truly excited about my manuscript as I was working on it. To Michiko Hase, Gwyn Kirk, and Margo Okazawa-Rey of Women for Genuine Security and International Women’s Network Against Militarism, for their continuous support and friendship. To Margot Dembo (and her poodle, Charley, named after Steinbeck’s poodle), an award-winning translator, for helping me with German words. To Jay Weaver, for taking me to the West Coast premiere of Heiner Goebbels’s Songs of Wars I have seen and for helping me with numerous interviews with my father. To Kim Hye- soon for encouraging me to complete the manuscript. And the last push came from Forrest Gander, who instructed me to stay put in Seattle. And last but not least, to Heidi Broadhead and Brittany Dennison for the incredible attention and care they have given to the book. Thank you to David Caligiuri for his amazing proofreading and to Jeff Clark for his stunning design. 97 a5 ey Lic an7f eeetl Bota cette LTE969,8F6tG6 . SF = So ae) St das hice) jel mA e HS a 2 a 2 es 5-12-965¢-1-8 syd 3 iM a1 = ——— aut AqdadK O = qasn row DON MEE CHOI IS THE AUTHOR OF THE MORNING NEWS IS EXCITING AND THE CHAPBOOK PETITE MANIFESTO. SHE-HAS RECEIVED AWE. AWARD AND .THE LUG ENS Pays ASIAN TRANSLATION P RD EE BORN IN SEOUL, SHE CAME TO THE CUS VIAVH ON GON. AND NOW LIVES IN. SBA REE. WAVE BOOKS 0 ISBN 978-1-940696-21-8 Sates Antología de Spoon River 1. a edición (digital), 2016 © Edgar Lee Masters © Fundación Editorial El perro y la rana, 2014 Centro Simón Bolívar Torre Norte, piso 21, El Silencio, Caracas - Venezuela, 1010. Teléfonos: (0212) 7688300 / 7688399. Correos electrónicos comunicacionesperroyrana@gmail.com atencionalescritorfepr@gmail.com Páginas web www .elperroylarana.gob.ve www .mincultura.gob.ve Redes sociales Facebook: Editorial perro rana Twitter: @perroyranalibro Youtube: Editorial El perro y la rana Soundcloud: perroyranalibro Google+: Editorial El perro y la rana Instagram: editorialperroyrana Rediseño de colección: David Dávila Traducción: Eduardo Gasca Edición: Luis Lacave Corrección: Yesenia Galindo Diagramación: David Dávila Hecho el Depósito de Ley Depósito legal lfi4022016800690 ISBN 978-980-14-3396-5 Colección Poesía del Mundo, de todas las naciones, de todas las len- guas, de todas las épocas, he aquí un proyecto editorial sin precedentes cuya finalidad es dar a nuestro pueblo las muestras más preciadas de la poesía universal en ediciones populares a un precio asequible. Es aspira- ción del Ministerio del Poder Popular para la Cultura crear una colección capaz de ofrecer una visión global del proceso poético de la humanidad a lo largo de su historia, de modo que nuestros lectores, poetas, escritores, estudiosos, etc., puedan acceder a un material de primera mano de lo que ha sido su desarrollo, sus hallazgos, descubrimientos y revelaciones, y del aporte invalorable que ha significado para la cultura humana. Palabra destilada, la poesía nos mejora, nos humaniza y, por eso mis- mo, nos hermana, haciéndonos reconocer los unos a los otros en el mila- gro que es toda la vida. Por la solidaridad entre los hombres y mujeres de nuestro planeta, vaya esta contribución de toda la Poesía del Mundo. Antología de Spoon River Edgar Lee Masters Traducción: Eduardo Gasca Presentación: Rafael Antonio Guerra 9 Antología de Spoon River: la rebelión de los muertos Edgar Lee Masters nació en Garnett, Kansas, un 23 de agosto de 1869. Recién graduado de abogado trabajó para la empresa Edison, una compañía que distribuía electricidad, como cobrador de deudas. Esta actividad le permitió viajar por todo el medio oeste, conocer pueblos y su gente, sobre todo co- nocer historias, muchas de las cuales seguramente utilizaría en su obra maestra. Según el testimonio de su esposa, alrededor de la mitad de “los muertos de la colina” fueron conocidos de Lee Masters; el resto lo creó directamente su imaginación. Como todo libro que adquiere un éxito literario, y de ven- tas al mismo tiempo, se creó alrededor del mismo una serie de especulaciones y mitos, algunos de los cuales afirman que Edgar Lee Masters escribió el poema en un estado de trance, al estilo de Yeats. Otros, que el poeta se apropió del manuscrito de un desconocido, probable habitante del mítico Spoon River (¡sic!). En 1914 la Antología de Spoon River fue publi- cada por entrega en la revista Poetry, cuya editora era su amiga Harriet Monroe, la misma que lo había estimulado a escribirla. Al año siguiente se publica- rá la primera edición del libro en su forma definiti- va con el agregado de dos textos: “La Spooniada” y “Epílogo”. Más adelante hablaremos de ellos. La aparición del libro creará un inédito éxito de crítica 10 y público. Lee Masters fue calificado como “un hijo natural de Walt Whitman”, y el propio Ezra Pound no dudó en aclamarlo con esta frase lapidaria (valga el adjetivo para quedar a la altura del tema): “Fi- nalmente América ha descubierto un poeta”. Como decíamos, también el público en general respondió de manera masiva y se vendieron miles de copias en pocos días (caso realmente insólito tra- tándose de un libro de poesía). Se calcula que para 1940 se habían realizado más de setenta ediciones. Este éxito quedó huérfano en la trayectoria litera- ria de Edgar Lee Masters. Los libros que publicó después (novelas, biografías, poemarios) quedaron sepultados bajo una gruesa capa de indiferencia por parte de la crítica y del público. Inclusive el intento de recuperar ese éxito a través de la escritura de una segunda parte titulada El nuevo Spoon River (1924), no pasó de ser un mero dato estadístico. Así que se le considerará siempre como el escritor de un solo libro, definición que claramente nunca agradecería el poeta. ¿Cómo fue que un libro de poesía llegó a convertirse en un éxito de ventas? La respuesta es bastante sencilla. Desde los pri- meros compases de la obra nos sentimos impactados por la (mala) suerte de los habitantes de “La coli- na”. Todos, o casi todos, son unos desventurados. En la obertura se nos indican algunas características 11 de los durmientes: un débil de ánimo, un fuerte de brazo, un payaso, un bebedor, un camorrero... ellos se mueren de fiebre, ardiendo en una mina, en una reyerta, en la cárcel, cayendo de un puente. Estas formas de morir nos llaman enseguida la atención y producen cierta conmoción. Estamos atrapados. A través de los “epitafios” (personalmente no me gus- ta mucho esta definición de los textos) llegaremos a identificarnos con buena parte de ellos. Sí, porque hay, como en botica, para todos los gustos. Nadie que lea la Antología de Spoon River podrá levantar la vista de ella y afirmar “aquí no pasa nada”. Es en ello donde reside la explicación del éxito del li- bro, vale decir, su multiplicidad. La pluralidad de las voces y la condición (que muchas veces se podía sustituir por miseria) humana que los personajes expresan, son el río donde el lector podrá sacar su pescado favorito y quedarse con él. La Antología... tuvo también otra característica: fue, y quizás lo siga siendo, una fuente de inspira- ción para otras creaciones artísticas. En 1963 se estrenó una obra de teatro basada en los monó- logos de sus “durmientes”, y en 1971 Fabrizio De André, un reconocido cantautor italiano, compuso un disco con nueve canciones que correspondieron a un mismo número de poemas extraídos de la An- tología... cuyo título pertenecía a un verso de “La colina”: Non al denaro, non all’amore, né al cielo. Después de haber leído el poema “El violinista Jo- nes”, Fabrizio De André se quedó tan identificado 12 con el personaje que decidió componer el álbum citado. A su vez la salida del disco creó un efecto colateral y en Italia aumentaron las ventas del libro. Como vemos, una operación de marketing efectiva, aunque no buscada. Después de transcurridos 57 años, la lectura de la Antología de Spoon River se- guía actual, no había perdido su fuerza. Hoy en día podemos también afirmar lo mismo y esto se debe a que el o los mensajes que contiene mantienen su actualidad. Vivimos en una sociedad consumista, donde la globalización nos bombardea todos los días con su propaganda aséptica y dañina. Quizás nos hemos modernizado, ahora tenemos celulares, com- putadoras, DVD, MP4, aviones supersónicos, vamos al espacio, etc. Pero el ser humano no ha cambiado y sigue siendo el mismo “pecador”, cometiendo los mismos delitos, viviendo las mismas debilidades, dañando a otro ser humano por ignorancia, por co- dicia, por celos, etc. Las máscaras siguen existiendo y detrás de ellas se escudan los poderosos. Uno de los valores de la obra de Lee Masters re- side en su autenticidad y su realidad. Él, a través de sus muertos, utiliza las páginas de su libro para denunciar muchas cosas, entre ellas la hipocresía y el oportunismo de ciertos políticos. Sí, porque la Antología de Spoon River es también una especie de manifiesto contra una sociedad opresiva e in- humana. En sus páginas encontraremos palabras muy duras fustigando, a través de los testimonios de sus protagonistas, la guerra, el militarismo, la 13 explotación de la mujer, los accidentes laborales, la corrupción, la codicia, la desigualdad, el capita- lismo, entre otros. También ataca la pacatería que existía en la literatura, la política, a los “patriotas” y a los fundamentalistas religiosos; todo esto le valió la acusación de revoltoso. Bien merecido el califica- tivo. Pero el texto nos habla de otros aspectos de la vida como, por ejemplo, el amor y el desamor. Una vez más se confirma su heterogeneidad y valga la siguiente anécdota: era la época del dominio fascista en Italia (1941) cuando una estudiante de literatura dirige esta pregunta a su profesor: “¿Qué diferen- cia hay entre la literatura inglesa y la norteameri- cana?”. Como respuesta el profesor le entrega una copia de Spoon River Anthology. La muchacha abre al azar el libro y se consigue con estos dos versos: “... besándola con el alma en los labios, / ella echó a volar” (Francis Turner). Cuenta la protagonista de esta anécdota que se sintió impactada por esas palabras. Comenzó entonces una lectura casi inin- terrumpida del libro y sucesivamente se dedicó a traducirlo al italiano. Tiempo después el profesor, quien era nada más y nada menos que Cesare Pave- se, se entera de la existencia de esta traducción y se empeña en hacerla publicar. A este efecto convence a Einaudi (importante editor italiano) sobre el valor del trabajo. Pero quedaba un obstáculo que vencer: la censura fascista que no veía con buen ojo cual- quier clase de texto proveniente de los EE.UU. La treta para lograr el objetivo fue simple e ingeniosa 14 al mismo tiempo. Le pusieron este título: Antolo- gia di S. River. ¡La S. simbolizaba la santidad del tal River! Evidentemente contaron también con la flojera del censor que seguramente no pasó de la portada. Para completar el cuento debemos deve- lar el nombre de la muchachita: Fernanda Pivano, quien se dedicará, de ahí en adelante, a traducir con mucho éxito a los grandes escritores norteamerica- nos. También a la Pivano se le conocerá como una excelente escritora de ensayos y de crítica literaria. El texto Ya desde el título adquirimos información preli- minar sobre el texto. Sabemos que se trata de una antología y que, por lo tanto, estamos en presencia de un antólogo. Pero en este caso hay otro perso- naje entre bastidores: el recopilador. A través de la lectura percibimos esta presencia y la queremos justificar. La primera señal nos viene de los propios protagonistas: ellos (sus espíritus, almas o como quieran llamárseles) no se encuentran en la colina. Están en otro lado. ¿Dónde? Escuchemos lo que uno de ellos, Lucius Atherton, al final de su inter- vención, nos dice: “Hay aquí una sombra poderosa que le canta/ a una tal Beatriz, / y ahora veo que la fuerza que lo engrandeció / a mí me arrastró al basurero de la vida”. Así mismo en “Sam Hookey”: “A mi entrada en estas regiones/ me tropecé con una sombra que me maldijo, / y me dijo que lo tenía 15 bien merecido... / ¡Era Robespierre!”. Pareciera que ellos están en un lugar (¿Hades?) donde se encuen- tran muertos. Un lugar universal que no tiene nada que ver con el pueblito. Alguien entonces tiene que haber recopilado sus testimonios, ¿quién podría ser este recopilador? En verdad no nos interesa saberlo, ni nadie nos lo dice. Lo importante es intuir que existe y es quien transcribe todos los textos. De ese todo el antólogo hizo sus escogencias. Pareciera que ese todo está claro. Resalto el pareciera, porque a Mr. Lee Masters le gustaba jugar y enredar los hi- los. Veamos el porqué en el poema inicial, “La coli- na”, el hablante anónimo nos dice que los muertos están Todos, todos durmiendo en la colina. Aquí se utiliza por única vez el verbo dormir para describir la condición de los muertos. El dormir es una con- dición transitoria en espera de un despertar. Pero, como para confirmar el gusto de Lee Masters para el enredo, al final se nos dice: ¿Dónde está Jones el viejo violinista que jugó con la vida durante sus noventa años afrontando el viento helado a pecho descubierto, bebiendo, alborotando, sin pensar en esposa o parentela, ni en el oro, ni el amor, ni el cielo? ¡Aquí está!, chachareando de los pescados fritos de antaño, de las carreras de antaño en Clary’s Grove, de lo que Abe Lincoln dijo una vez en Springfield. 16 ¡Qué buena broma! Ahora resulta que hay uno entre muchos que no duerme, sino ¡que está cha - chareando! Esta contradicción sigue a lo largo del libro, porque si algunos afirman estar en compañía de muertos ilustres, otros en cambio nos dicen que “yacen” en la colina. El “Epílogo”, por ejemplo, es digno de atención. Está escrito como si fuera una representación tea- tral. En el original en inglés (según nos apunta el Prof. Eduardo Gasca) 1 varios parlamentos riman, y en su gran mayoría están constituidos por versos yámbicos de unas 4 o 5 sílabas métricas, lo que con- trasta con el manejo del verso libre de toda la obra. Ahora bien, ¿qué nos dice ahí el poeta? Veamos: El cementerio de Spoon River. Se escuchan dos voces detrás de una pantalla decorada con figuras diabólicas y angélicas en varias alusiones alegóricas. Una luz tenue se muestra va- gamente a través de la pantalla, como si esta fuese un tejido de hojas, ramas y sombras. Después de un partido de ajedrez entre Dios y Belcebú, leemos lo siguiente: “(La pantalla se desva - nece y entra Belcebú con una trompeta, que toca a muy bajo volumen. De inmediato Loki y Yogarindra saltan de las sombras nocturnas)”. 1 La presente traducción está basada en el original inglés: Spoon River Anthology: An Annotated Edition. [Edited and with an Introduction and Annotations by John E. Hallwas]. University of Illinois Press. Urbana & Chicago, 1992. 17 ¿Quiénes son estos tres personajes? Belcebú: es curiosa y al mismo tiempo para nada sorprenden- te la escogencia de este nombre para designar al maligno. ¿Por qué no utilizar la palabra Diablo o Satanás? Porque una vez más Lee Masters enreda y aquí saca a un diablo que pertenece a la tradición cananea: Baal-Zebub (Baal el Príncipe) que para los judíos y cristianos es el príncipe de los demo- nios. Judíos y cristianos. Sin comentarios. Loki, en la mitología escandinava, el bello gigante que representaba el mal y poseía gran conocimiento y astucia. Judíos, cristianos y ahora un personaje de la mitología escandinava. Y llega Yogarindra. Dice John E. Hallwas en sus “Notas a los poemas” de la edición en inglés: En una carta que me escribió, Burgess identifica esta oscura figura así: “Yogarindra, generalmente escrito ‘Yoga-nidra’, se dice que fue uno de los aspectos de la diosa Durga, la ilusión/ engaño 2 personificado. La mitología hindú dice que Durga tenía como asistentes a unas hechiceras llamadas ‘yogini’. Masters probablemente modificó morfológicamente el nombre por razones de métrica poética”. 2 La palabra en inglés es delusion y no tiene equivalente exacto en castellano. En ese idioma significa algo que es falso o engañosamente propagado: una falsa creencia o un error persistente de la percepción ocasionado por una falsa creencia o trastorno mental; algo que es creído a fe ciega sin que tenga existencia real. Es más fuerte que “ilusión”, pues se trata del autoengaño total. Yogarindra o Yoga-nidra engaña en el sentido de que crea la ilusión de una realidad. Algo así como los “ilusionistas” o “magos” de los espectáculos. 18 La traducción de esta cita de Hallwas es autoría del Prof. Eduardo Gasca, quien amablemente ha querido colaborar conmigo para develar el “mis- terio”: ¿dónde están los muertos? Sigamos, no sin antes decir que el personaje de Yogarindra (que engaña y crea ilusiones) se me está pareciendo mu- chísimo al mismo Masters. Dice el texto más ade- lante: “(De inmediato se produce un crepitar como de caparazones de cigarras agitadas por el viento; y cientos de muertos, incluidos los que aparecen en la Antología... acuden presurosos al sonar de la trompeta)”. Con estos últimos elementos podemos afirmar que los difuntos “están todos” en la colina, menos algunos loquitos con excesivo egocentrismo que afirman tener contacto con personajes de alta alcurnia... ah, y la Contessa Navigato que está en Génova, ¿o no? Cerrado este paréntesis, regresemos al título. Aparecen las palabras Spoon River y todas las edi- ciones en español las conservan debido a que sería un improperio traducirlas: ¡Río Cuchara! Pero la traducción nos sirve para reafirmar el propósito de la escogencia del nombre; en efecto, la cuchara es un utensilio del cual nos servimos para recoger. ¿Les recuerda algo? ¡Mr. Lee Masters no descuidaba detalles! Una curiosidad, o tal vez una nueva baliza, es que el río que humedece las riberas del pueblito es su homónimo o quizás viceversa. 19 Pero, ¿qué es y cómo es Spoon River? Edgar Lee Masters “inventa” un pueblo que reú- ne y expresa las características de muchos centros poblados del medio oeste norteamericano. Caracte- rísticas geográficas, arquitectónicas, sociales, cultu- rales, económicas, políticas, religiosas, así como la idiosincrasia de sus habitantes. Spoon River es el espejo imaginativo de una realidad muy concreta en la sociedad norteamericana de la época. Lee Mas- ters antecede a renombrados escritores del siglo XX, que varios años más tarde repetirán la misma rece- ta. Valga para todos estos tres ejemplos: William Faulkner con su Yoknapatawpha (Sartoris, 1929); Juan Rulfo y su Comala (Pedro Páramo, 1955) y finalmente Gabriel García Márquez con Macondo (Cien años de soledad, 1967). En el caso de Juan Rulfo hay que agregar que el escritor mexicano tam - bién utilizó a los muertos para echar sus cuentos. Para contestar la segunda parte de la pregunta, recurriremos una vez más a las voces de sus exha - bitantes. A través de sus narraciones nos enteramos de que Spoon River consta de todos los servicios básicos (acueducto, electricidad y transporte), de edificios públicos (alcaldía, tribunal, iglesias, es- cuelas, cárcel, etc.), una fábrica de latas, varios periódicos y hasta un teatro de la ópera, cuyo am- bicioso nombre no se corresponde con la realidad: en la instalación del mismo funciona un salón de póker (se pueden imaginar qué tipo de espectáculos 20 se presentaban). Dato curioso, por sus calles fun- cionaba una librería ambulante que no duró mucho. Escuchemos a Seth Compton: Cuando me morí, la librería circulante que le construí a Spoon River, y dirigí para bien de las mentes despiertas, fue vendida en remate en la plaza pública como para destruir el último vestigio de mi memoria y de mi influencia . Esta memoria confirma la sentencia de otro de los muertos, que nos dice: “No había cultura en Spoon River, lo sabemos.” (Archibald Higbie). Como elementos geográficos relevantes tenemos al famoso río Cuchara (por cierto muy turbio y lleno de desperdicios, como nos lo describe Whedon, edi- tor: “Y entonces yacer aquí, junto al río, en el lugar a donde llegan las cloacas del pueblo, y tiran latas vacías y botan la basura y ocultan los abortos”), las colinas que lo rodean (además de la famosa hay otras menos relevantes), los cerros de Miller’s Ford, y cercano se escucha el oleaje del mar. Ya tenemos entonces al escenario donde se moverán los perso - najes invisibles de esta obra. 21 La estructura El libro se basa en lo que algunos llaman epita- fios, pero que yo me atrevo a llamar testimonios. A mi modesto parecer es limitante la definición de epitafio. Veamos lo que nos dice un diccionario enciclopédico: Epitafio (del latín, epitaphĭus , “escrito sobre una tumba”): breve inscripción funeraria; también composición breve en verso o prosa que canta las alabanzas de una persona fallecida. Las inscripciones más antiguas se encuentran en los sarcófagos egipcios. Indican el nombre del difunto, así como la familia a la que este pertenecía y su condición social, y van acompa- ñadas de una oración dedicada a un dios. Compuestos por lo general en forma de epigramas, los epitafios griegos fueron los primeros en alcanzar valor literario. En las urnas funerarias romanas se indicaban el nombre, la edad y la profesión del difunto, así como el nombre del creador de la urna. Esta definición nos aclara algo importante: el epi- tafio canta la alabanza de una persona fallecida. En la Antología... son muy pocos los “durmientes” que se autoalaban, más bien hay muchísimos que hablan mal de sí mismos y de los vivos. También descubri- mos que fueron los griegos en utilizar por primera vez los epitafios en textos con valor literario. Parece ser que esta fue la fuente de inspiración del poeta; pero en este trabajo no queremos profundizar este aspecto. Rechazamos el uso de la palabra epitafio 22 y la sustituimos, a nuestro modesto entender, por testimonio. Los muertos dan sus versiones, sus ver- dades sobre sus propias existencias. Ahora bien, ¿cuántos son estos muertos? Las fuentes consultadas nos indican el no despreciable número de 244. Ya lo dijimos, hay para todos los gustos. Mis cálculos me llevan a afirmar la presencia de 190 hombres y 54 mujeres. ¡Vaya mayoría! Ciertos analistas nos hablan también de 19 historias que se hilvanan a lo largo del libro. Aquí también me permito disentir. Creo que en cuanto a historias hay muchísimas más, lo que los expertos llaman historias son, según mi juicio, contrapunteos, los que nos permiten demos- trar otra aseveración: los muertos a veces mienten o simplemente cuentan su verdad (hay que creerles ma non troppo), y como constatación pueden leer- se los poemas “Ollie McGee”, “Fletcher McGee”, “Knowlt Hoheimer” y “Lydia Puckett” . Completan el libro dos textos: “La Spooniada” y el “Epílogo”. El primero está escrito por el difunto Jonathan Swift Somers, laureado de Spoon River, quien planificó “La Spooniada” para veinticuatro libros, pero desafortunadamente no vivió para com- pletar ni siquiera el primero. El fragmento fue ha- llado entre sus papeles por William Marion Reedy y se publicó por primera vez en el Reedy’s Mirror el 18 de diciembre de 1914. El difunto Somers y su presunto texto son invención de Masters, una vie- ja treta literaria. Ambos escritos fueron agregados 23 a la edición definitiva de 1915 (no aparecían en la publicación de la revista Poetry de 1914). El lenguaje y la forma Edgar Lee Masters recibió enseguida el recono- cimiento de la crítica especializada por el manejo en su obra del verso libre. Nos unimos a este juicio y agregamos que lo más destacado de este manejo está en la variedad de tonos, ritmos, sonoridad y ar- monía que el poeta logra asignar a cada uno de sus personajes. En este sentido, no hay dudas de que nos encontramos frente a una obra maestra. Tam- bién percibimos el uso del lenguaje poético como un medio y no como un fin. Quiero decir que es a través de la poesía que el autor logra su propósito principal que no es otro que el de contar. No cuenta para poetizar, poetiza para narrar y afirmar ciertas realidades. Otro es el caso de los dos textos que culminan la Antología...: “La Spooniada” y el “Epílogo”. Nos en- contramos frente a una subida repentina. El panora- ma cambia radicalmente. El lenguaje y la estructura sufren una mutación. ¿Por qué? Es difícil contestar esta interrogante. Pareciera que Lee Masters quiso rematar con un toque de academicismo, de intelec- tualidad, que a nuestro modesto parecer no agrega nada a la obra en sí. Los dos textos no cuajan con el resto del libro. Es como estar comiendo un pla- to de spaghetti a la bolognesa y encontrarse con la 24 presencia en el plato de unas cuantas fresas. Ambos productos son buenos, pero, juntos... En cuanto a la forma, sentimos que podemos comparar la Antología de Spoon River a una can- tata profana. Una cantata compuesta por las múl- tiples voces de esos ahora habitantes del más allá. Un director de orquesta, una coral compuesta por 244 cantantes y la musicalidad poética representan el conjunto (cantata) que nos da el resultado de la ecuación. Los “testimonios” se transforman enton- ces en “cantos”. El cementerio Nos trasladamos hacia la colina, allí donde está ubicado nuestro escenario indiscutido. Es allí donde escucharemos los “cantos” de esos seres que decidie- ron rebelarse en contra de los falsos epitafios y, en consecuencia, hacernos escuchar sus voces. Y aquí Lee Masters nos reserva una sorpresa: ¡En la colina no descansan todos los muertos del pueblo! Leamos: Chase h enry En vida fui el borracho del pueblo; cuando morí, el cura no me quiso enterrar en suelo santificado. Eso me deparó buena fortuna, porque los protestantes compraron este lote y enterraron aquí mi cuerpo, 25 junto a la tumba de Nicholas el banquero, y su esposa Priscilla. Tomad nota, almas prudentes y piadosas de las vías encontradas de la vida, que a quien vivió en deshonra, de muerto le brindan honores. Es evidente que el suelo santificado corresponde al cementerio católico. Aquí encontramos uno de los tantos elementos de polémica religiosa existentes en el libro. Nótese también la ironía con la cual Chase Henry hace su relato. ¿Quiénes son los durmientes? El abanico de profesiones y condiciones es amplio. Hemos contabilizado casi cincuenta, entre las cuales podemos citar: ferretero, bailarina, maestra, juga- dor, alguacil, inventor, loco, ciego, borracho, lavan- dera, asesino, suicida, carnicero, periodista, médico, etc. Pero las categorías con más nombramientos son los abogados y sacerdotes. ¿Por qué será? ¿Por qué hablan los muertos? Los “cantos” son una rebe - lión a los epitafios reales llenos de lugares comunes y falsedades. Como hemos afirmado, los muertos rompen sus cadenas y atacan por todo el medio a una sociedad castradora. Desaparecen los temores y prejuicios, las diferencias sociales se anulan. Ya no tienen nada que perder. Así que sueltan la lengua y ¡cómo! ¿De qué nos hablan? Los temas son múlti- ples y variados. Conoceremos sus historias de amor y desamor. Sus frustraciones y desilusiones. Sus traiciones. Algunos confesarán sin tapujos sus crí - menes o pecados. Otros acusarán a sus victimarios 26 o insultarán a sus antiguos vecinos. Habrá quien nos dará consejos de vida, o sugerencias filosóficas y religiosas. Ciertos durmientes erigirán su propio púlpito desde donde nos sermonearán dándonos lec - ciones de moral. También nos encontraremos con sus quejas, acusaciones y protestas en contra de los supervivientes, así como contra Spoon River trans- formado en sujeto. Rafael antonio GueRRa Antología de Spoon River 29 La colina ¿Dónde están Elmer, Herman, Bert, Tom y Charley, el débil de ánimo, el fuerte de brazo, el payaso, el bebedor, el peleador? Todos, todos durmiendo en la colina. Uno murió de fiebre, uno ardió en una mina, uno quedó muerto en una reyerta, uno pereció en la cárcel, uno se cayó del puente bregando por su mujer y los niños — Todos, todos durmiendo, durmiendo, durmiendo en la colina. ¿Dónde están Ella, Kate, Mag, Lizzie y Edith, la de corazón tierno, la de mente simplona, la escandalosa, la orgullosa, la feliz? Todas, todas durmiendo en la colina. Una murió de parto deshonroso, una de amores contrariados, una a manos de una bestia en un burdel, una de orgullo roto en pos de un anhelo del corazón, una, después de haber vivido en Londres y París lejanas, fue devuelta a su pequeño espacio con Ella, Kate y Mag— Todas, todas durmiendo, durmiendo, durmiendo en la colina. ¿Dónde están tío Isaac y tía Emily, y el viejo Towny Kincaid y Sevigne Houghton, y el alcalde Walker que había conversado 30 con los notables de la revolución? Todos, todos durmiendo en la colina. A ellos les trajeron hijos muertos en la guerra e hijas demolidas por la vida, con sus hijos sin padre, que lloraban— Todos, todos durmiendo, durmiendo, durmiendo en la colina. ¿Dónde está Jones el viejo violinista que jugó con la vida durante sus noventa años afrontando el viento helado a pecho descubierto, bebiendo, alborotando, sin pensar en esposa o parentela, ni en el oro, ni el amor, ni el cielo? ¡Aquí está!, chachareando de los pescados fritos de antaño, de las carreras de antaño en Clary’s Grove, de lo que Abe Lincoln dijo una vez en Springfield. 31 Hodd Putt Aquí yazgo, junto a la tumba del viejo Bill Piersol, que se hizo rico negociando con los indios, y luego se valió de la ley de bancarrotas para resurgir más rico que nunca. Me fui cansando de la brega y la pobreza, y viendo al viejo Bill y los demás enriquecerse, una noche asalté a un viajero por los lados de Proctor’s Grove y ahí lo maté sin querer, por eso me juzgaron y me ahorcaron. Esa fue mi manera de entrar en quiebra. Ahora los que nos valimos de la ley de bancarrotas, cada quien a su manera, dormimos en paz, hombro con hombro. 32 Ollie McGee ¿Han visto caminando por el pueblo a un hombre de mirada baja y rostro demacrado? Ese es mi esposo, quien con crueldad oculta que jamás se sabrá, me robó mi juventud y mi belleza; hasta que al fin, arrugada y con dientes amarillos, y con el orgullo roto y una humildad indecorosa, me hundí en la tumba. ¿Pero qué creen que le remuerde el corazón a mi marido? ¡El rostro de lo que fui, el rostro de lo que hizo de mí! Eso lo va trayendo a donde estoy ahora. En la muerte, entonces, soy vengada. 33 Fletcher McGee Ella me fue quitando las fuerzas de minuto en minuto, ella me fue quitando la vida de hora en hora, ella me fue secando como una luna enfebrecida que mina al mundo en rotación. Los días se iban como sombras, los minutos giraban como las estrellas. Ella me quitó la piedad del corazón, y la hizo sonrisas. Ella era un puñado de arcilla de escultor y mis pensamientos secretos eran los dedos: aleteaban tras su rostro pensativo y lo delineaban a punta de dolor. Le entiesaron los labios, y le hundieron las mejillas, y le entristecieron la mirada. Mi alma había penetrado en la arcilla luchando como mil demonios. No era ni mía ni suya; ella la retenía, pero sus forcejeos le moldearon un rostro que ella odiaba, que yo temía mirar. Yo tranqué las ventanas, eché los cerrojos, me escondí en un rincón— Y entonces se murió y se me aparecía, y me anduvo cazando toda la vida. 34 Robert Fulton Tanner Si un hombre pudiese morder la mano de gigante que lo atrapa y lo destruye como a mí me mordió una rata cuando mostraba la trampa que inventé, aquel día en mi ferretería. Pero un hombre jamás puede vengarse del ogro monstruoso de la Vida. Se entra en la habitación, es decir, se nace, y entonces hay que vivir —agotar el alma, ¡ajá! La carnada que te apetece está a la vista: una mujer con dinero con la que te quieres casar, el prestigio, una posición, o el poder en el mundo. Pero hay trabajo por hacer y cosas por conquistar— ¡Ah, sí! el envoltorio de la carnada. Al fin logras entrar —pero escuchas una pisada: el ogro, la Vida, entra en la habitación, (estaba a la espera y escuchó el resorte dispararse) para verte roer el estupendo queso, y contemplarte con ojos fulgurantes, y fruncir el entrecejo y reírse, y burlarse, y maldecirte, mientras corres jaula arriba y jaula abajo. Hasta que tu miseria lo aburre. 35 Cassius Hueffer Sobre mi lápida cincelaron las palabras: “Fue dulce su vida y los elementos se combinaron en él tan bien que la naturaleza pudo ponerse de pie y decirle al mundo entero: Este fue un hombre”. Quienes me conocieron se sonríen al leer esta retórica vacía. Mi epitafio debió ser: “La vida no fue dulce con él, y los elementos se le combinaron tan mal que le libró combate a la vida y en él fue muerto”. ¡En vida no me pude salvar de las lenguas viperinas y ahora muerto tengo que soportar el epitafio que grabó un imbécil! 36 Serepta Mason La flor de mi vida pudo haber florecido por todos lados de no ser por un viento aciago que me atrofió los pétalos del lado de mí que ustedes, los del pueblo, podían ver. Desde el polvo elevo una voz de protesta: ¡Mi lado florecido que ustedes jamás vieron! Vosotros, los vivientes, vosotros sois ciertamente unos imbéciles, que no sabéis de los rumbos del viento y las fuerzas invisibles que gobiernan los procesos de la vida. 37 Amanda Barker Henry me hizo un hijo sabiendo que yo no podría engendrar una vida sin perder la mía. Así que bien joven crucé el portal del polvo. Viajero, se cree en el pueblo en que viví que Henry me amó con amor de esposo, pero yo proclamo desde el polvo que me mató para satisfacer su odio. 38 Constance Hately ¡Spoon River, tú alabas mi sacrificio de criar a Irene y a Mary, las huérfanas de mi vieja hermana! ¡Y censuras a Irene y a Mary por despreciarme! Pero no alabes mi sacrificio, ni censures su desprecio; ¡Es cierto que las crié y me ocupé de ellas!— Pero emponzoñé mi caridad recordándoles una y otra vez su dependencia. 39 Chase Henry En vida fui el borracho del pueblo; cuando morí, el cura no me quiso enterrar en suelo santificado. Eso me deparó buena fortuna, porque los protestantes compraron este lote y enterraron aquí mi cuerpo, junto a la tumba de Nicholas el banquero, y su esposa Priscilla. Tomad nota, almas prudentes y piadosas, de las vías encontradas de la vida, que a quien vivió en deshonra, de muerto le brindan honores. 40 Harry Carey Goodhue Estúpidos de Spoon River, ustedes nunca se asombraron cuando Chase Henry votó en contra de las cantinas en venganza de que le negaron la entrada. Pero ninguno fue lo bastante listo para seguir mis pasos o la pista como hermano espiritual de Chase. ¿Recuerdan cuando peleé con el banco y la pandilla de los tribunales por embolsillarse los intereses de los fondos públicos? ¿Y cuando peleé con los ciudadanos importantes por convertir a los pobres en burritos de carga de los impuestos? ¿Y cuando peleé con el servicio del agua por birlarse calles y aumentar las tarifas? ¿Y cuando peleé con los hombres de negocios que pelearon contra mí en esas peleas? ¿Recuerdan entonces: que salí trastabillando del naufragio de esas derrotas y de una carrera arruinada, escurrí de mi capa el último ideal, oculto hasta entonces a todas las miradas como una acariciada quijada de burro, y vapuleé al banco y al servicio del agua, y a los hombres de negocios con la prohibición e hice pagar a Spoon River los costos de las peleas que yo había perdido? 41 El juez Somers ¿Cómo fue, díganmelo ustedes, que yo, el más erudito de los abogados, que me sabía a Blackstone y a Coke casi de memoria, el que pronunció el más grande discurso que haya escuchado jamás la corte, y escribió un alegato que se ganó el elogio del magistrado Breese— cómo fue, díganmelo ustedes, que yazgo aquí sin señal alguna, olvidado, mientras Chase Henry, el borracho del pueblo, tiene un pedestal de mármol coronado por una vasija en la que la naturaleza, por capricho irónico, ha sembrado hierba floreciente? 42 Kinsey Keene Su atención, Thomas Rhodes, presidente del banco; Coolbaugh Whedon, director del Argos; reverendo Peet, pastor de la principal iglesia; A. D. Blood, varias veces alcalde de Spoon River; y finalmente todos ustedes, miembros de la Sociedad de las Buenas Costumbres— Su atención para con las palabras de Cambronne, de pie al lado de los heroicos sobrevivientes de la guardia de Napoleón en el monte Saint Jean en el campo de batalla de Waterloo, cuando Maitland, el inglés, los conminó: “¡Ríndanse, valientes franceses!”— Allí al caer la tarde, con la batalla perdida sin remedio, y hordas de hombres que ya no eran ejército del gran Napoleón huyendo a campo traviesa como jirones de nubes preñadas de truenos en la tormenta. Bien, lo que Cambronne le dijo a Maitland antes de que el fuego inglés rasara la cresta de la colina contra la luz declinante del día les digo a usted, y a todos ustedes, y a ti, oh mundo. Y les encargo grabarlo sobre mi lápida. 43 Benjamin Pantier Juntos en esta tumba yacen Benjamin Pantier, procurador, y Nig, su perro, compañero fiel, consolación y amigo. Por el camino gris, amigos, niños, hombres y mujeres, se me fueron yendo uno por uno de la vida, y me dejaron solo. Con Nig de acompañante, compañero de lecho y camarada en la bebida. En la mañana de la vida supe de aspiraciones y vislumbré la gloria. Entonces ella, la que me sobrevive, me atrapó el alma en una trampa que me desangró a morir, hasta que yo, alguna vez de recia voluntad, me postré roto, indiferente, a vivir con Nig en el cuarto de atrás de una oficina sórdida. Bajo mi barbilla se arrellana la nariz huesuda de Nig— Nuestra historia se pierde en el silencio. ¡Desaparece de la vista, mundo loco! 44 La señora de Benjamin Pantier Yo sé que él dijo que le atrapé el alma en una trampa que lo desangró a morir. Y todos los hombres lo querían y muchas mujeres lo compadecieron. Pero pongamos que una es realmente una dama, y tiene gustos delicados, y odia el olor a whisky y a cebollas, y el ritmo de la Oda de Wordsworth le resuena en los oídos, mientras él se la pasa día y noche repitiendo trozos de aquello tan ordinario: “¿Oh, por qué habría de sentirse orgulloso el espíritu del mortal?” Y supongamos luego que eres una mujer bien dotada, y el único hombre con el que la ley y la moralidad te permiten una relación marital es justo el hombre que te repugna cada vez que piensas en eso —y piensas en eso cada vez que lo ves. Por tal razón lo eché de la casa para que se fuera a vivir con su perro en un cuartucho sórdido detrás de su oficina. 45 Reuben Pantier Bien, Emily Sparks, no se perdieron tus plegarias, ni tu amor fue del todo en vano. Le debo cuanto fui en la vida a tu esperanza que no me dejó solo, a tu amor que a pesar de todo me veía como bueno. Querida Emily Sparks, déjame echarte el cuento. Dejo de lado la influencia de mis padres; La hija de la sombrerera me metió en problemas y me fui a correr mundo y pasar por cuanto peligro puedan traer consigo el vino y las mujeres y el goce de la vida. Una noche, en un cuarto de la Rue de Rivoli, estaba bebiendo vino con una cocotte de ojos negros, y se me llenaron de lágrimas los ojos. Pensó ella que eran lágrimas de amor y sonrió creyendo que me había conquistado. Pero mi alma andaba a tres mil millas de allí, en los días cuando me dabas clases en Spoon River. Y ahora no podías amarme, ni rezar por mí, ni escribirme cartas, tu silencio eterno habló por ti. Y la cocotte de ojos negros creyó que las lágrimas eran para ella, como los besos de engaño que le di. De todos modos, a partir de ese momento tengo una visión nueva— ¡Querida Emily Sparks! 46 Emily Sparks ¿Dónde está mi niño, mi niño, en qué lugar lejano del mundo? ¿El niño que más amé de todos los de la escuela?— Yo, la maestra, la vieja solterona, la de corazón virgen, la que a todos convertí en hijos, ¿estaba en lo cierto sobre mi niño cuando lo creí un espíritu en llamas, en movimiento, siempre anhelante? Oh, niño, niño, por quien recé y recé en tantas horas de insomnio por las noches, ¿recuerdas la carta que te escribí sobre el hermoso amor de Cristo? Y te haya o no llegado, mi niño, dondequiera que estés, esfuérzate en salvar tu alma, que todo el barro que eres, toda la impureza que eres le cedan el paso al fuego que eres, ¡hasta que el fuego sea solamente luz!... ¡Solamente luz! 47 Trainor, el farmaceuta Tan solo el químico, y no siempre el químico, puede decir lo que resultará de combinar sólidos o líquidos. ¿Y quién puede decir cómo actuarán unos sobre otros hombres y mujeres, o qué hijos saldrán? Ahí estaban Benjamin Pantier y su esposa, buenos cada quien por separado, pero nefastos el uno para el otro; oxígeno él, hidrógeno ella, su hijo, fuego devastador. Yo, Trainor, el farmaceuta, mezclador de elementos, que me maté haciendo un experimento, viví en soltería. 48 Daisy Fraser ¿Oyeron decir alguna vez que Whedon, el director, le entregara al fisco algo del dinero que recibía por apoyar a algún candidato a cargo público? ¿O por hacerle propaganda a la fábrica de latas para que la gente invirtiese en ella? ¿O por omitir los hechos respecto al banco cuando estaba en la mala y al borde de la quiebra? ¿Oyeron decir alguna vez que el juez del distrito ayudara a alguno que no fuese el ferrocarril “Q”, o los banqueros? ¿O que el reverendo Peet o el reverendo Sibley donasen algo de su salario, ganado por quedarse callados, o por hablar en voz alta, según lo quisieran los prominentes, para obras públicas o el servicio de agua? ¡Pero yo, Daisy Fraser, la que siempre transitó por esas calles entre hileras de sonrisas y cabezas ladeadas, y tosecitas y frases como “allá va esa”, jamás comparecí ante el juez Arnett sin contribuir con diez dólares y los costos para los fondos de la escuela de Spoon River! 49 Benjamin Fraser Sus espíritus me azotaban como alas de mil mariposas. Yo cerraba los ojos y sentía vibrar sus espíritus. Yo cerraba los ojos y todavía sabía cuando los de ellos dejaban caer las pestañas sobre los pómulos, y cuando volteaban la cabeza, y cuando sus ropajes se les adherían o les caían como colgaduras exquisitas. Sus espíritus miraban mi éxtasis de un vistazo de etéreo desapego. Sus espíritus vigilaban mi tortura, la bebían como el agua de la vida, las mejillas rojas y los ojos relumbrantes la llama creciente de mi alma alumbraba sus espíritus como ala de mariposa que entra de pronto a plena luz. Y ellos me imploraban vida, vida, vida. Pero cuando me tomé para mí la vida, cuando atrapé y estrujé sus almas, como un niño estruja las uvas para beber el jugo púrpura de la palma de la mano, penetré en este vacío sin alas, donde no se conoce el rojo, ni el dorado, ni el vino, ni el ritmo de la vida. 50 Minerva Jones Yo soy Minerva, la poetisa del pueblo, burla y rechifla de los patanes de la calle por el cuerpo macizo, los ojos bizcos y el bamboleo, y peor aún cuando “Butch” Weldy me atrapó tras brutal cacería. Él me abandonó a mi suerte con el doctor Meyers, y yo me fui sumiendo en la muerte, me fui entumeciendo desde los pies, como quien se va hundiendo cada vez más en un río helado. ¿Irá alguien hasta el periódico del pueblo para recoger en un libro los versos que escribí? ¡Tenía tanta sed de amor! ¡Tenía tanta hambre de vida! 51 “Indignación” Jones ¿Sí me irán a creer que provenía de buena cepa galesa? ¿Que era más puro de sangre que toda esa basura blanca de acá? ¿Y más recto de linaje que los norteños y sureños de Spoon River? Ustedes no me creerían que pasé por la escuela y me leí algunos libros. Me veían nada más como un hombre en la ruina, de pelo y barba enmarañados y cubierto de harapos. A veces a un hombre se le vuelve un cáncer la vida de tanto verse magullado y vuelto a magullar hasta parar en amasijo sangriento, como esos brotes en los tallos del maíz. Aquí estaba yo, un carpintero, enfangado en la ciénaga de la vida en la que entré pensando que era pradera, con una percusia por esposa, y la pobre Minerva, mi hija, a la que ustedes atormentaron y llevaron a la muerte. Así, me arrastré, me arrastré como un caracol a lo largo de los días de mi vida. Ya no volverán a escuchar mis pasos en las mañanas resonar sobre la acera hueca camino a la bodega por un puñado de harina de maíz y cinco centavos de tocino. 52 El doctor Meyers Nadie, salvo el doctor Hill, hizo más por la gente de este pueblo que yo. Y todos los débiles, los incapacitados, los irresponsables, y quienes no podían pagar venían a mí. Yo tenía buen corazón, el buenazo doctor Meyers. Lleno de salud, contento, me iba de lo mejor, con la bendición de una esposa que me comprendía, mis hijos ya crecidos, todos casados, bien acomodados. Y entonces una noche Minerva, la poetisa, me trajo su problema, llorando. Traté de resolvérselo —ella murió— me inculparon, los diarios me difamaron, mi mujer murió con el corazón destrozado. Y la neumonía acabó conmigo. 53 La señora Meyers Afirmó toda su vida que los diarios mintieron sobre él con villanía, que él no fue el culpable de la desgracia de Minerva, sino que solo trataba de ayudarla. Pobre alma hundida en el pecado, no pudo ver que aún tratando de ayudarla, como él dijo, había roto la ley humana y la divina. Paseantes, les hago una advertencia antigua: si van a transitar los caminos de la bondad, y su sendero es el de la paz, amen a Dios y observen sus mandamientos. 54 “Butch” Weldy Después de tomar la religión y sentar cabeza me dieron trabajo en la fábrica de latas, y todas las mañanas debía llenar de gasolina el tanque del patio que alimentaba los mecheros en los cobertizos para calentar el metal de la soldadura. Y yo me encaramaba sobre una escalera tembleque cargando baldes llenos de combustible. Una mañana, subido ahí vertiendo el líquido, el aire empezó a aquietarse y después a hincharse, y salí disparado cuando explotó el tanque, y caí al suelo con las piernas rotas y los ojos fritos como un par de huevos, porque alguien dejó un mechero encendido y algo chupó la llama hacia el tanque. El juez del distrito dijo que el que lo hizo era un compañero de trabajo mío y, por lo tanto, el hijo del viejo Rhodes no tenía que indemnizarme. Y yo estaba sentado en el estrado de los testigos tan ciego como Jack, el violinista, repitiendo y repitiendo “No tengo idea de quién fue”. 55 Knowlt Hoheimer Fui el primer fruto de la batalla de Missionary Ridge. Cuando sentí la bala entrar en mi corazón, deseé haberme quedado mejor en casa e ir a la cárcel por robarme los puercos de Curl Trenary, y no salir corriendo a meterme en el ejército. Mejor mil veces la cárcel del distrito que yacer bajo esta figura de mármol con alas, y este pedestal de granito que sostiene las palabras Pro Patria . Por cierto, ¿qué significan? 56 Lydia Puckett Knowlt Hoheimer salió corriendo a la guerra el día antes de que Curl Trenary le pusiera denuncia ante el juez Arnett por robarle los puercos. Pero no fue esa su razón para hacerse soldado. Descubrió mis amores con Lucius Atherton. Peleamos y le dije que jamás se volviera a cruzar en mi camino. Entonces robó los puercos y se fue a la guerra— tras cada soldado hay una mujer. 57 Frank Drummer Venir desde una celda hasta este espacio a oscuras— ¡terminar a los veinticinco! Mi lengua no podía expresar lo que dentro de mí se agitaba, y el pueblo me creía loco. Pero al comienzo había una clara visión, un propósito elevado y urgente en mi alma que me impulsó a aprenderme de memoria ¡la Enciclopedia Británica! 58 Hare Drummer ¿Van todavía al negocio de Siever los chicos y las chicas a tomar sidra después de clases a fines de septiembre? ¿O a recoger avellanas entre los matorrales de la granja de Aaron Hatfield cuando empieza la helada? Tantas veces jugué con los chicos y las chicas que reían por la carretera y sobre las colinas, cuando el sol estaba bajo y el aire fresco, deteniéndonos para golpear a los nogales de pie y sin hojas frente al ocaso en llamas. Ahora, el olor del humo de otoño y las bellotas que caen, y los ecos rebotando en los valles traen sueños de vida. Giran sobre mí. Me interrogan: ¿dónde están los risueños camaradas? ¿cuántos están conmigo, cuántos en las viejas huertas camino a lo de Siever y en las arboledas que dominan las aguas mansas? 59 Conrad Siever No en ese jardín abandonado donde los cuerpos se vuelven pasto que no alimenta rebaños, y siemprevivas que no dan fruto— allí donde se escucha suspirar en vano a lo largo de las veredas sombreadas y se sueñan sueños más vanos todavía de íntima comunión con almas muertas— sino aquí bajo el manzano que yo amé y cuidé y podé con nudosas manos por largos, largos años; ¡Aquí, bajo las raíces de este manzano de invierno, para girar en la transformación química y el círculo de la vida, y penetrar en la tierra y en la carne del árbol, y en los epitafios vivientes de las manzanas más rojas! 60 El doctor Hill Calle arriba y calle abajo iba, de aquí para allá noche y día, todas las horas de la noche cuidando los enfermos pobres. ¿Saben por qué? Mi esposa me odiaba, mi hijo se tiró a la ruina y yo me volqué hacia la gente, les vertí mi amor. ¡Qué placentero ver la multitud merodear por el prado el día de mi funeral y escucharlos murmurar su amor y su tristeza. Pero, oh, mi Dios querido, me tembló el alma, capaz a duras penas de seguir la vía de la nueva vida, cuando percibí a Em Stanton detrás del roble al lado de la sepultura, ocultándose, y ocultando su pena! 61 Andy, el guardia nocturno En mi capa española, y el viejo sombrero de ala gacha. y cubrebotas de fieltro, y Tyke, mi perro fiel, y mi bastón de nogal nudoso, me escurría por esas calles con una linterna de ojo de buey de puerta en puerta en cada manzana, mientras allá arriba giraban las estrellas y la campana de la iglesia murmuraba cuando soplaba el viento y los pasos cansados del viejo doctor Hill resonaban como quien camina dormido, y a lo lejos cantaban los gallos. Y ahora hay otro haciendo la guardia en Spoon River como hubo otros antes de mí. Y aquí yacemos el doctor Hill y yo, donde nadie se mete a robar y no se necesita un ojo que vigile. 62 Sara Brown Maurice, no llores, no estoy bajo este pino. El viento aromado de la primavera susurra entre la hierba grata, brillan las estrellas, canta el aguaitacamino ¡pero tú estás afligido, mientras mi alma reposa en éxtasis en el Nirvana dichoso de la luz eterna! Anda, ve hasta el bueno de corazón que es el esposo mío, que rumia amargamente lo que él llama nuestro amor culpable: — dile que mi amor por ti, tanto como mi amor por él, urdieron mi destino –que mediante la carne gané el espíritu, y mediante el espíritu, la paz. En el cielo no existe el matrimonio, pero sí el amor. 63 Percy Bysshe Shelley Mi padre, que era dueño del taller de carrocerías y se hizo rico herrando caballos, me mandó a la Universidad de Montreal. No aprendí nada y regresé a casa, a vagabundear por los campos con Bert Kessler, cazando perdices y codornices. En el lago Thompson el gatillo de mi escopeta se enganchó en un costado del bote y se me abrió un gran boquete en el corazón. Sobre mí un padre cariñoso erigió este pedestal de mármol que remata una figura de mujer esculpida por un artista italiano. Dicen que las cenizas del hombre cuyo nombre llevo fueron esparcidas cerca de la pirámide de Cayo Cestio en algún lugar vecino a Roma. 64 Flossie Cabanis Del teatro de la ópera que Bindle tenía en el pueblo a Broadway hay un gran paso. Pero yo intenté darlo, se me encendió la ambición a los dieciséis, viendo la representación de East Lynne aquí en el pueblo, con Ralph Barrett, el actor romántico de tanto porvenir que me hechizó el alma. Es verdad que me devolví a casa, rota y fracasada, cuando Ralph desapareció en Nueva York abandonándome en la ciudad— pero la vida lo rompió a él también. En todo este lugar de silencio no hay un solo espíritu afín. Cómo me gustaría que la Duse pudiese abrirse paso por entre el patetismo de estos campos callados y leyese estas palabras. 65 Julia Miller Esa mañana peleamos, porque él era de sesenta y cinco y yo de treinta, y estaba nerviosa a la espera del niño y con miedo a parirlo. Pensaba en la última carta que me escribió el joven corazón enajenado cuya traición oculté casándome con el viejo. Entonces tomé la morfina y me senté a leer. Por entre la negrura que me vino a los ojos veo todavía parpadear la luz de estas palabras: “Y Jesús le habló así: en verdad te digo que hoy estarás conmigo en el paraíso”. 66 Johnnie Sayre Padre, nunca sabrás la angustia que abatió mi corazón por mi desobediencia, en el momento en que sentí al implacable engranaje del motor hundirse en la llorante carne de mi pierna. Cuando me llevaban a la casa de la viuda Morris, pude ver la escuelita en el valle de la que me fugaba para ir a colearme a los trenes. Rogaba sobrevivir hasta poder pedir tu perdón— ¡Y luego tus lágrimas, tus dolidas palabras de consuelo! La confortación de esa hora me concedió mucha felicidad. Tú supiste cincelar para mí: “Le fue arrebatado al demonio”. 67 Charlie French ¿Por fin descubrieron cuál de los chicos O’Brien me reventó la pistola de juguete en la mano? Allá, cuando las banderolas ondeaban rojiblancas en la brisa y “Bucky” Estil disparaba el cañón que trajo el capitán Harris a Spoon River desde Vicksburg; y los puestos de limonada vendían a todo dar y tocaba la banda, mira que venir a arruinarlo todo por un trozo de metal bajo la piel de la mano, y todos los muchachos arremolinados gritando: “¡Te vas a morir de tétanos, Charlie, seguro que sí!” ¡Válgame Dios! ¡Válgame Dios! ¿Cuál de mis compinches habrá sido? 68 Zenas Witt Tenía dieciséis y me daban las pesadillas más horribles, y veía manchitas delante de los ojos, y sufría de los nervios. Y no podía recordar los libros que leía, como Frank Drummer, que memorizaba página tras página. Y era débil de espaldas, y me preocupaba y me preocupaba, y me daba mucha vergüenza, y tartamudeaba al decir mis lecciones, y cuando me levantaba a contestar, se me olvidaba todo lo que había estudiado. Bueno, vi el anuncio del doctor Weese, y ahí estaba escrito todo tal como si me hubiese conocido en persona, y hasta los sueños que yo no podía remediar aparecían. Supe entonces que estaba marcado para morir muy joven y me preocupé tanto que me vino una tos, y ya no siguieron los sueños. Entonces dormí el sueño que no tiene sueños, aquí en la colina junto al río. 69 El poeta Teodoro De niño, Teodoro, te sentabas durante horas a orillas del turbio Spoon, la vista puesta en el hueco del cangrejo, esperando la aparición, la salida sigilosa, primero las antenas ondulantes, como pajas de heno, el cuerpo luego, del color del jaboncillo y el adorno de los ojos de azabache. Y en un rapto de reflexión te preguntabas lo que sabía, lo que deseaba, por cuál razón vivía, a fin de cuentas. Pero entonces la visión se te iba hacia los seres ocultos en los escondrijos del destino de las grandes ciudades, a la espera de la salida de sus almas y poder ver cómo y por cuál razón vivían, y por qué se arrastraban con tanto afán por la arenosa senda donde falta el agua y el verano mengua. 70 El alguacil del pueblo Los prohibicionistas me hicieron alguacil del pueblo cuando aprobaron el cierre de las cantinas, porque cuando fui un bebedor, antes de ingresar en la iglesia, maté a un sueco en el aserradero de Maple Grove. Y ellos querían alguien que metiera miedo, rígido, probo, fuerte, corajudo que odiara a las cantinas y a los bebedores para guardar la ley y el orden en el pueblo. Y me entregaron un bastón cargado— con él golpeé a Jack McGuire antes de que sacara el arma con la que me mató. Los prohibicionistas gastaron su dinero en vano para colgarlo, porque en un sueño me le aparecí a uno de los del jurado y le conté toda la historia secreta. Catorce años bastaron para pagar mi muerte. 71 Jack McGuire Me hubiesen linchado si no me pasan de prisa y en secreto a la cárcel de Peoria. Pero es que yo iba en paz, camino a casa, con mi damajuana, algo tomado, cuando Logan, el alguacil, me dio el alto, me llamó borracho sucio y me sacudió, y cuando lo maldije por eso, me golpeó con aquel bastón cargado de la prohibición— todo eso antes de dispararle. Me hubiesen colgado de no ser por lo siguiente: mi abogado, Kinsey Keene, ayudaba a que atraparan al viejo Thomas Rhodes por arruinar al banco, y el juez era amigo de Rhodes y quería que se salvara, y Kinsey le ofreció dejar tranquilo a Rhodes si me daba a mí catorce años. Y se hizo el trato. Cumplí mi condena y aprendí a leer y escribir. 72 Dorcas Gustine La gente del pueblo no me quería y todo por decir lo que pensaba y enfrentar a quienes se me propasaban ripostando sin tapujos, sin esconder y engordar inquinas ni reconcomios secretos. Tanto que se elogia lo que hizo aquel niño en Esparta, el que escondió al lobo bajo su manto y se dejó devorar sin una queja. Más valiente es, pienso yo, echar afuera al lobo y combatirlo abiertamente en la calle, entre el polvo que se levanta y los aullidos de dolor. Puede que la lengua sea un miembro atrabiliario, pero el silencio envenena el alma. Que me reproche el que quiera— yo estoy contento. 73 Nicholas Bindle ¿No les dio vergüenza, conciudadanos, cuando validaron mi testamento y ustedes se enteraron de la escasa fortuna que dejé?— ¡Ustedes que me acosaron en vida para que les diera, y les diera, y les diera, a las iglesias, a los pobres, al pueblo! —yo que ya había dado demasiado. Y no creerán que no me enteré de que el órgano de tubos que le doné a la iglesia acompañó sus cánticos cristianos cuando Rhodes, el diácono, que quebró el banco y casi me arruina, elevó sus plegarias luego de su absolución. 74 Jacob Goodpasture Cuando cayó el fuerte Sumter y llegó la guerra me lamenté con el alma amargada: “¡Ay, gloriosa República, has dejado de serlo!” Cuando enterraron a mi hijo soldado con toque de trompetas y redoble de tambor, el peso de los ochenta años abatió mi corazón, y me lamenté: “¡Ay, hijo mío, has muerto por una causa injusta, en la contienda que asesina la libertad!” Y me arrastré aquí, bajo la hierba. Y ahora, desde las almenas de la victoria, véanlo ustedes: tres veces treinta millones de almas unidas en el amor de una verdad muy grande, arrobadas a la espera de que nazca una nueva Belleza. Hija de la Hermandad y la Sabiduría. Con los ojos del espíritu veo la Transformación antes que los demás. Pero ustedes, casta infinita de águilas doradas que anidan cada vez más alto, y vuelan en círculos siempre más elevados hasta remontarse a las cumbres del Pensamiento, olvidan la ceguera del difunto búho. 75 Harold Arnett Me recosté de la chimenea, mareado, mareado, pensando en mi fracaso, mirando al abismo, debilitado por el calor del mediodía. La campana de una iglesia doblando a lo lejos con tristeza, y escuché llorar un niño y la tos de John Yarnell, abatido en cama, ardiendo en fiebre, muriéndose, y entonces la voz de mi mujer: “¡Ten cuidado, se están quemando las papas!” Las olí... allí vino la ira irreprimible. Tiré del gatillo... negrura... luz... remordimiento indecible... retornar al mundo a tientas. ¡Demasiado tarde! Luego llegué aquí, con pulmones para respirar... donde no se puede respirar con pulmones, pero hay que respirar... ¿de qué nos vale librarnos del mundo, si no hay alma que escape jamás del eterno destino de la vida? 76 Margaret Fuller Slack Pude haber sido grande como George Eliot de no ser por un destino adverso. Porque miren esta foto que me tomó Penniwit, la barbilla sobre una mano, los ojos de mirada profunda— grises además, viendo a lontananza. Pero estaba el viejo, viejo, problema: ¿soltería, matrimonio o libertinaje? Entonces John Slack, el farmaceuta rico, me cortejó, tentándome con la promesa del tiempo libre para mi novela, y me casé con él, y le parí ocho niños y no me quedó tiempo para escribir. De todos modos ya no tenía porvenir cuando me enterré la aguja en una mano lavando los pañales del pequeño y me morí de tétanos, una muerte irónica. ¡Escúchenme, almas ambiciosas, el sexo es la maldición de la vida! 77 George Trimble ¿Me recuerdan parado sobre las escalinatas de los tribunales, hablando de las acuñaciones sin plata y el impuesto único de Henry George? ¿Me recuerdan hablando de la prohibición cuando el Líder Supremo perdió la primera batalla, convertido en activista de la religión? Pues todo fue porque mi esposa me auguró la destrucción si no le probaba a la gente que yo tenía moral. Bueno, ella me arruinó: los radicales sospecharon de mí y los conservadores tampoco confiaron en mí— y aquí yazgo, sin que ninguno me llore. 78 El doctor Siegfried Iseman ¡Dije cuando me entregaron mi diploma, me lo dije a mí mismo, que yo iba a ser bueno, y sabio y valiente y siempre al servicio del prójimo; dije que llevaría el credo cristiano a la práctica de la medicina! Pero el mundo y los demás doctores de algún modo ya saben lo que hay en tu corazón cuando tomas una resolución tan digna de un alma elevada. Y entonces te ponen a morirte de hambre. Y a tu puerta no tocan sino los pobres. Y descubres demasiado tarde que ser médico no es más que un modo de ganarse la vida. ¡Y cuando eres pobre y tienes que cargar con el credo cristiano y una mujer con hijos, todo junto sobre tus espaldas, resulta demasiado! ¡Por eso fabriqué el Elixir de la Juventud que me aterrizó en la cárcel de Peoria con la etiqueta de timador y ladrón colocada por el muy honesto juez federal! 79 “El As” Shaw Nunca vi la diferencia entre jugar cartas por dinero y vender bienes raíces, practicar el derecho, ser banquero, o cualquiera de esas cosas. Porque todas dependen de la suerte. En cambio, ¿han conocido a alguno que sea bueno para los negocios? ¡Ese estará por delante de los reyes! 80 Lois Spears Aquí yace el cuerpo de Lois Spears, nacida Lois Fluke, hija de Willard Fluke, esposa de Cyrus Spears, madre de Myrtle y Virgil Spears, niños de ojos claros y miembros sanos (yo nací ciega). Fui la más feliz de todas las mujeres como esposa, madre y ama de casa, y cuidé a mis seres queridos y convertí a mi hogar en un lugar de orden y hospitalidad generosa: porque recorría las habitaciones y el jardín con un instinto tan seguro como la vista, como con ojos en la punta de los dedos— Gloria a Dios en las alturas. 81 El juez Arnett Es verdad, conciudadanos, que aquel viejo archivo mío estuvo allí por años en un estante sobre mi cabeza y por arriba del asiento de la justicia. Manifiesto que es verdad que el archivo tenía un borde de acero que me acuchilló la calva al caer— (creo que de alguna manera lo aflojó el golpe de aire que se expandió por el pueblo cuando estalló el tanque de gasolina de la fábrica de latas y quemó a Butch Weldy)— Pero consideremos los puntos en orden y razonemos el caso con el debido cuidado: en primer término admito que recibí un corte en la cabeza, pero en segundo término lo terrible fue lo siguiente: las fichas del archivo saltaron y se desparramaron a mi alrededor como un mazo de cartas en las diestras manos de un prestidigitador, y llegado el final veía todavía esas fichas, hasta que por último dije, “Esas no son fichas nada más, ¿qué, no pueden ver que son los días y días y los días y días de setenta años? ¿Y por qué me torturan ustedes con esas fichas y las pequeñas anotaciones que hice sobre ellas?” 82 Willard Fluke Mi esposa perdió la salud y fue menguando hasta pesar apenas los cuarenta kilos. Entonces apareció esa mujer, a quien los hombres llamaban Cleopatra. Y nosotros— nosotros los casados, quebramos nuestros votos, yo con todos los demás. Pasaron los años y uno a uno a los otros la muerte los reclamó de alguna forma atroz, y a mí me arrastraron los sueños de que Dios me concedía una gracia especial, y comencé a escribir, escribir, escribir resma sobre resma acerca de la segunda venida de Cristo. Entonces Cristo vino a mí y me dijo: “Ve a la iglesia, preséntate a la congregación y confiesa tu pecado”. ¡Pero cuando estuve ahí y comenzaba a hablar vi a mi niña sentada en la primera fila— mi niña que nació ciega! ¡Después de eso todo ha sido tinieblas! 83 Aner Clute Una y otra vez solían preguntarme, cuando pagaban el vino o la cerveza, primero en Peoria y más tarde en Chicago, Denver, Frisco, Nueva York, donde quiera que viví, por qué llevaba la vida que llevaba y cómo había comenzado. Bueno, les conté que con un vestido de seda y la promesa de matrimonio de un rico— (fue Lucius Atherton). Pero no era muy cierto. Pongamos que un muchacho se roba una manzana del cajón de la frutería y todos empiezan a tildarlo de ladrón, el director del diario, el pastor, el juez y el pueblo entero— “Ladrón”, “ladrón”, “ladrón”, por donde vaya. Y no puede conseguir trabajo, y no puede conseguir el pan sin robarlo, pues el muchacho tendrá que robar. Es la forma como la gente mira el robo de la manzana lo que hace al muchacho ser lo que es. 84 Lucius Atherton Cuando se me rizaba el bigote y tenía el pelo negro, y usaba pantalones apretados, y lucía en el cuello un botón de diamante, era yo una magnífica sota de corazones que se conocía todos los trucos. Pero cuando se me puso el cabello gris, ¡vean, pues!, las chicas de la nueva generación se reían de mí, ya no me temían y se terminaron las aventuras excitantes, las de salvarse por un pelo de recibir un tiro por ser un demonio redomado, ahora apenas unos lances de segunda, lances recalentados de otros días y otros hombres del pasado. Y me llegó la hora de vivir en la fonda de Mayer, comiendo los platos de la carta, un Don Juan rural gris, desaliñado, desdentado, descartado... Hay aquí una sombra poderosa que le canta a una tal Beatriz, y ahora veo que la fuerza que lo engrandeció a mí me arrastró al basurero de la vida. 85 Homer Clapp Muchas veces me negó Aner Clute el beso de despedida en la puerta, diciendo que antes debíamos comprometernos, y con nada más un apretón de manos frío me daba las buenas noches cuando la llevaba a casa después de patinar o la película. No acababan de apagarse mis pasos alejándome cuando Lucius Atherton (como supe cuando Aner se marchó a Peoria) se colaba por su ventana, o se la llevaba de paseo por el campo en su veloz yunta de bayos. El sacudón me hizo sentar los pies sobre la tierra y metí todo el dinero que le saqué a mi patrimonio en la fábrica de latas, a ver si me daban el puesto de primer contador, y lo perdí todo. Y entonces supe que yo era uno de esos tontos que abundan en la Vida, a quienes solo la muerte trata como iguales a los demás hombres, y ella me hizo sentir hombre. 86 El diácono Taylor Yo le pertenecía a la iglesia y al partido de la prohibición; y los del pueblo creyeron que había muerto de comer patilla. En verdad sufría de cirrosis del hígado porque cada mediodía durante treinta años me metí por debajo del precinto de la prohibición en la farmacia de Trainor y me serví un trago generoso de la botella rotulada “Spiritus frumenti”. 87 Sam Hookey Me fui de mi casa con el circo porque me enamoré de Mademoiselle Estralada, la domadora de leones. Una vez, habiendo puesto a los leones a pasar hambre por más de un día, entré en la jaula y empecé a pegarle a Brutus, y a Leo, y a Gipsy. Entonces Brutus me brincó encima, y me mató. A mi entrada en estas regiones me tropecé con una sombra que me maldijo, y me dijo que lo tenía bien merecido... ¡Era Robespierre! 88 Cooney Potter De mi padre heredé cuarenta acres, y con el trabajo de mi esposa, los dos hijos y dos hijas del amanecer al oscurecer, adquirí cien acres. Pero no contento con eso, pues quería llegar a los doscientos acres, bregué por años con el hacha y el arado, afanándome, olvidado de mí y olvidando a mi esposa y a los hijos. El juez de paz Higbee se equivoca conmigo cuando dice que morí de tanto fumar Red Eagle. Fue de comer pastel caliente y engullir café a las horas achicharradoras del tiempo de la cosecha lo que me trajo aquí, donde llevo ya seis años. 89 El violinista Jones La tierra mantiene viva una cierta vibración ahí en tu corazón, y eso eres tú. Y si la gente descubre que tocas el violín, pues tendrás que tocar el violín, toda tu vida. ¿Qué miras, un campo de tréboles? ¿O un prado que atravesar para ir al río? El viento en el maizal. Sobas las mazorcas casi listas para llevar al mercado. O a lo mejor escuchas un susurro como de faldas de muchachas danzando en Little Grove. Para Cooney Potter una columna de polvo que se levanta o un remolino de hojas significaban ruinosa sequía, a mí se me parecían a Sammy el Pelirrojo sacando el “Toor-a-Loor”. ¿Cómo iba yo a arar cuarenta acres, por no hablar de tener más, con ese torbellino de cornos y fagotes y flautas que cualquier cuervo, o gorrión, o chirriar de molino de viento— eso bastaba— me desataban en la cabeza? Y jamás en la vida logré empezar a arar sin que alguno me detuviera en el camino para llevarme a un baile o a un picnic. Terminé con mis cuarenta acres, terminé con un violín roto— y una risa rota, y con mil recuerdos y ni un solo remordimiento. 90 Nellie Clark Tenía apenas ocho años y antes de crecer y saber lo que significaba ni tenía palabra para eso, solo que me dio miedo y se lo conté a mi madre, y que mi padre agarró una pistola y hubiera matado a Charlie, que era un muchachón de quince, excepto para su madre. Sin embargo el cuento siempre me persiguió. Pero el hombre que se casó conmigo, un viudo de treinta y cinco, era un forastero y no se enteró sino dos años después del matrimonio. Entonces se sintió engañado y el pueblo estuvo de acuerdo en que yo no era realmente virgen. Bueno, él me abandonó, y yo morí al invierno siguiente. 91 Louise Smith Herbert rompió nuestro compromiso de ocho años cuando Annabelle volvió al pueblo del colegio, ¡ay de mí! Si yo hubiese dejado tranquilo mi amor por él, se habría convertido en hermoso pesar— ¿quién sabe?— y llenado mi vida de sanadora fragancia. Pero yo lo atormenté, y lo envenené, y le cegué los ojos, y se me volvió odio— hiedra ponzoñosa y no clemátide. Y se me cayó la planta del alma de su soporte, los zarcillos enmarañados de deterioro. No dejes que el afán juegue a ser jardinero de tu alma, a menos que estés convencida de que es más sabio que la naturaleza del alma tuya. 92 Herbert Marshall Todo ese pesar tuyo, Louise, y tu odio hacia mí, nacieron de la creencia de que fue mi crueldad de espíritu y el menosprecio de los derechos de tu alma lo que me hizo quedarme con Annabelle y dejarte a ti. De verdad maduraste para odiarme porque me querías, porque yo era la felicidad de tu alma, formado y forjado para resolver tu vida, pero no era así. Mas tú eras mi desdicha. ¿Acaso si tú hubieses sido mi felicidad no me hubiese aferrado a ti? Es esa la pena de la vida: que uno pueda ser feliz tan solo si ambos lo son; y que nuestros corazones sean atraídos por astros que no nos quieren. 93 George Gray He estudiado mucho el mármol que me esculpieron— una barca con la vela enrollada fondeada en puerto. En verdad no describe mi destino sino mi vida. Porque se me ofreció el amor, y me retraje por miedo a la desilusión, el pesar tocó mi puerta, y yo sentí temor, me llamó la ambición, pero le tuve miedo a los albures. Y siempre anhelando un sentido en mi vida. Y ahora sé que debemos izar la vela y tomar los vientos del destino hacia donde ellos quieran llevar la barca. Darle sentido a la vida puede parar en locura, pero la vida sin sentido es el tormento del desasosiego y el deseo incierto— es una barca que añora el mar y, sin embargo, teme. 94 El honorable Henry Bennett Nunca se me ocurrió, sino ya presto para morir que Jenny me amaba para matarme, con malicia en el corazón, porque tenía treinta y cinco y yo setenta y cinco. Y me desgasté hasta reducirme a sombra tratando de cumplirle a Jenny, la sonrosada Jenny, llena de ardor de vida. Pero con toda mi sabiduría y mi mente despierta no le daba placer, es la pura verdad, y a cada momento hablaba de la fuerza enorme de Willard Shafer, y su increíble proeza de sacar el tractor de la zanja levantándolo aquella vez en lo de Georgie Kirby. Así que Jenny heredó mi fortuna y se casó con Willard— ¡Esa montaña de músculos! ¡Esa alma de bufón! 95 Griffy, el tonelero Un tonelero debía conocer de barriles. Pero yo aprendí también acerca de la vida, y usted, que holgazanea por entre estas tumbas, cree conocer la vida. Usted cree que su mirada cubre un horizonte vasto, quizá en verdad no hace más que mirar el interior de su barril. No se puede empinar hasta el borde y ver el mundo de las cosas allá afuera y a la vez contemplarse a sí mismo. Está sumergido en el barril de usted mismo, y los tabúes y las reglas y las apariencias son las duelas de su barril. ¡Rómpalas y deshaga el hechizo de creer que su barril es la vida! ¡Y el de creer que conoce la vida! 96 Sexsmith, el dentista ¿Creen ustedes que fueron los sermones y las odas y el tañer de las campanas de la iglesia y la sangre de los ancianos y los jóvenes martirizados por la verdad que contemplaron con ojos iluminados por la fe en su Dios los que consumaron las grandes reformas del mundo? ¿Creen ustedes que el Himno de Batalla de la República sería escuchado si la venta de esclavos se hubiese encaramado sobre el dólar dominante, a pesar de la desmotadora de Whitney y el vapor y la laminadora y el hierro y el telégrafo y el trabajador independiente blanco? ¿Creen ustedes que a Daisy Fraser la hubiesen sacado y después expulsado si la fábrica de latas no necesitaba de su casita y de su terrenito? ¿O piensan ustedes que al salón de póker de Johnnie Taylor y al bar de Burchard los hubiesen cerrado si al cerrarlos el dinero perdido y el gastado en cerveza no hubiesen ido a parar a manos de Thomas Rhodes para aumentar las ventas de calzado y frazadas y capitas para niños y cunas de roble? Pues sí, la verdad moral es una caries en un diente que hay que rellenar de oro. 97 A. D. Blood Si ustedes los del pueblo piensan que cumplí bien mi tarea de cerrar las cantinas y acabar con los juegos de cartas, y detener a la vieja Daisy Fraser para llevársela al juez Arnett, y tantas cruzadas para expurgar al pueblo del pecado, ¿por qué entonces permiten que Dora, la de la sombrerera, y el inútil del hijo de Benjamin Pantier por las noches hagan de mi tumba su lecho de impudicia? 98 Robert Southey Burke Me gasté mi dinero para que lo eligieran alcalde, A. D. Blood. Vertí en usted mi admiración. Usted era en mi mente el hombre casi perfecto. Se devoró mi personalidad, y el idealismo de mi juventud y la fuerza de una lealtad hecha nobleza y todas mis esperanzas en el mundo y todo lo que creía sobre la Verdad fueron fundidas al calor deslumbrante de mi devoción y moldeadas a su imagen y semejanza. Y entonces descubrí lo que usted era: que su alma era pequeña y falsas sus palabras como sus dientes de porcelana azulada y sus puños de camisa de celuloide. Odié al amor que le tenía, me odié a mí mismo, lo odié a usted por mi alma malgastada, y por mi juventud malgastada y ahora les digo a todos, cuídense de los ideales, cuídense de entregar su amor a nadie que esté vivo. 99 Dora Williams Cuando Reuben Pantier huyó y me dejó tirada, me fui a Springfield. Allí conocí a un botarate que acababa de heredar una fortuna. Se casó conmigo en una borrachera. Se desgració mi vida. Al año lo encontraron muerto. Eso me volvió rica. Me mudé a Chicago. Con el tiempo me encontré a Tyler Rountree, un rufián. Me mudé a Nueva York. Un magnate de cabello gris enloqueció por mí. Otra fortuna. Murió una noche entre mis brazos, ustedes saben (por años seguí viendo aquella cara amoratada). Casi hubo un escándalo. Me mudé esta vez a París. Ahora ya era toda una mujer, insidiosa, artera, conocedora del mundo y rica. Mi lindo apartamento cerca de los Campos Elíseos era centro de toda clase de gente, músicos, poetas, dandis, artistas, nobles, y se hablaba francés y alemán, italiano, inglés. Me casé con el conde Navigato, natural de Génova. Nos fuimos a Roma. Pienso que él me envenenó. Ahora en el camposanto que mira al mar donde el joven Colón soñaba mundos nuevos vean ustedes lo que cincelaron: “Contessa Navigato implora eterna quiete”. 100 La señora Williams Yo era la sombrerera de la que hablaron, de la que mintieron, la mamá de Dora, cuya extraña desaparición la achacaron a su crianza. Tenía yo buen ojo para la belleza, y veía mucho más allá de las cintas, y las hebillas y las plumas y la paja de Italia y los fieltros para resaltar las caras lindas y el cabello oscuro y el dorado. Les diré una cosa y otra les preguntaré: las robamaridos usan polvo y joyas de imitación y sombreros de moda. Úsenlos ustedes, señoras esposas. Los sombreros pueden provocar divorcios— también los previenen. Bien, ahora la pregunta: si a todos los niños nacidos en el pueblo los criara el distrito en una granja, y a los padres y las madres les diesen libertad para vivir y para gozar, y cambiar de pareja si les place, ¿piensan ustedes que Spoon River hubiese sido mucho peor? 101 William y Emily ¡Algo hay en la muerte que vale igual para el amor! Conoces la pasión con alguien y el fulgor del amor de juventud. Luego de años de vida juntos sientes que el fuego se apaga y así juntos ambos se extinguen, gradualmente, quedamente, sutilmente, en los brazos del otro, desvaneciéndose del cuarto compartido— ¡Esa fuerza de fusión de las almas también la posee el amor! 102 El juez del distrito Tomen nota, paseantes, de la marcas de erosión que el viento y la lluvia moldean en mi lápida— pareciera que algún Némesis intangible o el odio se apuntasen tantos en mi contra, y para acabar con mi recuerdo, no para preservarlo. En vida fui juez del distrito, un verdadero marcador de tantos. Decidía los casos según los puntos que se anotasen los abogados, no según la legalidad del asunto. ¡Ay, lluvia y viento, dejen en paz mi tumba! Porque peor que la ira de los mal juzgados, y la maldición de los pobres, es yacer sin habla, pero con la vista clara, viendo como hasta Hod Putt, el asesino colgado por sentencia mía, es un alma inocente comparado conmigo. 103 Jack, el ciego Pasé el día tocando el violín en la fiesta del distrito. Pero de vuelta a casa en el carro “Butch” Weldy y Jack McGuire, con una curda de los mil demonios, me hicieron tocar y volver a tocar la música de Susie Skinner , mientras azotaban a los caballos hasta que se desbocaron. Ciego como era, traté de salirme cuando el carro se cayó en la zanja y las ruedas me atraparon y me trituraron. Aquí hay un ciego de frente grande y blanca como una nube. Y todos los violinistas, desde el más importante al menos valioso, los que escriben música y los contadores de historias, nos sentamos a sus pies y le escuchamos cantar la caída de Troya. 104 John Horace Burleson Me gané el primer premio de ensayo escolar aquí en el pueblo, y antes de los veinticinco publiqué una novela. Me fui a la ciudad a buscar temas y enriquecer mi arte; allá me casé con la hija del banquero, y más tarde llegué a presidente del banco— siempre a la espera de algún tiempo libre para mi novela épica sobre la guerra. Entre tanto, amigo de los grandes y amante de las letras, conocí a Matthew Arnold y a Ralph Waldo Emerson. Fui orador de sobremesa y escritor de ensayos para clubes locales. Al final me trajeron acá— mi hogar de la infancia, como ya saben— sin siquiera una plaquita en Chicago para preservar vivo mi nombre. ¡Qué grande haber escrito este único verso: “Avanza en oleadas, océano azul, hondo y oscuro, avanza”! 105 Nancy Knapp Bueno, ¿no ven acaso que fue así como pasó? Compramos la granja con lo que él heredó, y hermanos y hermanas lo acusaron de haberle envenenado la mente a su padre en contra de ellos. Y nunca tuvimos algo de paz con nuestro tesoro. La peste se llevó el ganado y las cosechas jamás se dieron. Y el rayo cayó sobre el granero. Hipotecamos la granja para seguir adelante y ahora él hizo su vida preocupado y silencioso. Varios de los vecinos dejaron de hablarnos y se pusieron de parte de sus hermanos y hermanas. Y yo no sabía para dónde coger, ya no era como antes, que uno podía decirse “No importa, fulano de tal es amigo mío”, o “Me puedo zafar de esta con un viajecito a Decatur”. Entonces los hedores más espantosos impregnaron los cuartos. Les pegué candela a las camas y la vieja casa embrujada fue una sola llama rugiente y yo danzaba en el patio agitando los brazos mientras él lloraba como un novillo que se muere de frío. 106 Barry Holden El mismo año en que Nancy Knapp, mi hermana, le pegó candela a la casa, juzgaron al doctor Duval por el asesinato de Zora Clemens, y yo fui a sentarme en la corte durante dos semanas para poder oír a todos los testigos. Estaba claro que él le había puesto una barriga, y lo de dejar nacer al muchacho, ni modo. ¿Y bueno, qué tal yo con mis ocho muchachos y uno en camino y la granja hipotecada a Thomas Rhodes? ¡Y cuando llego a casa esa noche (después de escuchar la historia del paseo en coche y el hallazgo de Zora en la cuneta), lo primero que veo, ahí mismo a un lado de la escalera, donde los muchachos cavaron buscando lombrices, es el hacha! Y nada más al entrar, ahí estaba mi esposa, parada frente a mí, voluminosa por el bebé. Empezó a hablar de la granja hipotecada y la maté. 107 El procurador del Estado, Fallas Yo, el del látigo en mano, el derribador de la balanza el castigador con azote y con espada; yo, el odiador de los infractores de la ley; yo, el legalista, inexorable y estricto, que induje al juzgado a colgar al loco Barry Holden, quedé como muerto por una luz demasiado brillante para la vista, y desperté para encarar a la Verdad en su rostro sangriento: fórceps de acero en manos de un doctor chapucero apretando el cráneo de mi muchacho cuando vino a la vida lo hicieron idiota. Acudí a los libros de ciencia para cuidar de él. Entonces el mundo de las mentes enfermas se volvió mi ocupación en la vida, y mi mundo entero. ¡Pobre muchacho destruido! A fin de cuentas fuiste el alfarero y yo y todos mis actos de caridad las vasijas que tus manos hicieron. 108 Wendell P. Bloyd Me acusaron primero de alterar el orden público, pues no había legislación sobre la blasfemia. Luego me encerraron por insania y un guardián católico me mató de una golpiza. Este fue mi delito: decir que Dios le mintió a Adán y lo condenó a una vida de idiota, ignorante de que en el mundo igual que hay bien, hay mal. Y cuando Adán burló a Dios comiéndose la manzana y logró ver por entre la mentira, Dios lo echó del Edén para que no tomara la fruta de la inmortalidad. Por amor a Cristo, ustedes, que son gente sensata, vean lo que Dios mismo dice en el libro del Génesis: “Y Dios Nuestro Señor dijo: ‘He aquí al hombre, ya es como uno de nosotros’ (un poquito celoso, como se ve), ‘para distinguir entre el bien y el mal’ (la mentira del todo-es-bueno al descubierto) ‘no vaya a ser ahora que alargue la mano y tome también del árbol de la vida y coma, y viva para siempre’: por eso Dios Nuestro Señor lo echó fuera del jardín del Edén” (creo que la razón por la que Dios crucificó a Su Propio Hijo para salir del lastimoso enredo fue porque tal cosa era muy propia de Él). 109 Francis Turner Cuando niño no podía correr ni jugar. Ya de adulto, no podía beberme la taza, sorberla nada más. Porque la escarlatina me enfermó el corazón. Pero aquí yazgo sosegado por un secreto que solo Mary sabe: hay un jardín de acacias, con catalpas y árboles que adornan las enredaderas —allí, en aquella tarde de junio, yo al lado de Mary— besándola con el alma en los labios, ella echó a volar. 110 Franklin Jones Si hubiese logrado vivir otro año, habría terminado mi máquina voladora, y sería rico y famoso. Así es que acertó el operario que trató de cincelarme una paloma y le salió más bien una gallina. ¿Y acaso no se trata todo sino tan solo de romper el cascarón y correr alrededor del patio hasta llegado el día del degüello? ¡A no ser que sea un hombre con la mente de ángel que divise el hacha desde un comienzo! 111 John M. Church Fui el abogado de la “Q” y de la compañía de indemnizaciones que aseguraba a los propietarios de la mina. Yo tiraba de los hilos del juez y del jurado y de las cortes de apelaciones, y derrotaba las demandas de los lisiados, las viudas y los huérfanos, y amasé una fortuna con eso. La asociación de abogados entonó mis alabanzas en una nota rimbombante, y fueron muchas las ofrendas florales— pero las ratas me devoraron el corazón, y una serpiente anidó en mi cráneo. 112 Sonia la Rusa Yo, nacida en Weimar de madre francesa y padre alemán, un profesor cultísimo, fui huérfana a los catorce, me hice bailarina, Sonia la Rusa me llamaban, subí y bajé por los bulevares de París, amante ocasional de un muestrario de duques y de condes, y luego de artistas y poetas pobres. A los cuarenta, passée , intenté Nueva York y conocí al viejo Patrick Hummer en el barco, rubicundo y vigoroso, aunque pasaba los sesenta, de regreso de vender un cargamento de ganado en esa ciudad de Alemania, Hamburgo. Él me trajo a Spoon River y aquí vivimos por veinte años —¡creían ellos que estábamos casados! Ese roble a mi lado es el lugar que los azulejos prefieren para chacharear y chacharear todo el día. ¿Y por qué no? Si mi propio polvo se ríe al pensar en esa cosa del humor llamada vida. 113 Isa Nutter El doctor Meyer dijo que tenía satiriasis, y el doctor Hill la llamó leucemia— mas yo sé bien lo que me trajo aquí: era de sesenta y cuatro, pero fuerte como uno de treinta y cinco o cuarenta. Y no fue por escribir una carta al día, y no fue por trasnocharme siete noches por semana, y no fue por el dolor de estar pensando en Minnie, y no fue por el miedo o pánico de los celos, o la incumplible tarea de sondear su mente prodigiosa, o por simpatía con la vida miserable que llevó con el primer marido y el segundo— nada de eso me llevó a la fosa— sino el griterío de las hijas y las amenazas de los hijos, y los desplantes y las maldiciones de todos mis parientes, hasta el día en que me escabullí a Peoria y me casé con Minnie a pesar de ellos— ¿Y por qué se extrañan de que hiciera mi testamento a favor de la más pura de todas las mujeres? 114 Barney Hainsfeather Si el tren del paseo a Peoria nada más se descarrila, seguramente habría escapado con vida— y me habría salvado de estar aquí. Pero además se quemó, y me tomaron por John Allen, al que mandaron al cementerio judío de Chicago, y a John por mí, así que aquí llegué. Ya era bastante malo manejar una tienda de ropa en este pueblo, para encima de eso estar enterrado acá... ¡ach! 115 Petit, el poeta Semillas en una vaina seca, tic, tic, tic, tic, tic, tic, como una pelea de insectos— yambos delicados que la brisa pura despierta— y con ellos el pino compone una sinfonía. Tercetos, villanelas, rondeles y rondós, baladas a granel con la misma vieja idea: las nieves y las rosas del ayer se han ido ¿y qué es el amor sino una rosa que se marchita? La vida en torno mío aquí en el pueblo: tragedia, comedia, valentía y verdad, coraje, constancia, heroísmo y fracaso— todo en el telar ¡y con qué colores! Bosques, prados, arroyos y ríos— ciego para ellos fui toda la vida. ¿Tercetos, villanelas, rondelas y rondós semillas en una vaina seca, tic, tic, tic, qué yambos tan pequeños mientras Homero y Whitman rugían en los pinos? 116 Pauline Barrett ¡Casi una cáscara de mujer tras el cuchillo del cirujano! y casi un año arrastrándome para recuperar fuerzas hasta que el amanecer de nuestro décimo aniversario me encontró de nuevo parecida a mí misma. Caminamos juntos por la arboleda, por un sendero de musgo y césped silencioso, pero no te podía mirar a los ojos y tú no podías mirarte en los míos, por esa tristeza nuestra— ya asomaban tus canas y yo no era más que una cáscara de mí. ¿Y de qué hablamos? —del cielo y del agua, de todo, casi, para ocultar lo que pensábamos. Y entonces tu regalo de rosas silvestres, puesto sobre la mesa para adornar nuestro almuerzo. ¡Pobre amor mío, qué enorme esfuerzo hiciste para imaginar y vivir una pasión recordada! Luego mi ánimo decayó cuando vino la noche y me dejaste sola en el cuarto por un rato como cuando era tu novia, pobre amor mío. Y me miré en el espejo y algo me dijo: “Una debería estar muerta del todo cuando ya está muerta a medias— y no remedar la vida, y no copiar el amor”. Y aquí lo hice, mirándome al espejo— ¿Querido, lo has entendido al fin? 117 La esposa de Charles Bliss El reverendo Wiley me aconsejó no divorciarme por el bien de los niños, y el juez Somers me dio el mismo consejo. Así que seguimos juntos hasta el fin del camino. Pero dos de los muchachos le daban la razón, y dos de los muchachos me daban la razón. Y los dos de su lado me echaban la culpa y los dos de mi lado le echaban la culpa. Y cada pareja se afligía por su preferido, desgarrados todos de tanto enjuiciamiento, y el alma triturada de no podernos amar a los dos. Pues bien, los jardineros saben que la planta que nace en un sótano, o bajo las piedras, crece torcida, amarillenta y débil. Y una madre no debe dar de mamar leche enferma. Pero los predicadores y los jueces aconsejan que se críen almas donde no les da el sol, sino solo media luz, ni el calor, sino solo frío y humedad— ¡Los predicadores y los jueces! 118 La señora de George Reece A los de esta generación les diría: memoricen un trocito de poesía de la verdad o de la belleza. Podría serles útil en algún momento de la vida. Mi esposo nada tuvo que ver con la caída del banco —era un simple cajero. El culpable de la ruina fue el presidente, Thomas Rhodes. Y también su hijo, inútil e inescrupuloso. Pero a mi esposo lo mandaron a la cárcel, y yo me quedé sola con los niños, a alimentarlos y vestirlos y educarlos. Y lo hice, y los solté al mundo bien limpios y fuertes. Todo siguiendo la máxima del poeta Pope: “Cumple bien tu papel, allí radica todo el honor”. 119 El reverendo Lemuel Wiley Prediqué cuatrocientos sermones, conduje cuarenta asambleas y bauticé a muchísimos conversos. Pero no hubo hecho mío que brillase con más fuerza en la memoria del mundo, ni que yo atesore más, que este: ver como salvé a los Bliss del divorcio, y así libré a sus niños de semejante desgracia, para desarrollarse como hombres y mujeres de bien, felices con ellos mismos, un orgullo para todo el pueblo. 120 Thomas Ross, hijo Esto lo vi con mis propios ojos: una venceja hizo nido en un agujero del talud arcilloso por los lados de Miller’s Ford. Pero en cuanto los pichones rompieron el cascarón una serpiente subió reptando al nido para devorar su cría. Entonces la venceja atacó a la serpiente en veloz revoloteo entre fuertes chillidos y la cegó batiéndole las alas hasta que cayó talud abajo retorciéndose y retrayendo la cabeza, en el mero río Spoon, y ahí se ahogó. No había transcurrido ni una hora cuando vino un alcaudón y empaló a la venceja en una espina. En lo que a mí respecta, superé mis bajos instintos, pero me destruyó la ambición de mi hermano. 121 El reverendo Abner Peet No hubiese puesto ninguna objeción a la subasta de los enseres de mi hogar en la plaza del pueblo. Le daba la oportunidad a mi querida grey de tener como recuerdo algo que yo había poseído. ¡Pero aquel baúl que se llevó Burchard, el bodeguero! ¿No sabían que en él guardaba los manuscritos de toda una vida de sermones? Y él los quemó como papel inútil. 122 Jefferson Howard ¡Mi valeroso combate! Valeroso lo llamo con las creencias de mi padre, virginiano viejo: odio a la esclavitud, pero igual a la guerra. Yo, pleno de ánimo, de audacia, de coraje, lanzado a la vida aquí en Spoon River y su poder dominante de Nueva Inglaterra, republicanos, calvinistas, comerciantes, banqueros, todos odiándome, pero a la vez temiendo mi brazo. Con la pesada carga de una mujer y niños— los frutos de mis disfrutes de la vida. Hurtador de placeres que me costaron prestigio y cosechador de demonios que nunca sembré; enemigo de la iglesia con su moho de tumba, amigo de la calidez humana de la taberna; enredado en destinos que me eran ajenos, abandonado de manos que creí como mías. Y ahora siento que mi fuerza de gigante pierde el aliento, pues veo la vidas de mis hijos crecer retorcidas en jardines de extraños— ¡Y yo plantado en pie, solitario, solitario como al inicio! ¡Mi vida valerosa! Morí sobre mis pies, enfrentado al silencio— enfrentado al acaso de que nadie se entere del combate que di. 123 El juez Selah Lively Supóngase que usted no pasaba del metro y medio, y se abrió camino como empleado de abasto, estudiando derecho a la luz de una vela, hasta llegar a abogado. Y luego suponga que gracias a su diligencia y asistir regularmente a la iglesia llegó a ser abogado de Thomas Rhodes, el cobrador de los pagarés y las hipotecas y representante de todas las viudas ante el tribunal sucesorio. Y todo ese tiempo la gente burlándose de su estatura, y riéndose de su ropa y sus botas pulidas. Y suponga entonces que llegó a juez del distrito. Y Jefferson Howard y Kinsey Keene y Harmon Whitney y todos los gigantes que te menospreciaban se ven obligados a estar de pie ante la barra y llamarte “Su Señoría”— Bueno, ¿no le parece natural que les haya puesto difíciles las cosas? 124 Albert Schirding Jonas Keene pensaba que tenía mala pata porque todos sus hijos le salieron fracasados. Pero yo conozco peor suerte que esa: ser un fracasado cuando todos tus hijos triunfan. Pues yo crié una nidada de águilas que al final alzaron vuelo y me dejaron como cuervo en rama abandonada. Entonces, con la ambición de agregarle un “Honorable” a mi apellido y así ganar la admiración de los muchachos, me postulé para superintendente de escuelas del distrito, y me gasté mis ahorros en ganar— pero perdí. Ese otoño mi hija recibió en París el primer premio por su cuadro El molino viejo — (era el molino de agua que luego Henry Wilkin hizo de vapor). El sentimiento de no ser digno de ella acabó conmigo. 125 Jonas Keene ¿Por qué se mató Albert Schirding, que aspiraba a superintendente de escuelas del distrito, bendecido como estaba por la buena posición económica y unos hijos maravillosos, que lo honraron antes de llegar a los sesenta? Si siquiera uno de los míos hubiese servido para un quiosco de periódicos o una de las mías se hubiese casado con un hombre decente, yo no habría salido a caminar bajo la lluvia para meterme en cama con la ropa empapada y rechazar que me atendiera el médico. 126 Eugenia Todd ¿Alguno de ustedes, transeúntes, ha padecido un dolor inacabable en una muela vieja? ¿O un dolor de costado que no termina nunca de dejarte? ¿O un tumor maligno que crece con el tiempo? ¿De manera que hasta en el sueño más profundo está ahí la brumosa conciencia o el fantasma del recuerdo de la muela, el costado, el tumor? ¡De igual modo un amor contrariado, o una ambición frustrada, o un tropezón en la vida que te la haya embrollado sin remedio, hasta lo último, flotará, como una muela o un dolor de costado, entre tus sueños en el sueño final, hasta que ya liberada de la esfera del mundo venga a ti como al que despierta curado y alegre en la mañana! 127 Yee Bow Me pusieron en la escuela dominical en Spoon River y trataron de cambiarme a Confucio por Jesús. No me habría ido peor si yo hubiera tratado de cambiarles a Jesús por Confucio. Porque sin ninguna advertencia, como quien hace travesura, a hurtadillas tras de mí, Harry Wiley, el hijo del pastor, me enterró las costillas en los pulmones de un solo puñetazo. Ahora no dormiré con mis antepasados en Pekín, y no habrá hijo que rece ante mi tumba. 128 Washington McNeely Rico, honrado por mis conciudadanos, padre de muchos hijos nacidos de madre noble, todos criados allá, en la gran mansión en las afueras, ¡vean ese cedro en el prado! Envié a los muchachos a Ann Arbor, a las chicas a Rockford, y seguí viviendo para la riqueza y los honores— descansando al atardecer bajo mi cedro. Pasaron los años. Envié a las muchachas para Europa; les di su dote cuando se casaron. A los muchachos les di también dinero para abrir negocios. Eran chicos fuertes, prometedores como manzanas con la piel intacta. Pero John huyó de la comarca, arruinado. Jenny murió dando a luz— me senté bajo mi cedro. Harry se mató después de pervertirse, Susan se divorció— me senté bajo mi cedro. Paul se malogró de tanto estudio, Mary se recluyó en casa por el amor de un hombre— me senté bajo mi cedro. Se me fueron todos con las alas rotas o los tragó la vida— me senté bajo mi cedro. Mi compañera, la madre de mis hijos, me fue llevada— 129 me senté bajo mi cedro, hasta que repicaron mis noventa. ¡Oh, madre tierra, que arrullas la hoja caída hasta que duerme! 130 Paul McNeely ¡Querida Jane! ¡Jane querida y bella! ¿Cómo te colaste en el cuarto (donde yacía tan enfermo) con toca de enfermera y puños de lino, y me tomaste de la mano para decirme sonriendo: “No estás tan enfermo, pronto estarás bien”? ¿Y cómo el húmedo cuidado de tus ojos entró en los míos como el rocío que resbala hasta el corazón de la flor? ¡Querida Jane! ¡Ni la fortuna entera de los McNeely podía haber comprado tus cuidados, día y noche, noche y día; ni pagado tu sonrisa, ni el calor de tu alma, en tus manos pequeñas sobre mi frente. Jane, hasta que se apagó la llama de la vida en la tiniebla sobre el disco de la noche anhelé y esperé sanar de nuevo para posar la cabeza en tus senos pequeños, y abrazarte muy fuerte con todo mi amor— ¿Te tomó en cuenta mi padre cuando murió, Jane, querida Jane? 131 Mary McNeely Transeúnte, amar es hallar tu propia alma, gracias al alma del ser amado. Cuando el amado se retrae de tu alma entonces tú has perdido la tuya. Está escrito: “Tengo un amigo, mas mi pesar no tiene amigos”. De ahí mis largos años de soledad en casa de mi padre, intentando recobrarme y convertir mi pesadumbre en altura del espíritu. Pero estaba mi padre con los pesares suyos sentado bajo su cedro, un cuadro que al final caló en mi corazón y me trajo un reposo infinito. ¡Oh, almas que se han hecho una vida fragante y blanca como los nardos nacidos de la tierra negra, tengan ustedes eterna paz! 132 Daniel M’Cumber Cuando me fui a la ciudad, Mary McNeely, pensaba volver a ti, claro que sí. Pero Laura, la hija de la casera, pudo meterse en mi vida, y me atrapó. Pasa el tiempo, ¿y a quién conozco? A Georgina Miner, de Niles, ese brote de amor libre en los jardines furieristas florecidos antes de la guerra por todo Ohio. Su amante picaflor se había hartado de ella y recurrió a mí por mi fuerza y mi consuelo. Ella era de esa especie de criaturas que lloran y uno alza en brazos y te empapan la cara, la nariz goteándoles, y vacían sobre ti toda su esencia; después muerden tu mano y echan a correr. ¡Y ahí te quedas, sangrando y husmeando al cielo! Pues sí, Mary McNeely, yo no merecía ni besar el ruedo de tu vestido. 133 Georgine Sand Miner Una madrastra me corrió de casa, y me amargó. Un picaflor, sinvergüenza y diletante, me desfloró. Fui por años su querida— sin que nadie supiera. Aprendí de él la astucia del parásito que aprovecha a los demás a escondidas, como la pulga al perro. Y todo el tiempo nada más que “amiga íntima” de diferentes hombres. Entonces Daniel, el radical, me tomó durante años. Su hermana me llamó su querida, y Daniel me escribió: “¡Palabra vergonzosa, que infama nuestro amor hermoso!” Pero mi rabia se enroscó y alistó sus colmillos. Mi amiga lesbiana entró en juego entonces, ella odiaba a la hermana de Daniel. Y Daniel despreciaba a su marido diminuto. Y ella vio la oportunidad de una estocada con veneno: ¡que me quejara con la esposa del acoso de Daniel! Pero antes le rogué que voláramos a Londres. “¿Y por qué no quedarnos aquí, como hasta ahora?”, preguntó. Ahí me sumergí para vengar su rechazo en brazos de mi amigo el diletante. Y volví a la superficie, con la carta que Daniel me escribió en la mano, para probar mi honor intacto, y la mostré a su esposa, a mi amiga lesbiana y a todo el universo. ¡Si Daniel me hubiese dado el tiro de muerte, nada más, sin dejarme desnuda de mentiras, como ramera en cuerpo y alma! 134 Thomas Rhodes Muy bien, ustedes liberales y navegantes de los predios del intelecto, marineros de las alturas de la imaginación, que los vientos erráticos dispersan y hacen caer en baches de aire, ustedes, las Margaret Fuller Slack, los Petit y los Tennessee Claflin Shope— al final supieron, con todo y su tan cacareada sabiduría, lo difícil que es evitar que el alma se fragmente en átomos celulares, mientras nosotros, los buscadores de tesoros terrenales, atesoradores de montones de oro, permanecemos enteros, compactos, en armonía incluso en el final. 135 Ida Chicken Tras asistir a tantas conferencias en nuestro Chautauqua, y estudiar francés por treinta años, y conocerme la gramática casi de memoria, pensé en dar un viaje a París y terminarme de pulir. Así que fui a Peoria a sacar el pasaporte— (Thomas Rhodes iba en el tren esa mañana). Y allí el oficial de la corte del distrito me hizo jurar que apoyaría y defendería la Constitución— ¡sí, me hizo jurar, a mí, que no podría defenderla o apoyarla para nada! ¿Y qué creen ustedes? ¡Esa misma mañana el juez federal, en la sala vecina a la de mi juramento, decidía que la Constitución eximía a Thomas Rhodes del pago de impuestos por el servicio de aguas de Spoon River. 136 Penniwit, el artista Perdí mi clientela en Spoon River tratando de enfocar con la mente y captar el alma de los retratados. La mejor foto que logré tomar fue la del juez Somers, procurador judicial. Se sentó todo tieso y me hizo aguardar hasta que enderezó su ojo bizco. Y cuando estuvo listo me dijo: “¡Ahora sí!”. Ahí grité yo “¡denegada!” y el ojo se le volteó. Y lo capté igualito como solía mirar cuando decía “yo objeto”. 137 Jim Brown Cuando regentaba el Dom Pedro averigüé lo que divide la raza de los nacidos para cantar Pavo entre la paja o Hay una fuente llena de sangre (como la cantaba Rile Potter allá en la Concord); 3 para jugar a las cartas o asistir a la charla sobre la tierra santa del reverendo Peet; para mover el esqueleto o pasar el cepillo en la misa; para la Pinafore 4 o los himnos en la escuela dominical; para la humanidad o para el dinero, para el pueblo o en su contra. Y era esto: El reverendo Peet y la Sociedad de las Buenas Costumbres, con la esposa de Ben Pantier a la cabeza, acudieron a los notables del pueblo y exigieron que me obligaran a mudar el Dom Pedro del granero de Wash McNeely, en el límite del pueblo, a una granja fuera de la jurisdicción, con el argumento de que corrompía la moral pública. Bien, Ben Pantier y el violinista Jones salvaron el día— opinaron que era como espantar a los potros del corral. 5 3 La iglesia Concord Church, al norte de Petersburg. 4 H.S.M. Pinafore, ópera cómica de Gilbert y Sullivan. 5 Esto era una crítica excesiva a los caballos jóvenes, tocando una cuerda muy sensible en una cultura centrada en torno al caballo. 138 Robert Davidson Engordé espiritualmente alimentándome del alma de los hombres. Al ver un alma fuerte le hería el orgullo y devoraba su fuerza. Los refugios de la amistad supieron de mi astucia, pues donde pude robar a un amigo lo hice. Y cuanta vez pude agrandar mi poder minando una ambición, lo hice, para satisfacer la mía. Y para mí era un placer triunfar sobre otras almas solo por afirmar y probar mi fuerza superior, para mi disfrute, por el puro regocijo de la gimnasia del alma. Habría vivido para siempre devorando almas. Pero sus restos indigestos me ocasionaron una nefritis mortal; con miedo, inquietud, derrumbe del espíritu, el odio, la sospecha, la visión nublada. Por último me desplomé con un alarido. Recuerden que tigre no come tigre. 139 Elsa Wertman Yo era una campesina alemana de ojos azules, tez sonrosada, feliz y fuerte. Trabajé primero en casa de los Greene, y un día de verano, estando ella ausente, Thomas se metió en la cocina y me tomó entre sus brazos y me besó en el cuello cuando volteé. Después ninguno de los dos parecía entender lo que había pasado. Yo lloraba por lo que iba a ser de mí. Y lloré y lloré cuando mi secreto comenzó a asomar. Un día la señora Green dijo que comprendía y que no formaría ningún lío por mí (él le dio una granja para suavizarla). Y ella se escondió en la casa y sembró rumores, como si lo que venía le vendría a ella. Y todo marchó bien y el niño nació— Ellos fueron muy buenos conmigo. Luego me casé con Gus Wertman y los años pasaron. Pero en los mítines de la campaña, cuando los presentes pensaban que lloraba por la elocuencia de Hamilton Greene, no era por eso. ¡No! Yo quería decirles: ¡Ese es mi hijo! ¡Ese es mi hijo! 140 Hamilton Greene Yo fui el único hijo de Frances Harris, de Virginia, y Thomas Greene, de Kentucky. De sangre valiente y honorable ambos. A ellos les debo todo cuanto fui, juez, miembro del Congreso, directivo del Gobierno. Heredé de mi madre la vivacidad, la imaginación, la habilidad para hablar; de mi padre, la fuerza de voluntad, el buen juicio, la lógica. ¡Para ellos sea todo el honor por lo útil que haya podido serle al pueblo! 141 Ernest Hyde Mi mente era un espejo: veía lo que él veía, sabía lo que él sabía. De joven mi mente no era más que un espejo en un auto a toda velocidad que atrapa y deja escapar fragmentos del paisaje. Con el tiempo al espejo se le hicieron rayones que dejaban entrar al mundo de afuera. Y es que así nace el alma que pena, con ganancias y pérdidas. La mente ve al mundo como cosa aparte, pero el alma se fusiona con el mundo. Un espejo rayado no refleja imagen— ese es el silencio de la sabiduría. 142 Roger Heston Ah, cuántas veces discutí con Ernest Hyde sobre el libre albedrío. Mi metáfora favorita era la vaca de Prickett: atada para pastar, el largo de su libertad igual al de la cuerda. Un día lo discutimos, mirando a la vaca tirar de la cuerda para salir del círculo sin pasto que ya había pacido. Se soltó la estaca. Sacudiendo la testa, la vaca se lanzó a la carrera tras nosotros. “¿Y eso qué es, libertad de albedrío?”, gritó Ernest, corriendo. Me caí justo cuando tiró la cornada, y me mató. 143 Amos Sibley Nunca tuve carácter, ni fortaleza ni paciencia, aunque el pueblo creyese lo contrario por soportar a mi esposa mientras predicaba, haciendo el trabajo que Dios me asignó. La detestaba por desfachatada, por impúdica. Supe de todos sus tantos adulterios. Pero aun así, si me divorciaba tendría que olvidar mi sacerdocio. ¡Y para cumplir la tarea de Dios y recoger su cosecha cargué con ella! ¡Cómo me mentí a mí mismo! ¡Cómo le mentí a Spoon River! Probé a ser conferencista, me postulé para la legislatura, tragué libros, con una sola idea en mente: si así hago dinero, me divorcio de ella. 144 La señora Sibley El secreto de las estrellas: la gravitación. El secreto de la tierra: los estratos de rocas. El secreto del suelo: recibir la semilla. El secreto de la semilla: la germinación. El secreto del hombre: la siembra. El secreto de la mujer: el suelo. Mi secreto: bajo un montículo que jamás hallarás. 145 Adam Weirauch Entre Altgeld y Armour me trituraron. Perdí muchos amigos, mucho tiempo y dinero peleando por Altgeld, al que Whedon, el director del diario, denunció como candidato de los apostadores y los anarquistas. Entonces Armour empezó a despachar carne en conserva en Spoon River y me forzó a cerrar mi matadero, y mi carnicería se vino abajo. Las nuevas fuerzas de Altgeld y de Armour me atraparon a la vez. Pensé que para recobrar el dinero perdido y reemplazar los amigos que me abandonaron bastaría que el gobernador me nombrara comisionado del transporte. Pero nombró a Whedon, el del Argos de Spoon River. Así que competí para la legislatura y me eligieron. Mandé al demonio los principios y le vendí mi voto a la franquicia del tranvía de Charles T. Yerkes. Por supuesto, fui uno de los tipos que atraparon. ¿Quién fue entonces el que me arruinó, Armour, Altgeld o yo mismo? 146 Ezra Bartlett Capellán del ejército, capellán de prisiones, predicador en Spoon River, ebrio de divinidad, Spoon River— y con todo llevé a la deshonra a la pobre Eliza Johnson, y a mí a la desdicha y al escarnio. ¿Acaso ustedes no verán nunca que el amor a las mujeres, y hasta el amor al vino, estimulan al alma hambrienta de divinidad para llegar a la visión extasiada y contemplar las avanzadas del cielo? Solo después de muchas pruebas de fuerza, solo después del fracaso de todos los estimulantes puede el alma que anhela, con su propia fuerza diáfana, hallar lo divino apoyada en sí misma. 147 Amelia Garrick Sí, yazgo aquí, cerca de un rosal atrofiado en un lugar que nadie recuerda, no lejos de la cerca sobre la que la maleza del bosque de Siever ha crecido expandiéndose. Y tú, tú eres una gran dama en Nueva York, la esposa de un famoso millonario, un nombre de las páginas sociales, bella, admirada, quizás magnificada por el espejismo de la lejanía. Tú tuviste éxito, yo fracasé a los ojos del mundo. Tú estás viva, yo estoy muerta. Pero sé que mi espíritu venció al tuyo; y que al yacer aquí, lejos de ti, sin que me escuchen tus grandes amigos del mundo brillante en que te mueves, soy el poder indoblegable sobre tu vida que te despoja del triunfo total. 148 John Hancock Otis En lo tocante a democracia, conciudadanos, ustedes no están preparados para admitir que yo, que heredé riquezas y fui rico de cuna, no era segundo de nadie en Spoon River en devoción a la causa de la Libertad, mientras Anthony Finlay, contemporáneo mío, nacido en una choza y que se inició en la vida como cargador de agua para los obreros, y al crecer llegó a obrero él mismo, y después a capataz de cuadrilla, hasta elevarse a la superintendencia del ferrocarril y vivir en Chicago, era un auténtico negrero, opresor de los trabajadores y enemigo acérrimo de la democracia. Y te lo digo a ti, Spoon River, y a ti, la República, cuídense del hombre que asciende hasta el poder viniendo de abajo. 149 Anthony Findlay Así para el país como para el hombre, e igual para un país y un solo hombre, mejor es ser temido que amado. Y si para este país mejor sería romper con la amistad de todas las naciones que entregarles las riquezas, yo digo también que para un hombre peor sería perder el dinero que los amigos. Y rasgo la cortina que cubre el alma de una vieja aspiración: cuando el pueblo clama por su libertad lo que busca en verdad es dominar al poderoso. Yo, Anthony Findlay, que me elevé hasta la grandeza desde humilde cargador de agua, hasta poder ordenarle a miles “Vengan” y ordenarle a miles “Váyanse”, afirmo que ninguna nación será buena jamás, ni le irá bien si no son los fuertes y los sabios quienes tengan la vara para usarla con los tontos y los débiles. 150 John Cabanis Ni la inquina, conciudadanos, ni las omisiones de la ineptitud, ni la anarquía y el derroche bajo el gobierno de la democracia en Spoon River pudieron lograr que abandonara el bando de la ley y el orden y comandara el bando liberal. ¡Conciudadanos! Veo, como dotado del poder de la visión, que cada uno de los millones de hombres que se entregan a la Libertad y fracasan donde la Libertad fracasa tolerando el derroche y la anarquía, y el gobierno de los débiles y los ciegos, morirán a la espera de construir, como hace el animal de los corales, el asiento sobre el que finalmente erigirán el templo. ¡Y yo juro que la Libertad librará hasta el final la guerra que hará a todas las almas sabias y fuertes y tan aptas para gobernar como los excelsos guardianes de Platón en una república del mundo puesta en cintura. 151 El desconocido Ustedes, los que tienen ambiciones, oigan la historia del desconocido que aquí yace sin lápida que señale el sitio. De muchacho atolondrado y travieso, merodeando arma en mano por el bosque, cerca de la mansión de Aaron Hatfield, le tiré a un gavilán posado en la copa de un árbol seco. Dio un grito ronco y cayó a mis pies, con el ala rota. Entonces lo puse en una jaula donde vivió por muchos días, graznándome con rabia cuando le ofrecía comida. Recorro a diario los predios del Hades en busca del alma del gavilán, para ofrecerle la amistad de alguien a quien la vida hirió y enjauló. 152 Alexander Throckmorton Cuando joven tenía las alas fuertes e incansables, pero no conocía las montañas. De viejo conozco las montañas pero mis alas cansadas ya no pueden acompañarme la visión— El genio es sabiduría y juventud. 153 Jonathan Swift Somers 6 Después de que has enriquecido tu alma al punto máximo, con los libros, el pensamiento, el sufrimiento, la comprensión de las múltiples personalidades, el poder de interpretación de las miradas, los silencios, las pausas en las transformaciones trascendentales, el don de la adivinación y la profecía, hasta sentirte a veces capaz de tener al mundo en la palma de la mano; entonces, si por la acumulación de tantos poderes en el ámbito de tu alma, tu alma se enciende, y en la conflagración de tu alma la maldad del mundo se ilumina y queda en claro— agradece que en esa hora de visión suprema la vida no esté para juegos. 6 Autor de “La Spooniada” (ver el poema más adelante). 154 La viuda McFarlane Yo era la viuda McFarlane, la que le tejía las alfombras a todo el pueblo. Te compadezco, a ti que aún estás en el telar de la vida, y cantas al compás de la lanzadera y contemplas amorosa la obra de tus manos, si alguna vez te llega el día el odio, de la Verdad terrible. Porque la tela de la vida es tejida, como sabes, según el diseño oculto bajo el telar— ¡un diseño que nunca verás! Y tú tejes animosa, cantando, cantando, y reservas los hilos del amor y la amistad para nobles dibujos en dorado y púrpura. Y mucho después de que otros ojos puedan ver que tejiste una cinta de tela del color de la luna, te ríes de tu fuerza, porque la Esperanza la decora con figuras de amor y de belleza. ¡De repente se detiene el telar! ¡Desaparece el diseño! ¡Estás sola en la habitación! ¡Has tejido un sudario! ¡Y lo odias, pero en él yaces! 155 Carl Hamblin Destrozaron la imprenta del Clarín de Spoon River y me cubrieron de plumas y brea por publicar esto el día que colgaron a los anarquistas en Chicago: “Vi una bella mujer con los ojos vendados de pie en la escalinata de un templo de mármol. Grandes multitudes pasaban ante ella, los ojos levantados, implorantes. En la mano izquierda sostenía una espada, ella blandía la espada, y aquí hería a un muchacho, allá a un obrero, luego a una mujer en fuga, después a un lunático. En la mano derecha sostenía una balanza, en la balanza estaban las monedas de oro que depositan los que esquivan los tajos de la espada. Un hombre de capucha negra leía un manuscrito: ‘Ella no considera a las personas’. Entonces un joven de capucha roja saltó a su lado y le arrancó la venda. Y se vieron los párpados supurantes con las pestañas comidas; los globos de los ojos con un moho lechoso; el delirio del agonizante escrito en su rostro— y la multitud supo por qué llevaba la venda”. 156 Whedon, editor Poder ver todos los lados de cualquier asunto; estar en todos lados, ser cualquier cosa, no ser nada que dure; pervertir la verdad, manejarla con intención, utilizar los sentimientos y las pasiones nobles de la especie humana para bajos propósitos, para fines arteros. Llevar una máscara como los actores griegos— la de tu diario de ocho páginas— tu parapeto, para vocear con un megáfono de los grandes: “Este soy yo, el gigante”. Y con eso vives también la vida de un ladrón furtivo, envenenado con las palabras anónimas de tu alma clandestina, escarbar la tierra que cubría el escándalo por dinero, y regarlo a los cuatro vientos por venganza, o vender documentos y triturar reputaciones, o vidas, si hace falta, para vencer a cualquier costo, excepto el de tu vida. Sentir la gloria en el poder del demonio, sepultando la civilización, como el muchacho paranoico que pone un tronco sobre la vía y descarrila el tren. Para ser editor, como yo lo era. Y entonces yacer aquí, junto al río, en el lugar a donde llegan las cloacas del pueblo, y tiran latas vacías y botan la basura y ocultan los abortos. 157 Eugene Carman ¡Esclavo de Rhodes! Vender zapatos y zaraza, harina y tocino, overoles, ropa todo el día, a razón de catorce horas al día por trescientos trece días durante más de veinte años, diciendo “sí, mi doña” y “sí, señor” y “gracias” mil veces al día, y todo por cincuenta dólares al mes. Viviendo en un cuartucho apestoso del “Comercial”, esa ratonera. Y obligado a asistir a la escuela dominical, y escuchar al reverendo Abner Peet ciento veinte veces al año, por más de una hora cada vez, porque Thomas Rhodes manejaba la iglesia y también la tienda y también el banco. Y esa mañana, mientras me hacía el nudo de la corbata me miré de pronto en el espejo: tenía el cabello gris, y la cara como una torta cruda. Así que maldije y maldije: ¡Pedazo de viejo! ¡Perro cobarde! ¡Pobre miserable! ¡Esclavo de Rhodes! Hasta que Roger Baughman pensó que peleaba contra otra persona, y se asomó a la puerta justo a tiempo para verme caer sobre el piso como un fardo con una vena rota en la cabeza. 158 Clarence Fawcett La muerte repentina de Eugene Carman me puso de turno para un ascenso con cincuenta al mes, y se lo dije a la mujer y los niños esa misma noche. Pero no se dio, y entonces pensé: “El viejo Rhodes sospecha que me estoy robando las mantas que me llevo para venderlas por mi cuenta y poderle pagar al médico las consultas de la niña”. Entonces el viejo Rhodes me acusó, como un rayo que cae, pero me prometió ser clemente por consideración a mi familia si confesaba, y por eso confesé, y le rogué que no lo denunciara en la prensa, y se lo pedí a los editores también. Esa noche, en casa, me agarró el policía y todos los diarios, menos el Clarín , me tildaron de ladrón, porque el viejo Rhodes era un anunciante y él quería convertirme en ejemplo. ¡En fin! Ustedes ya saben cómo lloraron los niños, y cómo mi esposa me compadeció, y me odió y cómo vine yo a yacer aquí. 159 W. Lloyd Garrison Standard Vegetariano, desobediente pasivo, librepensador, cristiano en ética; hábil orador al ritmo engañoso de Ingersoll, carnívoro, vengador, creyente y pagano, casto y promiscuo, cambiable, traicionero, vano, orgulloso, con ese orgullo que convierte a la lucha en cosa de risa; con el corazón perforado por el gusano del desaliento teatral; puesta la chaqueta de la indiferencia para ocultar la vergüenza de la derrota; yo, hijo del idealismo abolicionista— especie de Brand, de nacimiento en dos mitades. ¿Y qué otra cosa podía ocurrir cuando defendí a los bribones patriotas que quemaron el edificio de los tribunales, por lo que Spoon River necesitó uno nuevo, sino que los declararan culpables? Cuando Kinsey Keene perforó la máscara de cartón de mi vida de un lanzazo de luz, qué más iba a hacer sino escurrirme, como la propia bestia de mí que crié desde cachorro, hasta un rincón y gruñir. La pirámide de mi vida no era más que un montículo, yermo y amorfo, al que por último abatió la tormenta. 160 El profesor Newcomer Todos se rieron del coronel Prichard por comprar un motor tan potente que se destrozó él mismo, y destrozó el molino que marchaba con él. Pero aquí les va un chiste de tamaño descomunal: el impulso de la naturaleza que hizo al hombre desarrollar de su cerebro una vida espiritual— ¡Oh, milagro del mundo!— el mismísimo cerebro con que el mono y el lobo obtienen comida y refugio y procreación. La naturaleza ha puesto al hombre en ese desarrollo en un mundo en el que, después de todo, ella no le da otra cosa que hacer —(aunque la fuerza de su alma dé vueltas y más vueltas malgastando potencia para engranarse al molino de los dioses)— ¡que obtener comida y refugio y procrear! 161 Ralph Rhodes Todo lo que dicen es verdad: quebré el banco de mi padre con mis préstamos para amortizar con trigo, pero esto también lo es: a la vez compraba trigo para él, que no podía hacer el negocio a nombre suyo por su relación con la iglesia. Y mientras George Reece pagaba su condena, yo perseguía el fuego fatuo de las mujeres, y el vino de imitación en Nueva York. Es mortal enfermarse de vino y de mujeres cuando no nos queda más que eso en la vida. Pero suponte que tienes la cabeza gris inclinada sobre una mesa cubierta de colillas de cigarrillos acres y vasos vacíos, y oyes que golpean a la puerta, y sabes que es el golpe tanto tiempo ahogado por el saltar de los corchos y los chillidos de pavo real de las mujerzuelas— y levantas la cabeza, y ahí está tu Ladrona, que aguardó hasta que el cabello se te pusiera gris y que tu corazón comenzara a regatear sus latidos, para decirte: “Se acabó el juego. He venido por ti, sal a Broadway y hazte atropellar, te enviarán de vuelta a Spoon River”. 162 Mickey M’Grew Fue como todas las cosas en mi vida: algo por fuera de mí me echó abajo, mis propias fuerzas jamás me fallaron. Pues sí, hubo un tiempo en que ganaba dinero como para ir a la escuela, y de repente mi padre necesitó ayuda y debí dárselo todo. Así marcharon las cosas hasta que terminé como el hacelotodo de Spoon River. Entonces me tocó lavar el depósito de agua, y me alzaron hasta esos veinte metros. Al llegar allá arriba me desaté la muñeca, largué la risa y lancé mis brazos de gigante sobre los lisos bordes de acero del tope del depósito— pero resbalaron en el limo traicionero, y me zambullí abajo, abajo, abajo, en la tiniebla atronadora. 163 Rosie Roberts Estaba enferma, pero más que eso, furiosa con la policía bribona, y con el bribón juego de la vida. Así que le escribí al jefe de policía en Peoria: “Estoy aquí en el hogar de mi niñez en Spoon River, marchitándome día a día. Pero venga y lléveme presa, yo maté al hijo del príncipe de los mercaderes, en lo de Madam Lou, y los diarios que dijeron que se suicidó en su casa limpiando una escopeta— mintieron como el demonio para acallar el escándalo, por la coima de la publicidad. Yo le disparé en mi cuarto, en lo de Madam Lou, porque me derribó de un golpe cuando le dije que a pesar de todo su dinero había visto a mi amante esa noche. 164 Oscar Hummel Yo iba a tientas en lo oscuro, muchas nubes en el cielo y pocas estrellas por las que me guiaba lo mejor posible. Eran las nueve. Trataba de llegar a casa. Pero de algún modo me había perdido. Entonces pasé haciendo eses frente a una puerta y entré al jardín, y llamé con toda mi voz: “¡Epa, violinista! ¡Epa, señor Jones!” (pensé que era su casa y él me indicaría el camino a la mía). Pero resultó que quien salió fue A. D. Blood, en camisón de dormir, garrote en mano, y rugiendo contra las malditas cantinas y los criminales que las tenían. “Estás borracho, Oscar Hummel” me dijo, a mí, de pie como una mecedora recibiendo los golpes de su garrote hasta caer muerto a sus pies. 165 Roscoe Purkapile Ella me amaba. ¡Oh, cuánto me amaba! Desde el primer día que me vio ya no pude escapar. Pero creí que después de casados demostraría ser mortal dejándome ir o divorciándose. Pero pocas mueren, y ninguna renuncia. Entonces me largué y estuve afuera un año de parranda. Pero nunca reclamó. Y volví. Le dije que remando en un bote me habían capturado los piratas en el lago Michigan cerca de Van Buren, y me tuvieron encadenado, por lo que no pude escribirle. ¡Ella lloró, y me besó, y dijo que había sido una crueldad brutal, inhumana! Me di cuenta entonces de que nuestro matrimonio era un designio divino y no podía ser disuelto. Excepto por la muerte. Tenía razón. 166 La señora Purkapile Se largó y estuvo afuera un año. Cuando volvió a casa me contó la tonta historia de unos piratas que lo secuestraron en el lago Michigan y lo tuvieron encadenado, por lo que no pudo escribirme. Hice como si le creía, aunque sabía muy bien lo que estuvo haciendo, y que se encontraba de vez en cuando con la sombrerera, la señora Williams, cuando ella iba a la ciudad a comprar mercancía, según decía. Pero promesa es promesa y matrimonio es matrimonio; y por respeto a mi persona me negué a verme metida en un divorcio por la treta de un esposo que nada más se había ido cansando de sus votos y deberes maritales. 167 Josiah Tompkins Yo era bien conocido y muy amado por ser rico, como se estima a las fortunas en Spoon River, donde viví y trabajé. Ese fue mi hogar, aunque todos mis muchachos emprendieron vuelo— que es la ley de la naturaleza— menos uno. El muchacho, mi niño, se quedó en casa, para ayudarme en mis días ya menguantes y solaz de su madre. Pero me fui poniendo débil, y él fuerte, y peleó conmigo por los negocios. Y su esposa dijo que yo era una rémora; y él puso a su madre de su lado hasta que me arrancaron de raíz para trasplantarme con ella a la casa de su infancia en Missouri. Y así toda mi fortuna se disipó al final. Aunque yo hice mi testamento como él me lo indicó, le sacó poco provecho. 168 La señora Kessler Como ustedes saben el señor Kessler estuvo en el ejército y tenía una pensión de seis dólares al mes, y se la pasaba en la esquina hablando de política, o en casa leyendo las memorias de Grant, y yo mantenía a la familia lavando ropa, y le conocía los secretos a todo el mundo por las cortinas, los cubrecamas, las camisas y las faldas, porque hay cosas que fueron nuevas y se pusieron viejas y la gente las cambia por mejores o por ninguna: todo depende de si prosperan o les va mal. Y los remiendos y los parches se ponen tan grandes con el tiempo que hilo y aguja ya no pueden frenarle el paso al deterioro, y hay manchas que se burlan del jabón, y colores que destiñen por más que uno no quiera, y entonces te reclaman que arruinaste algún vestido. Los pañuelos y los manteles tienen sus secretos— la lavandera —la Vida— los conoce todos. Y yo, que asistí a todos los entierros en Spoon River, juro que nunca vi una cara de muerto sin pensar que parecía una pieza de ropa lavada y planchada. 169 Harmon Whitney Fuera de las luces y el fragor de las ciudades, como una brasa a la deriva en Spoon River fundido por el fuego de la bebida, y roto, amante de una que tomé para despreciarme a mí mismo, pero también para ocultar el orgullo herido. Para que me juzgara y me odiara un pueblo de mentecatos— a mí, que tenía don de lenguas y sabiduría, hundido aquí en el polvo de un tribunal, recogedor de harapos en el basurero de las inquinas y las falsedades, ¡yo, a quien le sonreía la fortuna! En un pueblo, declamándoles páginas de poesía a patanes boquiabiertos, hechas del saber de los años dorados, o provocando la risa con destellos de un ingenio obsceno cuando pagaban tragos para encender mi mente moribunda. Que me vengan a juzgar ustedes, a mí que les oculto mi alma con su herida gangrenada por el amor a la esposa que causó la herida, con su seno blanco frío, traicionero, puro y firme, implacable hasta el final, cuando el simple toque de su mano, en cualquier instante, me hubiese sanado del tifus que cogí en la selva de la vida donde tantos se extravían. Y solo pensar que mi alma no pudo reaccionar, como la de Byron, en el canto, en algo noble, sino se enroscó como una serpiente atormentada— ¡Júzgame así, oh mundo! 170 Bert Kessler Le tiré al ala de mi ave aunque volaba hacia el poniente; pero en el instante en que sonó el disparo, remontó cada vez más alto entre las astillas de una luz dorada, hasta que viró desde allá arriba, las plumas encrespadas, con motas de flojel flotando alrededor y cayó como un plomo entre la hierba. Di vueltas en su busca, apartando la maleza, hasta ver un manchón de sangre sobre el tocón de un árbol, y la codorniz tirada sobre una raíz podrida. Estiré una mano sin mirar a la zarza, y algo se disparó y me picó y me aturdió. Y entonces, en cosa de segundos, divisé a la cascabel— los ojos amarillos con cortinas corridas, la cabeza arqueada, retraída entre las roscas, un círculo de inmundicia de color ceniza o de hojas de roble desteñidas bajo capas de hojas. Me quedé como de piedra y ella retrocedió y se desmontó y echó a reptar bajo el tocón y caí como un plomo entre la hierba. 171 Lambert Hutchins Aparte de este obelisco de granito tengo dos monumentos: uno, la casa que construí en la colina, con columnas, ventanales y techo de pizarra; el otro, el muelle del lago en Chicago, donde el ferrocarril maniobra entre máquinas que silban y ruedas que chirrían, y el humo y el hollín que se esparcen sobre la ciudad, y el fragor de los carros a lo largo del bulevar— un manchón como un chiquero en el puerto de una gran metrópoli, pestilente como una pocilga. Yo ayudé a dejarle esta heredad a generaciones aún por nacer, con mi voto en la Cámara de Representantes, y la carnada del negocio era descansar en paz del eterno miedo a la necesidad, y darles a mis hijas una buena educación y una sensación de seguridad en la vida. Pero ya lo ven, aunque tuve la casa solariega y pases para viajar y distinción local podía escuchar las murmuraciones, murmuraciones, murmuraciones, dondequiera que iba, y mis hijas crecieron con la mirada de los que se sienten a punto de ser golpeados; y se casaron a lo loco, a los cipotazos, nada más por salir y tener un cambio. ¿Y qué tanto valió todo ese esfuerzo? ¡Pues bien, no valió un comino! 172 Lillian Stewart Yo era hija de Lambert Hutchins, y nací en una granja vecina al molino, me crié en la mansión allá en la colina, con columnas, ventanales y techo de pizarra. ¡Lo orgullosa que estaba mamá de su mansión! ¡Lo orgullosa que estaba de la altura de papá en el mundo! Y cómo nos amaba y nos cuidaba papá, y le montaba guardia a nuestra felicidad. Pero creo que la casa tenía una maldición, porque aparte de ella papá no tenía casi fortuna; y cuando mi esposo descubrió que se había casado con una muchacha realmente pobre, se burló de las columnas, y les dijo a todos que la casa era un fraude, una trampa con carnada, para atraer jóvenes despertando ilusiones de una dote que no existía, y que un hombre que vende su voto debería sacar lo bastante de su traición al pueblo para amurallar bien a toda la familia. Humilló mi vida hasta que me volví a casa a vivir como una vieja hasta mi muerte, de ama de casa de papá. 173 Hortense Robbins Mi nombre aparecía en la prensa todos los días, en una cena o en cualquier sitio, o viajando a alguna parte, o alquilando una casa en París donde agasajar a la nobleza. Siempre de viaje o de comida, o tomando una cura en Baden-Baden. Ahora estoy aquí para honrar a Spoon River, al lado de la familia en que nací, ¡a nadie le importa ahora dónde cené, o estuve, o a quién agasajaré, o con qué frecuencia me voy de cura a Baden-Baden! 174 Batterton Dobyns ¿Mariposeaba mi viuda de Mackinac a Los Ángeles, reposando y bañándose y sentándose una hora o más a la mesa para la sopa y las carnes y los dulces finos y el café? Me troncharon en la flor de la vida el trabajo en exceso y la ansiedad. Siempre pensé, pase lo que pase mantendré mi seguro al día y en el banco siempre habrá algo, y un pedazo de tierra en Manitoba. Pero mientras caía tuve una visión de último delirio: me vi acostado y lavado en una caja de corbata blanca y flor en la solapa y a mi mujer sentada ante la ventana mirando el mar en un lugar lejano; se veía reposada, rubicunda y gorda aunque de pelo blanco. Y ella sonreía y le decía a un mesonero negro: “Otra rodaja de rosbif, George. Y ten cinco centavos para tu problema”. 175 Jacob Godbey ¿Cómo se sintieron ustedes, los libertarios que malgastaron su talento desfilando por muy nobles razones alrededor de la cantina, como si hubiese otro lugar para encontrar la Libertad que no sea la barra, o en alguna mesa, empinando el codo? ¿Cómo te sientes, Ben Pantier, tú y todos los demás, que casi me lapidaron como a un tirano, trajeados de moralistas, y caras de asceta que fruncen el ceño ante el pudín de Yorkshire, el rosbif y la cerveza y el buen talante y el alegre brindis— cosas que en su vida vieron en taberna alguna? ¿Cómo se sintieron después de muerto e ido yo, con su diosa Libertad desenmascarada como una ramera, que les vendió las calles de Spoon River a los gigantes insolentes que manejaban las cantinas a distancia? ¿Se les ocurrió acaso que la libertad personal es la libertad de la mente y no la libertad de la panza? 176 Walter Simmons Mis padres pensaron que sería igual de grande, o más, que Edison: de chico construía globos aerostáticos y cometas prodigiosas y juguetes de relojería y pequeñas locomotoras con rieles para que corrieran y teléfonos con latas vacías y un hilo conductor. Tocaba la corneta y pintaba cuadros. Modelaba en arcilla y hacía de villano en El mulato . Pero a los veintiuno me casé y tuve que ganarme la vida, y así, para ganármela, aprendí el arte de hacer relojes y tuve la joyería de la cuadra, y pensaba, y pensaba, y pensaba, y pensaba— no en el negocio, sino en la máquina que al fin calculé y construí. Y todo Spoon River observaba y esperaba para verla funcionar, pero nunca funcionó. Y algunas almas bondadosas creyeron que a mi genio lo atascó la tienda. No era verdad. La verdad era esta: no tenía el cacumen. 177 Tom Beatty Yo fui un abogado como Harmon Whitney o Kinsey Keene o Garrison Standard, pues litigué sobre los derechos de propiedad, durante treinta años, aunque a la luz de una lámpara en el salón de póquer del Teatro de la Ópera. Y le digo que la vida es una apostadora que a todos nos lleva una morena. No hay alcalde viviente que pueda cerrar ese garito. Y si pierdes, bien puedes chillar todo lo que quieras, que no te van a devolver el dinero. Ella dificulta que superes el promedio; amaña las cartas para atraparte en tus debilidades y no para enfrentar tu fuerza. Y te da setenta años para que juegues: pues si no puedes ganar en los setenta, entonces ya no ganarás jamás. Así que si pierdes, abandona el salón— abandona el salón cuando sea el momento. Es indigno quedarse sentado y chapucear con las cartas, y maldecir cuando pierdes, con ojos somnolientos, implorando seguir y seguir. 178 Roy Butler Si la ilustre Corte Suprema de Illinois resolviese los secretos de todos los casos como hace con las violaciones, sería la mejor corte del mundo. Un jurado, casi todo de vecinos, con “Butch” Weldy como presidente, me halló culpable en diez minutos y dos votaciones en un caso como el que cuento: tuve un problema con Richard Bandle por una cerca y mi esposa peleó con la de Bandle sobre si Ipava era o no mejor pueblo que Table Grove. Una mañana desperté con el corazón rebosante de amor a Dios, y fui a ver a Richard para arreglar la cerca en el espíritu de Jesucristo. Toqué la puerta y abrió su esposa; sonrió y me hizo pasar; yo entré— tiró la puerta y empezó a chillar, “¡Quíteme las manos de encima, so muérgano!”. Ahí entró su esposo. Agité las manos, atragantado de palabras. Buscó su escopeta y yo salí corriendo. Pero ni la Corte Suprema ni mi esposa creyeron una palabra de lo que ella dijo. 179 Searcy Foote Quise ir a la escuela, pero mi tía rica, Persis, no me ayudó. Así que arreglé jardines y rastrillé la grama y con las ganancias compré los libros de John Alden y así fui bregando por ganarme la vida. Quise casarme con Delia Prickett, ¿pero cómo podía, con lo que ganaba? Y ahí estaba tía Persis, mayor de setenta, medio viviendo en su mecedora, con la garganta tan tiesa que cuando tragaba la sopa le salía de la boca como a los patos— Con todo y eso una glotona que invertía en hipotecas cuanto le entraba, metida todo el día en sus pagarés y sus alquileres y sus letras. Aquel día yo le aserraba la madera y leía a Proudhon en los descansos. Entré a la casa por un vaso de agua, ¡y ella dormía en la mecedora, y Proudhon sobre la mesa y sobre el libro una botella de cloroformo que usaba a veces para el dolor de muelas! Empapé un pañuelo en el cloroformo y lo sostuve sobre su nariz hasta que murió— Ay, Delia, Delia, tú y Proudhon me sostuvieron la mano, y el forense dijo que murió de una falla en el corazón. Me casé con Delia y tomé el dinero— ¿Te la jugué acaso, Spoon River? 180 Edmund Pollard Quisiera haber introducido estas manos hechas de mi carne entre girasoles repletos de abejas, en el disco de fuego, que parece un espejo, de la luz de la vida, el sol del deleite. ¿Porque de qué valen anteras, o pétalos, o aureolas radiantes? ¡Remedos, sombras del corazón de la flor, la llama central! Es todo tuyo, joven que transitas; entra en la sala del banquete con el pensamiento; no con timidez, como si dudases de ser bienvenido—¡el festín es para ti! Toma nada más un poco, rechaza la demasía con un “muchas gracias” ruboroso, aunque tengas hambre. ¿Tienes viva el alma? ¡Pues déjala que se alimente! ¡No evites balcones a los que puedas trepar, ni pechos blancos como la leche para tu reposo, ni cabelleras de oro con almohadas para compartir, ni copas de oro si es dulce el vino; ni el embeleso del cuerpo o del alma, vas a morir, sin duda, pero muere mientras vives sumido en el azul, arrobado y apareado, ¡besando a la abeja reina, la Vida! 181 Thomas Trevelyan Se lee en Ovidio la triste historia de Itis, hijo del amor de Tereo y Procné, muerto por la pasión culpable de Tereo por Filomela, cuya carne de hijo le sirvió Procné a Tereo, y la ira de Tereo, que persiguió a la asesina ¡hasta que los dioses convirtieron a Filomela en ruiseñor, el laúd de la luna naciente, y a Procné en golondrina! ¡Oh, moradores y artistas de la Hélade siglos ha, que sellaron en pequeños inciensarios los sueños y la sabiduría, incienso invalorable, aromado por siempre, que aclara los ojos del alma de tan solo inhalarlo! ¡Cómo aspiré su dulzura aquí en Spoon River! El inciensario se abrió cuando ya había vivido y aprendido que todos matamos los hijos del amor, y todos sin saber lo que hacemos devoramos su carne; y nos volvemos cantores, aunque sea por una vez en la vida, o nos volvemos —¡ay, dolor!— golondrinas, para gorjear entre los vientos helados y las hojas que caen. 182 Percival Sharp ¡Observen las manos entrelazadas! ¿Serán acaso manos de despedida o de salutación, Manos que ayudé o manos que me ayudaron? ¿No hubiese sido bueno tallar una mano con el pulgar al revés, como la de Heliogábalo? Y más allá está una cadena rota, —a lo mejor la idea del eslabón más débil— ¿pero en verdad qué era? Y corderos, algunos acostados, otros en pie, como escuchando al pastor —y otros portando una cruz, con una pata levantada— ¿por qué no cincelar algunas arrastrando el paso? ¡Y columnas derruidas! Excaven el pedestal, por favor, o las bases; veamos las causas de la caída. Y luego compases e instrumentos de aritmética, como ironizando la ignorancia de los inquilinos de abajo acerca de las determinantes y los cálculos de las variables. Y anclas, para unos que jamás navegaron. Y puertas de par en par —sí, así lo están, las dejas abiertas y las cabras descarriadas se meten en tu jardín. Y hay un ojo que vigila, igual que Arimaspi— con un solo ojo —como tú lo hacías. Y ángeles haciendo sonar trompetas —tus heraldos— es tu corneta y tu ángel y la estima de tus familiares. 183 Todo está muy bien, pero en lo que a mí respecta sé que desperté ciertas vibraciones en Spoon River que son mi verdadero epitafio, más perdurable que la piedra. 184 Hiram Scates Traté de ganar el nombramiento de presidente del concejo y discurseé por todo el condado denunciando a Solomon Purple, mi rival, como enemigo del pueblo, aliado de los peores enemigos de la humanidad. Los jóvenes idealistas, los guerreros mutilados, cojeando sobre una muleta de esperanza, almas que se lo jugaron todo a la verdad, perdedores de mundos por apostarle al cielo, se congregaron conmigo y siguieron mi voz como el salvador del condado. Pero Solomon ganó el nombramiento; entonces di la media vuelta, y metí a mis seguidores bajo su estandarte y lo proclamé victorioso, lo hice rey de la Montaña Dorada, y la puerta se cerró a mis espaldas en cuanto entré, halagado por la invitación de Solomon para ser secretario del concejo. Y afuera, en el frío, se quedaron mis seguidores: los jóvenes idealistas, los guerreros mutilados cojeando sobre una muleta de esperanza— almas que se lo jugaron todo a la verdad, perdedores de mundos por apostarle al cielo, mirando al demonio patear al milenio allá arriba en la Montaña Dorada. 185 Peleg Poague Los caballos son como los hombres. Ahí estaba mi padrillo, Billy Lee, negro como un gato y de líneas finas como un ciervo, con fuego en la mirada, presto para la arrancada, y más veloz que cualquier otro caballo en Spoon River y sus alrededores. Pero cuando ya pensaban que no podía perder, con esa ventaja de más de cuarenta metros, se echó hacia atrás y derribó al jinete, y cayó sobre su propio lomo, enredadas las patas, virtualmente desmoronado. Como ustedes ven, era un fraude perfecto: no podía ganar, no podía trabajar, demasiado liviano para el tiro o el arado; y nadie quería potrillos suyos. Y cuando traté de montarlo yo —bueno, se desbocó y me mató. 186 Jeduthan Hawley Alguien vendría a tocarme la puerta y yo me levantaría a medianoche para ir a la tienda, donde viajeros retrasados me escucharían martillar tablones sepulcrales y entachuelar el raso. Y muchas veces me pregunté quién se iría conmigo a la lejana tierra, nuestros nombres tema de la conversación, en la misma semana, porque había notado que siempre se iban de a dos. Chase Henry en pareja con Edith Conant; y Jonathan Somers con Willie Metcalf; y el editor Hamblin con Francis Turner, cuando este rogaba vivir más que el editor Whedon, y Thomas Rhodes con la viuda McFarlane; y Emily Sparks con Barry Holden; y Oscar Hummel con Davis Matlock; y el editor Whedon con el violinista Jones; y Faith Matheny con Dorcas Gustine. Y yo, el hombre más solemne del pueblo, me marché con Daisy Fraser. 187 Abel Melveny Compré cuanta máquina se conociese— amoladoras, desgranadoras, sembradoras, segadoras, moledoras y trilladoras, y rastrillos y arados— y todas ellas terminaron al sol y al agua, oxidándose, estropeadas y maltrechas, por no tener un cobertizo donde resguardarlas, ni cómo darle uso a la mayoría. Y ya al final, cuando pensaba que todo estaba terminado, sentado ante la ventana, cada vez más claro acerca de mí mismo, mientras el pulso me disminuía, y mirando una de las moledoras que compré— a la que no necesitaba para nada tal y como las cosas resultaron, y que nunca utilicé— una buena máquina, alguna vez brillante de barniz y con deseos de funcionar, ahora con la pintura decolorada— me vi a mí mismo como una buena máquina que la vida nunca utilizó. 188 Oaks Tutt Mi madre estaba por los derechos de la mujer y mi padre era el molinero de London Mills. Yo soñaba con las iniquidades del mundo y quería corregirlas. Cuando murió mi padre, salí a ver pueblos y países para aprender cómo reformar el mundo. Viajé por muchas tierras. Vi las ruinas de Roma, y las ruinas de Atenas, y las ruinas de Tebas y me senté a la luz de la luna en la necrópolis de Menfis. Allí fui atrapado por alas llameantes y hubo una voz del cielo que me dijo: “¡La Injusticia, la Falsía, las destruyeron. Sigue tú adelante! ¡Predica la Justicia, predica la Verdad!” Volví de inmediato a Spoon River a despedirme de mi madre antes de dar inicio a mi tarea. Todos veían una luz extraña en mi mirada y poco a poco, de oír lo que decía fueron descubriendo lo que tenía en mente. Entonces Jonathan Swift Somers me retó a debate sobre el tema (llevando yo la parte de la negación): “Poncio Pilato, el Filósofo más Grande del Mundo”. Y él ganó el debate al decir al final “Antes de que usted reforme al mundo, señor Tutt, por favor, responda la pregunta de Pilatos: “¿Qué es la Verdad?” 189 Elliott Hawkins Tenía un parecido a Abraham Lincoln. Era uno de los tuyos, Spoon River, en todas tus agrupaciones, pero siempre en defensa de los derechos de la propiedad y el orden. Iba a la iglesia con regularidad, y a veces me aparecía en tus asambleas populares para prevenirte contra los males del descontento y de la envidia, y para denunciar a los que intentaban destruir la Unión, y para señalar el peligro de los Paladines de la Clase Obrera. Mi éxito y mi ejemplo han sido influencias inevitables para tus jóvenes y las generaciones por venir, a pesar de los ataques de diarios como el Clarín. Visitante regular de Springfield cuando había sesión de la Legislatura, para prevenir ataques por sorpresa contra los ferrocarriles y los hombres que construían el estado. Ellos y tú, Spoon River, confiaban en mí por igual, a pesar de las acusaciones de cabildero en mi contra. Me desplazaba por el mundo discretamente, rico y adulado. Al final, morí por supuesto, pero para yacer aquí bajo una losa sobre la que cincelaron un libro abierto y las palabras “De ellos es el Reino de los Cielos”, y ahora ustedes, salvadores del mundo, que nada cosecharon en vida y en la muerte no tienen ni losa ni epitafios, ¿disfrutan mucho de su silencio de bocas tapadas por el polvo de mi carrera triunfal? 190 Voltaire Johnson ¿Por qué me zaherías con tus palurdeces si no querías que te hablara de ellas? ¿Y me atosigaste con tus imbecilidades si no querías que te las destapase? ¿Y me enterraste los clavos de la crueldad si no querías que me los arrancase para clavarlos en tu cara? ¿Y me sometiste a privaciones porque me negaba a obedecerte, si no querías que socavara tu tiranía? ¡Pude haber sido un alma tan serena, como la de William Wordsworth de no ser por ti! ¡Pero qué cobarde eres, Spoon River, que me obligaste a permanecer de pie en el círculo mágico que la espada de la Verdad trazó! ¡Y luego a quejarme de tus quemaduras y a maldecirlas, y maldecir mi fuerza que se mantenía erguida y se reía en medio de los rayos de la ironía! 191 English Thornton ¡Presentes! ¡Ustedes, los hijos de los hombres que combatieron junto a Washington en Valley Forge, y le dieron una paliza a Águila Negra en Starved Rock, a levantarse! ¡Denle la batalla a los descendientes de los que compraron tierras en El Recodo cuando era un arenal baldío, y le vendieron mantas y armas al ejército de Grant, y se sentaron en la legislatura de los comienzos, a aceptar el soborno de los ferrocarriles! ¡A levantarse! ¡Denle la batalla a los embaucadores y los farsantes, los aparentadores y los figurones de las columnas de sociales, y los patanes cuyas hijas se casan con los condes; y los parásitos de las grandes ideas, y los aprovechadores de las grandes causas, y los herederos de los antiguos ladrones! ¡A levantarse! Y hagan suya la ciudad, y suya la Nación!— ¡Ustedes que son los hijos de los esforzados voluntarios de los cuarenta! ¡Por Dios! Si ustedes no destruyen a esos bribones, mi fantasma vengador borrará del mapa a su ciudad y su estado. 192 Enoch Dunlap ¿Cuántas veces, en mis cuarenta años como líder, amigos de Spoon River, descuidaron la convención y la asamblea y dejaron sobre mis espaldas el peso de salvaguardar y salvar la causa de nuestro pueblo?— unas veces porque se enfermaron; o se les enfermó la abuela, o bebieron demasiado y se quedaron dormidos; o si no, decían: “Él es nuestro líder, todo estará bien; él pelea por nosotros; solo tenemos que seguirlo”. ¡Ah, pero sí que me maldijeron cuando caí, y me maldijeron diciendo que los traicioné cuando salí del salón de la asamblea por un instante, y los enemigos del pueblo reunidos allí aguardaban y acechaban por una oportunidad de destruir los Sagrados Derechos del Pueblo. ¡Sepan ustedes, vulgar chusma: yo me salí de la asamblea para ir a orinar! 193 Ida Frickey Nada en la vida te es ajeno: yo era una chica sin un céntimo que vino de Summum. Me apeé del tren de la mañana en Spoon River, y todas las casas se me plantaron enfrente con puertas cerradas y persianas corridas —me excluían; no había espacio ni lugar para mí en ninguna de ellas. Y pasé por frente a la vieja casona de los McNeely, un castillo de piedra entre caminerías y jardines, con hombres de guardia por todas partes y el sostén del condado y el estado por el señorío de su propietario, ahíto de orgullo. Estaba tan hambrienta que tuve una visión: unas tijeras gigantescas caer del cielo como una guillotina y cortar en dos la casa como un lienzo. Pero al llegar al “Commercial” vi aquel hombre que me guiñó un ojo cuando pedí trabajo— era el hijo de Wash McNeely. Demostró ser el eslabón en la cadena de la propiedad que me concedió mi mitad de la casona por haber roto el compromiso ante la ley: eran las tijeras. Como ven, aquella casa, desde que nací solo esperaba por mí. 194 Seth Compton Cuando me morí, la librería circulante que le construí a Spoon River, y dirigí para bien de las mentes despiertas, fue vendida en remate en la plaza pública como para destruir el último vestigio de mi memoria y de mi influencia. Porque aquellos de ustedes que no podían ver la virtud de conocer las Ruinas de Volney, o la Analogía de Butler, o el Fausto , o bien Evangelina constituían en verdad el poder en el pueblo, y muchas veces me preguntaron “¿De qué sirve conocer el mal del mundo”? Ya estoy fuera de tu camino ahora, Spoon River. Elige lo que creas es el bien y llámalo el bien. Pues nunca pude hacerte ver que nadie sabe qué es el bien si no sabe qué es el mal; y nadie sabe qué es lo cierto si no sabe qué es lo falso. 195 Felix Schmidt Nada más una casita con dos cuartos— casi como una casa de muñecas— y apenas dos hectáreas de tierra alrededor; y yo con tantos hijos para alimentar, y darles ropa y escuela, y una mujer enferma de tanto parir. Un día apareció el abogado Whitney y me probó que Christian Dallman, que ya era dueño de mil doscientas catorce hectáreas de terreno, había adquirido en mil ochocientos setenta y uno las treinta y dos que me colindaban por once dólares, en una compra de derecho de tierra cuando papá yacía enfermo de muerte. Así que se inició la querella y yo acudí a la ley. Pero a la hora de las pruebas el peritaje dejó tan claro como el sol que los derechos de Dallman incluían mi terreno y mi casita de dos cuartos. De eso me valió haberlo hecho enojar. Perdí mi caso y perdí mi casa. Salí de la sala del juicio y me fui a trabajar como arrendatario de Christian Dallman. 196 Schroeder, el pescador Me sentaba en la orilla, allá por Bernadotte, y echaba migajas en el agua, nada más por ver atropellarse a las carpas, hasta que la más fuerte se llevaba el premio. O me iba a mi corral, donde los puercos apacibles dormían en el lodo, o se hociqueaban amorosos, y les vaciaba una cesta de maíz amarillo, y los miraba empujarse, chillar y morderse, y pisarse para comerse el maíz. Y vi cómo la granja de Christian Dallman, de más de mil doscientas hectáreas, se tragó el pedacito de Felix Schmidt, como una puerca se traga a una carpa. Y digo que si hay algo en el hombre— espíritu, o conciencia, o hálito de Dios— que lo hace diferente de los peces o los puercos, ¡me gustaría verlo en acción! 197 Richard Bone Cuando llegué a Spoon River, no sabía si lo que me contaban era cierto o falso. Me encargaban un epitafio y se quedaban rondando la tienda mientras trabajaba y decían “Tan bueno que era”, “Él era maravilloso”, “Ella era la más dulce de todas las mujeres”, “Era un cristiano verdadero”. Y yo les cincelaba lo que me pedían, sin conocer para nada sus verdades. Pero más tarde, cuando conviví con la gente, supe cuán cerca de la vida real estaban los epitafios que me encargaban cuando morían. Pero así y todo cincelaba lo que me pagaban por cincelar y me hacía partícipe de las crónicas falsas de las lápidas, igual que el historiador que escribe sin conocer la verdad, o porque fue influenciado para ocultarla. 198 Silas, el loco Había luz de luna y resplandecía la tierra con la nevada recién caída. Era medianoche y no había un alma alrededor. Naciendo de la chimenea del tribunal saltó a la caza del viento del noroeste un sabueso de humo. Cargué una escalera hasta el rellano de las escalinatas y la recosté del marco de la trampilla en el techo del pórtico y me arrastré bajo el techado y por entre los travesaños y arrojé entre los maderos curados un puñado de estopa empapado en gasolina, encendido. Entonces bajé y me perdí de vista. Al poco rato sonó la campana de incendios— ¡Clang! ¡Clang! ¡Clang! El cuerpo de bomberos de Spoon River llegó con una docena de baldes y empezó a echarle agua a la hoguera magnífica, cada vez más ardiente, y alta y brillante, hasta que las paredes se desplomaron, y las columnas de piedra caliza donde Lincoln posaba se vinieron abajo como los árboles que el leñador tala... Cuando volví de Joliet, había un tribunal nuevo con su cúpula. Y a mí me castigaron como a todos los que destruyen el pasado en aras del futuro. 199 Dillard Sissman Los zamuros vuelan en círculos lentos en un cielo con calina como de polvo de la carretera. Y el viento sopla entre el pasto sobre el que reposo batiendo la hierba en oleadas. Mi cometa flota sobre el viento, aunque de vez en cuando cabecea como un hombre sacudiéndose de hombros, y la cola se dispara por momentos para luego hundirse en el reposo. Y los zamuros dan vueltas y más vueltas, barriendo el cielo en amplios círculos sobre mi cometa. Y las colinas duermen. Y una casa de campo, blanca como la nieve, se empina para ver entre los árboles verdes— a lo lejos. Y yo contemplo mi cometa, pues la luna tenue asomará dentro de poco y entonces se mecerá como un disco colgado a la cola de mi cometa. Un chorro de fuego como un dragón acuático me deslumbra la vista— ¡Soy ondeado como una bandera! 200 Jonathan Houghton Está el graznido del cuervo y el indeciso canto del tordo. Y el cencerro que campanea a lo lejos y la voz de un labriego en la colina de Shipley. El bosque más allá del huerto está en sosiego con esa paz de mediados del verano; y por el camino traquetea un carretón, cargado de maíz camino a Atterbury. Y un anciano se sienta bajo un árbol dormido, y una anciana cruza el camino viniendo del huerto con un canasto de moras. Y un muchacho acostado en la hierba a los pies del viejo, mira navegar a las nubes, y añora, y añora, y añora aunque no sabe qué: ¡llegar a hombre, la vida, el mundo que no conoce aún! Luego pasan treinta años y el muchacho regresa gastado por la vida y descubre que el huerto ha desaparecido, y ya no existe el bosque, y la casa fue vendida, y el camino está lleno del polvo de los automóviles— ¡y a sí mismo deseando La Colina! 201 E. C. Culbertson ¿Es cierto, Spoon River, que en el vestíbulo del nuevo tribunal hay una placa de bronce en la que se ven las caras en relieve del editor Whedon y Thomas Rhodes? ¿Y es verdad que de mis esfuerzos exitosos en el Concejo Municipal, sin los cuales no se hubiese puesto ni una sola piedra sobre otra piedra, y de las contribuciones que di de mi propio bolsillo para construir el templo ya no queda sino el recuerdo en las personas, y se va perdiendo con el tiempo, para bajar con ellas hasta este olvido en el que yazgo? En verdad, puedo creerlo porque es ley en el Reino de los Cielos que quien entre en esta viña a la hora oncena recibirá la paga de una jornada entera. Y es ley en el Reino de este Mundo que quienes se opongan primero a una buena obra, le echen mano luego y se la apropien cuando se ponga la primera piedra y se coloquen las placas conmemorativas. 202 Shack Dye Los blancos me gastaban toda clase de bromas. Me sacaban el pez grande del anzuelo y ponían en su lugar uno pequeño cuando iba a buscar una cuerda, y me hacían creer que no había visto bien el pez. Cuando el circo de Burr Robbins vino al pueblo, hicieron que el maestro de ceremonias soltara un leopardo domado en la arena, y me hicieron creer que le daba latigazos a una fiera salvaje, cual Sansón, cuando acepté el reto de meterlo en su jaula por cincuenta dólares. Una vez entré en mi herrería y me asusté al ver las herraduras arrastrarse por el piso, como si estuvieran vivas— Walter Simmons había puesto un imán bajo el barril del agua. Pero a todos ustedes, los blancos, los engañaban también con leopardos y pescados, y tampoco se daban cuenta, como yo con mis herraduras, de qué era lo que los movía en Spoon River. 203 Hildrup Tubbs Libré dos combates por el pueblo. Primero me salí de mi partido, portando la bandera de la independencia, en pro de la reforma, y fui derrotado. Después utilicé mi fuerza de insurrecto para capturar el estandarte de mi antiguo partido— y lo capturé, pero fui derrotado. Desacreditado y descartado, misantrópico, busqué el consuelo del oro y usé lo que me quedaba de poder para aferrarme como un saprofito al cadáver putrefacto del banco de Thomas Rhodes en bancarrota como beneficiario de los fondos. Ahora todo el mundo me voltea la cara. Se me ha puesto el pelo blanco. Mis dorados placeres se volvieron grises, el tabaco y el whisky perdieron su sabor y durante años hasta la Muerte me ignoró como a un cerdo. 204 Henry Tripp El banco quebró y yo perdí mis ahorros. Estaba harto de los juegos pesados en Spoon River y decidido a escapar y dejar el lugar de mi vida y mi familia; pero en cuanto el tren de medianoche entró en la estación, del peldaño saltaron Cully Green y Martin Vise, y empezaron a pelear para saldar su vieja rivalidad, dándose de puñetazos que resonaban como mazazos. Me parecía que Cully iba ganando, cuando en su cara ensangrentada se abrió de pronto una sonrisa de repugnante cobardía, y se recostó de Martin gritando “Somos buenos amigos, Mart, tú sabes que soy tu amigo”. Pero un terrible puñetazo de Martin lo hizo rodar y rodar hecho un ovillo. Entonces me arrestaron como testigo, y perdí mi tren y me quedé en Spoon River para librar mi pelea con la vida hasta el final. ¡Ay, Cully Green, fuiste mi salvador— Tú, tan avergonzado y cabizbajo durante años, que vagabas sin voluntad por esas calles, el alma lastimada envuelta en trapos sucios, tú, el que no supo resolver peleando. 205 Granville Calhoun Quería ser juez del distrito un período más, para redondear un servicio de treinta años. Pero mis amigos me abandonaron para unirse a mis enemigos, y eligieron a uno nuevo. Entonces me atrapó un espíritu de venganza y se lo contagié a mis hijos, y viví rumiando mi desquite, hasta que la Naturaleza, ese gran médico, me abatió con la parálisis para dar descanso a mi cuerpo y a mi alma. ¿Consiguieron mis hijos poder y dinero? ¿Le sirvieron al pueblo o lo uncieron al yugo para arar y cosechar las tierras del egoísmo? ¿Porque cómo podrían olvidar jamás mi rostro ante la ventana de mi dormitorio, sentado sin poder valerme, entre mis jaulas doradas con canarios cantores, mirando hacia el viejo edificio del tribunal? 206 Henry C. Calhoun ¡Logré escalar la máxima altura en Spoon River, pero gracias a cuánta amargura del espíritu! El rostro de mi padre, sentado en silencio, como un niño, vigilando sus canarios, y contemplando la ventana del juez del distrito en el edificio del tribunal, y sus exhortaciones a que me impusiera en la vida, y castigara a Spoon River para vengar la injusticia que cometieron con él, me llenaron de furiosa energía para procurar la riqueza y procurar el poder. ¿Pero qué otra cosa hizo sino enviarme a la senda que conduce a la gruta de las Furias? Seguí la senda, y esto les digo: por el camino a la gruta se pasa frente a las Parcas, los ojos en sombras, inclinadas sobre su telar. Deténganse por un momento, y si ven que el hilo de la venganza salta de la lanzadera entonces arranquen las tijeras de las manos de Atropos y córtenlo de inmediato, no vaya a ser que los hijos de ustedes y los hijos de los hijos terminen por vestir el manto emponzoñado. 207 Alfred Moir ¿Por qué no fui devorado por el desprecio de mí mismo, ni aniquilado por la indiferencia y la sublevación impotente, como “Indignación” Jones? ¿Por qué, con todos los pasos erráticos que di, no seguí el destino de Willard Fluke? ¿Y por qué, aunque estaba en la barra del Burchard, como una especie de señuelo de la casa para que los muchachos pagaran más tragos, la maldición de la bebida cayó sobre mí como una lluvia pasajera y me dejó el alma seca y limpia? ¿Y por qué nunca maté a un hombre, como Jack McGuire? Pero en cambio algo ascendí en la vida, y todo se lo debo a un libro que leí. ¿Por qué tuve que ir a Mason City, donde por casualidad vi el libro en una vidriera, con esa portada llamativa que atrajo mi mirada? ¿Y por qué mi alma le respondió al libro cuando lo leí y lo releí? 208 Perry Zoll Mis agradecimientos, amigos de la Asociación Científica del Distrito, por esta modesta piedra y su plaquita de bronce. Dos veces traté de ingresar a ese honorable cuerpo, y fui rechazado. Y cuando mi breve tratado acerca de la inteligencia de las plantas comenzó a atraer la atención, casi aprobaron mi ingreso. Después de eso crecí sin necesidad de ustedes ni de su reconocimiento. Pero no rechazo su piedra conmemorativa, en vista de que si lo hiciera, les privaría del honor de honrarse. 209 Dippold, el optometrista ¿Y ahora qué ve? Pelotas negras, amarillas, moradas. ¡Un momento! ¿Y ahora? Papá, mamá y mis hermanas. ¡Sí! ¿Y ahora? Caballeros en armas, mujeres hermosas, caras simpáticas. Probemos este. Un campo de trigo —una ciudad. ¡Muy bien! ¿Y ahora? Una mujer joven con ángeles que se inclinan sobre ella. ¡Un lente más fuerte! ¿Y ahora? Muchas mujeres con los ojos brillantes y los labios abiertos. Probemos este. Solo una copa sobre una mesa. ¡Ajá, ya veo! Probemos este lente. Solo un espacio abierto —no veo nada en particular. ¡Bien! ¿Y ahora? Pinos, un lago, un cielo de verano. Eso está mejor. ¿Y ahora? Un libro. Léame una página. No puedo. Los ojos se me van de la página. Pruebe con este lente. Abismos de aire. 210 ¡Excelente! ¿Y ahora? Luz, solo luz, que vuelve todo allá abajo un mundo de juguete. Muy bien, le haremos sus lentes apropiados. 211 Magrady Graham Cuéntenme, ¿a Altgeld lo eligieron gobernador? Porque cuando comenzaron a llegar los resultados y Cleveland estaba arrasando en el Este fue demasiado para ti, mi viejo y querido corazón, que se había batido por la democracia en los largos, largos años de la derrota. Y como un reloj que se echa a perder te sentía marchar cada vez más lento, hasta que te detuviste. Cuéntenme, ¿eligieron a Altgeld? ¿Y qué hizo? ¿Le regaló su cabeza en una bandeja a una bailarina o logró triunfar para su pueblo? Porque cuando lo vi y tomé su mano, el azul infantil de su mirada me hizo llorar, y había un aire de eternidad en torno suyo, ¡como la clara y fría luz que reposa al amanecer sobre las colinas! 212 Archibald Higbie Te detestaba, Spoon River. Traté de elevarme por sobre ti. Me avergonzabas. Te despreciaba como lugar de nacimiento. Y allá en Roma, entre los artistas, hablando en italiano, hablando en francés, me parecía a veces estar libre de todo vestigio de mi origen. Me parecía llegar a la cumbre del arte y respirar el aire que respiraban los maestros y mirar el mundo con los ojos de ellos. Pero al pasar ante mi obra decían: “¿Qué es lo que buscas, amigo? A veces las caras tienen un parecido a Apolo y a veces se dan un aire a Lincoln” No había cultura en Spoon River, lo sabemos. Y yo ardía de vergüenza y guardaba silencio. ¿Pero qué podía hacer cubierto del todo y aplastado por la tierra del oeste, sino anhelar y rogar por un nuevo nacimiento en otro lugar del mundo, con todo cuanto fuese de Spoon River arrancado de mi alma? 213 Tom Merritt Al comienzo algo sospeché— ella actuaba tan calmada y distraída. Y un día escuché que la puerta trasera se cerraba al entrar yo por el frente, y lo vi escabullirse tras el ahumadero hasta el solar, y correr por el campo. Y tuve la intención de matarlo al verlo no más. Pero ese día, caminando por Fourth Bridge, sin un palo o piedra en mano, de pronto lo vi ahí parado muerto de miedo, sosteniendo sus conejos, y solo pude gritarle “No, no, no,” cuando apuntó y me tiró al corazón. 214 La señora Merritt Callada ante el jurado, sin responder una palabra al juez cuando me preguntó si tenía algo que decir contra la sentencia, solo meneando la cabeza. ¿Y qué iba yo a decirle a la gente que pensaba que una mujer de treinta y cinco está en pecado cuando su amante de diecinueve mata al esposo? Aunque ella le hubiese dicho una y otra vez “Vete, Elmer, vete lejos, te enloquecí cuando te regalé mi cuerpo: terminarás haciendo algo terrible”. Y tal como temía, mató a mi esposo; ¡con eso, ante Dios, nada tuve que ver! ¡Callada por treinta años de cárcel! Y las puertas de hierro de Joliet se abrieron cuando los presos de confianza, grises y silenciosos me sacaron en el ataúd. 215 Elmer Karr ¿Qué sino el amor de Dios pudo haber ablandado y vuelto indulgente a la gente de Spoon River para conmigo que ofendí el lecho nupcial de Thomas Merritt y además lo maté? ¡Oh, amorosos corazones que me volvieron a aceptar cuando volví de mis catorce años en prisión! ¡Oh, manos solidarias que me recibieron en la iglesia y escucharon entre lágrimas mi confesión penitente al tomar el sacramento del pan y el vino. Arrepiéntanse, ustedes los que aún viven y están con Jesús. 216 Elizabeth Childers ¡Polvo de mi polvo, y polvo en mi polvo oh, niña muerta al venir al mundo, muerta en mi muerte! Sin conocer el Aliento de la Vida, aunque lo procuraste con afán, con un corazón que latió mientras viviste en mí, y se detuvo cuando me dejaste para siempre. Todo está bien, mi niña. Porque nunca recorriste el largo, largo camino que comienza con los días de la escuela, cuando los deditos borronean bajo las lágrimas que caen sobre los garabatos de las letras. Y la primera herida, cuando un compañerito te deja por otra; y las enfermedades, y el rostro del Miedo junto a tu cama; la muerte del padre o de la madre, o avergonzarte de ellos, o la pobreza. Termina el pesar inocente de los días de escuela y ya la ciega naturaleza te hace beber de la copa del Amor, aunque sepas que está envenenada; ¿hacia quién te obliga a volver la flor de tu rostro, al jardinero o al inútil? ¿Cómo es la sangre que nos llama? Pura o inmunda, qué más importa, la sangre que llama nuestra sangre. Y luego tus hijos— ¡Ay!, ¿qué podrá ser de ellos? ¿Y cuál tu sufrimiento? ¡Niña! ¡Niña! ¡La muerte es mejor que la vida! 217 Edith Conant Deambulamos por el lugar, nosotros, los recuerdos, y nos cubrimos los ojos por el temor a leer: “17 de junio de 1884, a la edad de 21 años y tres días”. Y es que todas las cosas han cambiado. Y nosotros, nosotros, los recuerdos, permanecemos aquí por nuestra propia cuenta, pues ya no hay mirada que nos advierta, o sepa por qué seguimos aquí. Murió tu esposo, tu hermana vive lejos, a tu padre lo encorvó la edad, se olvidó de ti, ya casi no sale de la casa. ¡No hay quien recuerde tu rostro exquisito, tu voz cantarina! Y cómo cantabas, aún en la mañana del ataque, con penetrante ternura, con conmovedora tristeza antes de venir la niña que murió contigo. Todo en el olvido, menos nosotros, los recuerdos, que el mundo ha olvidado. Todo ha cambiado, menos el río y la colina... aunque hasta ellos cambiaron. Solo son los mismos el sol ardiente y las estrellas serenas. Y nosotros— nosotros, los recuerdos, seguimos aquí temerosos, los ojos cubiertos de un hastío de lágrimas ¡en el hastío inmenso! 218 Charles Webster ¡Los pinares en la colina, y la casa de la grana en la distancia, nítidos como a través de un lente bajo un cielo azul pavorreal! Pero hacia la tarde llegó un manto de nubes a ensombrecer la tierra. Y caminaste por la carretera y el trebolar donde solo se escuchaba el líquido trémolo del grillo. Luego cayó el sol entre grandes jirones de tormentas distantes. Y un viento creciente despejó el cielo y avivó las llamas de las estrellas desnudas e hizo oscilar a la luna bermeja suspendida entre la ceja de la colina y las copas intermitentes del manzanar. Recorriste la playa del pensamiento donde las gargantas de las olas eran como chotacabras cantando bajo el agua y gritándole a la estela del viento entre los cedros, hasta detenerte, demasiado agobiado de lágrimas, cerca de la choza, y al mirar hacia arriba ahí estaba Júpiter jugando con la copa del pino gigante, y al mirar hacia abajo ahí estaba mi mecedora vacía, mecida por el viento en el porche solitario— ¡Ten valor, amada! 219 El padre Malloy Su lugar es allá, padre Malloy, donde el campo es santo, y hay una sepultura en cada cruz, no aquí en la colina con nosotros— Nosotros los de la fe vacilante y la visión obnubilada y la esperanza a la deriva y los pecados sin perdonar. Era usted tan humano, padre Malloy, que de vez en cuando se tomaba un trago amistoso con nosotros, se ponía de nuestra parte para rescatar Spoon River de la tiesura y la monotonía de la moralidad pueblerina. Usted era como el viajero que nos trae una cajita con arena del desierto que rodea a las pirámides y las vuelve reales y vuelve a Egipto real. Era parte y relación con un gran pasado, y sin embargo tan cercano a muchos de nosotros. Usted creía en la alegría de vivir. No parecía avergonzarse de la carne. Encaraba a la vida tal cual es, y con sus cambios. Algunos casi fuimos hasta usted, padre Malloy, al ver como su iglesia había divinizado el corazón, y cuidado de él, por Pedro la Llama, Pedro la Roca. 220 Ami Green ¡No “un joven de cabello cano y ojeroso”, sino un viejo de piel tersa y pelo negro! Cara de niño tuve toda la vida y por años el alma firme y decidida en un mundo que solo me vio como una chanza al que tratar como muchacho cuando le placía, o abrumar como hombre cuando le placía, pues ni era hombre ni era niño. En verdad nunca maduré ni de cuerpo ni de alma, y yo les digo que la tan anhelada juventud eterna no es más que detención del crecimiento. 221 Calvin Campbell Ustedes que se revuelven contra el Destino, díganme ¿cómo es que en este mismo lado de la colina, que baja al río y recibe el sol y el viento del sureste, esta planta solo extraiga veneno del aire y del suelo y se vuelva hiedra venenosa? ¿Y que esta otra extraiga del mismo aire y del mismo suelo el elixir dulce y el colorido, y sea un cerezo? ¿Y ambas florezcan? Podemos culpar a Spoon River por lo que es, ¿pero a quién culpar por la voluntad tuya que se alimenta a sí misma y te hace ser cicuta, cizaña, amargón o barbasco, y no es capaz de aprovechar el suelo o el aire para hacerte jazmín o glicina? 222 Henry Layton Quienquiera que seas, tú que por aquí transitas, sabes que mi padre era amable, y mi madre violenta, y yo el conjunto de las mitades hostiles, sin mezcla ni fusión, sino distinta cada una, apenas soldadas. Algunos de ustedes me conocieron amable, algunos violento, otros las dos cosas, pero ninguna de ambas forjó mi ruina. Fue el derrumbe de las dos mitades que nunca encajaron lo que mató a mi alma. 223 Harlan Sewall Nunca comprendiste, oh desconocido, por qué retribuí tu amistad leal y tus atenciones delicadas primero con agradecimiento cada vez menor y luego con retiro gradual de tu presencia para no verme en la obligación de agradecerte, y después con el silencio que siguió a la separación definitiva. Tú salvaste mi alma eterna. Pero para eso supiste de mi enfermedad, conociste mi secreto, y por eso hui de ti. Pues cuando nuestros cuerpos se levantan de su sufrimiento, besamos para siempre las manos diligentes que nos daban ajenjo, pero temblamos de solo pensar en el ajenjo, un alma ya curada es otra cosa, porque borramos de nuestra memoria las palabras dichas con dulzura, los ojos preocupados, y nos plantamos en el olvido eterno, no tanto del sufrimiento mismo, sino de la mano que lo curó. 224 Ippolit Konovaloff Yo fui armero en Odessa. Una noche la policía irrumpió en mi cuarto donde unos cuantos leíamos a Spencer. Nos confiscaron los libros y nos arrestaron. Pero hui y me vine a Nueva York y de ahí a Chicago, y luego a Spoon River, donde pude estudiar en paz a mi Kant ¡y ganarme la vida reparando pistolas! ¡Vean mis moldes! ¡Mi arquitectónica! ¡Uno para el cañón, uno para el percutor y otros para las demás partes de la pistola! Bien, supongan ahora que quien vive de la armería no hace otra cosa que duplicar los moldes que les muestro —bueno, todas las pistolas serían iguales, con un percutor para golpear el cartucho y un cañón para dirigir el tiro, todos funcionando para sí mismos de la misma manera y todos funcionando para los demás de la misma manera. ¡Y así sería vuestro mundo de las pistolas!, al que nada podría liberar de sí mismo salvo un moldeador con diferentes moldes para moldear el metal. 225 Henry Phipps Yo era el supervisor de escuelas dominicales, y presidente títere de las obras del ferrocarril y de la enlatadora, a las órdenes de Thomas Rhodes y la pandilla de banqueros; mi hijo cajero del banco, casado con la hija de Rhodes. Gastaba los días de semana en hacer dinero y los domingos en orar en la iglesia. Para todo efecto un diente en el engranaje de las cosas como son: el dinero, el patrono y el hombre, todo blanqueado con la pintura del credo cristiano. Y entonces: se desplomó el banco. Me quedé mirando la maquinaria arruinada— los engranajes con los agujeros tapados con masilla pintada, los pernos con herrumbre, las varillas rotas; y solo en buen estado el depósito de almas, listo para usar en una nueva devoradora de vidas, cuando los diarios, los jueces y los magos del dinero la vuelvan a construir. Me dejaron en el hueso, pero echado sobre la Roca de los Tiempos, sabedor ahora de cómo se batía el cobre, ya no el incauto de antes, y enterado de que “los rectos perdurarán sobre la tierra, pero los días de los deshonestos serán acortados”. De pronto el doctor Meyers me descubrió un cáncer en el hígado. ¡Después de todo Dios no tenía un interés particular en mí! 226 Pues sí, cuando estaba en la cima hasta donde escalé superando las nubes, y listo para una larga vida en el mundo, las fuerzas de la eternidad me dieron un empujón hacia el frente. 227 Harry Wilmans Recién cumplí los veintiuno y Henry Phipps, superintendente de escuelas municipales, dio un discurso en el Teatro de la Ópera de Bindle. “Debemos mantener en alto el honor de la bandera”, dijo, “así la ataque una banda de bárbaros tagalos o la potencia más poderosa de Europa”. Y nosotros aplaudimos y aplaudimos el discurso y la bandera que él hacía ondear mientras hablaba. Y me fui a la guerra a pesar de mi padre, y seguí la bandera hasta que la vi izarse sobre nuestro campamento en un arrozal cerca de Manila, y todos la aplaudimos y la aplaudimos. Pero había moscas y bichos venenosos; y había un agua mortífera, y un calor despiadado, y comida malsana, putrefacta, y la hediondez de las zanjas tras las tiendas de campaña donde iban los soldados a aliviarse; y estaban las putas que nos seguían, llenas de sífilis; y actos bestiales entre nosotros o en solitario, y nos atropellábamos, nos detestábamos, nos degradábamos, y días de odio y noches de miedo a la hora de ir a la carga por el pantano humeante tras la bandera, hasta que caí con un grito, con un tiro en las tripas. Ahora hay una bandera sobre mí en Spoon River. ¡Una bandera! ¡Una bandera! 228 John Wasson ¡Oh, la hierba humedecida de rocío en la pradera de Carolina del Norte por la que Rebecca me seguía llorando y llorando con un niño en brazos, y tres detrás llorando, prolongando el adiós de mi ida a la guerra con el inglés, y luego los largos, largos años hasta lo de Yorktown. Y después mi búsqueda de Rebecca, para hallarla por último en Virginia con dos niños muertos en el entretanto. Nos fuimos en carreta para Tennessee, y de allí, tras años, hasta Illinois y por fin a Spoon River. Cortamos el pasto del búfalo, talamos los bosques construimos escuelas y puentes allanamos caminos y aramos los campos, a solas con la pobreza, las calamidades, la muerte— Si Harry Wilmans, que peleó en Filipinas, ha de tener una bandera sobre su tumba, ¡tómenla de la mía! 229 Muchos soldados La idea ondeó ante nosotros como una bandera, el sonar de la música marcial, la emoción de portar un arma, conquistar posiciones al volver a casa, un destello de gloria, la furia contra los villanos, el sueño de deberse a la patria o a Dios. Solo cosas en nuestro interior brillando ante los ojos, no el poder tras de nosotros, la Todopoderosa mano de la Vida como el fuego del centro de la tierra, hacedor de montañas, o las aguas represadas que se abren paso entre ellas. ¿Recuerdan aquella banda de hierro que Shack Dye, el herrero, soldó en torno al roble del jardín de Bennet para colgar de él una hamaca en la que Janet, su hija, pudiese reposar y leer en las tardes de verano? ¿Y que el árbol, al engrosar, partió en dos la banda de hierro? Pero ni una sola célula del árbol se enteró de que una vez había vibrado de vida, ni le importó que la hamaca cayese a tierra con los poemas de Milton. 230 Godwin James ¡Harry Wilmans! Tú que caíste en un pantano cerca de Manila, siguiendo a la bandera, no fuiste herido por la grandeza de un sueño, o destruido por una labor inútil, o llevado a la insania por tropiezos diabólicos, ni te destrozó el mal de nervios, ni llegaste a la vejez cubierto de heridas. No moriste de hambre, porque el gobierno te alimentaba. No padeciste el grito de “adelante” a un ejército que encabezabas contra un enemigo de sonrisa burlona más aguda que las bayonetas. No te aniquilaron bombas invisibles. No te rechazaron quienes te vencieron. No comiste el pan insípido que una alquimia miserable cuece con los ideales. Tú fuiste a Manila, Harry Wilmans, y yo me alisté en el ejército destartalado de divinos jóvenes de mirada brillante que avanzamos en oleada, que nos hicieron retroceder y caer, enfermos, quebrados, llorosos, despojados de fe, siguiendo la bandera del Reino de los Cielos. Tú y yo, Harry Wilmans, caímos cada uno a su manera, sin distinguir el bien del mal, la derrota de la victoria, ni cuál es esa cara que sonríe tras la máscara demoníaca. 231 Lyman King Podrías pensar, transeúnte, que el Destino es una trampa que te acecha allá afuera, a la que puedes darle la vuelta si empleas la prudencia y la sabiduría. Eso crees, contemplando la vida de los demás, como el que imita a Dios y se inclina sobre el hormiguero a ver como son evitables las dificultades. Pero trasládalo a la vida: a su debido tiempo verás aproximarse a tu Destino con la forma de tu propia imagen en el espejo; o estarás sentado a solas frente al hogar y de pronto habrá un huésped en la silla a tu lado, y sabrás quién es ese huésped, y leerás el auténtico mensaje en su mirada. 232 Caroline Branson ¡Con nuestros corazones como soles errantes paseamos, tantas veces, por los campos de abril hasta que la luz de las estrellas tapizase con gasa invisible la penumbra bajo la cuesta, el lugar de nuestras citas de la arboleda, en el recodo del arroyo! ¡Pasando del embeleso en notas musicales, conjugándose a las caricias que el amor inspirado improvisa! ¡Pero cerrarnos como termina un cántico el arrobado encantamiento de la carne en el que se hundían nuestras almas hondo, hondo, hasta donde ya no había ni tiempo ni espacio ni nosotros— aniquilados de amor! Dejar atrás todo eso, por un cuarto con lámparas, y nuestro Secreto burlándose de sí mismo, ocultándose entre flores y mandolinas a la vista de todos entre la ensalada y el café. Y verlo temblar, y sentir que me conozco el futuro, como quien firma un pagaré— ni ostentosa de obsequios ni colmada de prendas, con las manos rosadas tapándole el rostro. Y entonces, ¡la noche! ¡premeditada! ¡desamorada! ¡Y todo el embeleso ensuciado por caricias en la habitación elegida y a la hora sabida por todos! Al día siguiente se sentó allí, tan indiferente, casi frío, tan raramente cambiado, extrañado de mi llanto, 233 hasta que en una especie de enfermo desespero y voluptuosa insania nos arrastró hasta el pacto de la muerte. Apenas un retoño de la esfera de la tierra, frágil como la luz de las estrellas; a la espera de ser echado de nuevo al torrente de la creación. Pero la próxima vez para ser puesto a nacer de vez en cuando contemplado por Rafael y San Francisco a su paso. Porque yo soy su hermanito, al que se conocerá claramente cara a cara a lo largo del ciclo del nacimiento que aquí comienza. Puedes conocer la semilla y el suelo, pueden ustedes sentir caer la lluvia fría, pero tan solo la esfera de la tierra, tan solo el cielo conoce el secreto de la semilla en la cámara nupcial en el subsuelo. Échenme de nuevo al torrente, concédanme otro intento— ¡Sálvame, Shelley! 234 Anne Rutledge De mí, una desconocida que no valgo nada, brotan las vibraciones de una música que no muere: “Sin malicia para nadie, con caridad para todos”. De mí surge el perdón de millones para otros millones, y el rostro benefactor de una nación resplandeciente de justicia y de verdad. Yo soy Anne Rutledge, la que duerme bajo estos rastrojos, amada en vida por Abraham Lincoln, casada con él, pero por separación, no por unión. ¡Florece por siempre, oh República, desde el polvo de mi corazón! 235 Hamlet Micure En la fiebre persistente nos vienen muchas visiones: estaba de vuelta en la casita del gran jardín de tréboles que llegaban a la cerca, a la sombra del roble donde los niños colgamos el columpio. Pero la casita era el zaguán de una finca puesta en un prado, y al lado del prado el mar. Yo estaba en el cuarto donde el pequeño Paul se ahogaba de difteria, pero tampoco era ese cuarto— era un mirador asoleado entre ventanas con parteluces, y en una silla había un hombre sentado con un manto negro con un aire a Eurípides. Había venido a visitarme, o yo había ido a visitarlo— no sabría decirlo. Podíamos oír el ritmo del mar, el trebolar asentía al viento del verano, y el pequeño Paul vino a la ventana con flores de trébol y se sonrió. Entonces le dije: “¿Qué es el ‘desespero divino’, Alfred?”. “¿Leíste Lágrimas, lágrimas vanas ?”, me preguntó. “Sí, pero no veo expresado el desespero divino”. “Mi pobre amigo”, me respondió, “por eso era divino el desespero”. 236 Mabel Osborne ¡Tus brotes rojos entre las hojas verdes languidecen, bello geranio! Pero no pides agua. ¡No puedes hablar! No necesitas hablar: ¡todos saben que te mueres de sed, pero no te dan agua! Pasan de largo, diciendo: “El geranio quiere agua”. Y yo, que tenía felicidad para compartir y quería compartir su felicidad; yo que te amaba, Spoon River, y que les imploraba amor, me marchitaba ante tus ojos, Spoon River— sedienta, sedienta, muda por un alma casta para pedir amor a quienes me conocían y me veían perecer ante ellos, como ese geranio que alguien plantó sobre mí y lo dejó morir. 237 William H. Herndon Junto a la ventana de la vieja casa posada sobre el risco, oteando millas de valle, concluidos mis días de trabajo, sentado en la decadencia de la vida, día tras día miraba en mi memoria, como el que observa en la bola de cristal de la adivinadora, y veía las figuras del pasado moverse por la increíble esfera del tiempo como en desfile tras el vidrio de un sueño esplendoroso. Y vi a un hombre levantarse del suelo como un gigante mítico y arrojarse sobre un destino sin muerte, señor de grandes ejércitos, líder de la república, recogiendo en un ditirambo del canto recreativo las esperanzas épicas de un pueblo, y al mismo tiempo el Vulcano de los fuegos supremos donde se forjaron escudos y espadas imperecederos con espíritus templados en el cielo. ¡Véanlo en el cristal! Miren cómo aprieta el paso hacia el lugar donde su senda empalma con la senda de un hijo de Plutarco y Shakespeare. Oh, Lincoln, actor de veras, que hiciste bien tu rol, y tú, Booth, que irrumpiste con una pieza mímica en la pieza, muchas veces los vi, mientras los cuervos cruzaban graznando rumbo al bosque sobre el techado de mi casa en los ocasos solemnes, allí junto a mi ventana, solo. 238 Rebecca Wasson ¡Primavera y verano, otoño e invierno arrastrándose uno tras otro, arrastrándose por ante mi ventana! ¡Y he yacido durante tantos años viéndolos arrastrarse y contando los años hasta que el terror llegaba a mi corazón en ocasiones, cuando sentía que me había vuelto eterna; y así hasta llegar a los cien años! ¡Y todavía yazgo escuchando el tictac del reloj, y el mugir del ganado y el chillido del grajo volando entre las hojas que caen! Día tras día sola en un cuarto de la casa de una nuera gris golpeada por los años. Y en la noche, o mirando por la ventana en pleno día, mi pensamiento volaba atrás, al parecer, por el tiempo infinito hasta Carolina del Norte y todos los días de mi infancia, y a John, mi John. Ido a la guerra contra el inglés, y todos los niños, las muertes, y todas las tristezas, y esa extensión de años como una pradera en Illinois, a través de la cual grandes figuras cruzaban como jinetes presurosos, Washington, Jefferson, Jackson, Webster, Clay. ¡Oh, hermosa joven república a la que mi John y yo le dimos toda nuestra fuerza y nuestro amor! ¡Y, oh, mi John!, ¿por qué, cuando yacía en cama tan desasistida por años, rezando para que vinieras, se demoró tu venida? Viendo que con un grito de júbilo, como el que di cuando me hallaste en la vieja Virginia al terminar la guerra, volví a gritar cuando te vi al lado de la cama 239 mientras el sol permanecía bajo en el oeste y se iba empequeñeciendo y apagando a la luz de tu rostro. 240 Rutherford McDowell Me trajeron ambrotipos 7 de los viejos pioneros para que los ampliara. Y a veces alguno posaba para mí— alguno que estuvo ahí cuando las manos de los gigantes del vientre del mundo desgarraron la república. ¿Qué había en sus miradas?— porque nunca pude desentrañar ese dolor místico de párpados caídos y la serena tristeza de sus ojos. Era como un pozo de agua entre los robles a la vera del bosque donde caen las hojas mientras se escucha el canto del grillo de una granja lejana, allá por las colinas donde vive la tercera generación, y los hombres fuertes y las mujeres fuertes están ausentes y olvidados. ¡Y esos son los nietos y biznietos de los pioneros! En verdad mi cámara grabó, también, sus rostros con mucha de la vieja fuerza ida, y la vieja fe ida, 7 Fotografía en positivo hecha mediante el proceso del colodión sobre vidrio y que se mira sobre un fondo oscuro. 241 y el viejo dominio de la vida ido, y la vieja valentía ida, ¡la que se esfuerza y ama y sufre y canta bajo el sol! 242 Hannah Armstrong Le escribí una carta para pedirle a nombre de los viejos tiempos que licenciara a mi hijo enfermo del ejército; pero quizá no pudo leerla. Entonces fui a la ciudad, y puse a James Garber, que redactaba tan bonito, a escribirle otra carta. Pero quizá se perdió en el correo. Así que me eché todo el viaje hasta Washington. Me costó más de una hora hallar la Casa Blanca. Y cuando la hallé no me dejaban entrar, tapándose las sonrisas. Entonces pensé: “Ah, bueno, ya no es el mismo de cuando lo alojé y él y mi esposo trabajaban juntos y todos lo llamábamos Abe, allá en Menard”. Como último intento me volví hacia un guardia y le dije: “Por favor, dígale que es la tía vieja Hannah Armstrong, de Illinois, que vino a verlo por lo de su hijo enfermo en el ejército”. ¡Bueno, en un santiamén me dejaron entrar! Y cuando él me vio, se echó a reír, y dejó sus asuntos de presidente, y escribió con su propia mano la licencia de Doug mientras hablaba de aquellos tiempos y echaba los cuentos. 243 Lucinda Matlock Yo iba a los bailes en Chandlerville, y jugaba en Winchester a cambiar de parejas. Una vez cambiamos de pareja camino a casa a la luz de la luna, a mediados de junio, y ahí conocí a Davis. Nos casamos y vivimos juntos por setenta años, dichosos, trabajando, criando doce muchachos. Perdimos ocho antes de yo llegar a los sesenta. Hilaba, tejía, llevaba la casa, cuidaba a los enfermos, arreglaba el jardín, y los días de fiesta paseaba por el campo donde cantaban las alondras, y por las orillas del Spoon recogiendo conchitas y flores y yerbas medicinales— gritándoles a las colinas cubiertas de árboles, cantándoles a los verdes valles. A los noventa y seis ya había vivido suficiente, eso es todo, y entré al dulce reposo. ¿Qué es eso que oigo decir de la tristeza y el hastío, la rabia, el descontento y las esperanzas por el suelo? Hijos e hijas degenerados, la vida es demasiado fuerte para ustedes— se necesita vida para ansiar la Vida. 244 Davis Matlock Suponte que solo existe la colmena: que hay zánganos y obreras y reinas, y nada más almacenamos miel— (cosas materiales junto a la cultura y la sabiduría)— para la siguiente generación, la generación que aún no vive, sino bulle bajo el sol de la juventud, estirando sus alas sobre lo recolectado y saboreando, camino a la colmena desde el trebolar, el botín delicado. Supón todo eso, y supón la verdad: que la naturaleza del hombre es mayor que la necesidad de la naturaleza en la colmena, y que debes soportar la carga de la vida junto al impulso de los excesos del espíritu— Bueno, diría yo vivirla como un dios seguro de su inmortalidad, aunque dudando de la forma de vivirla. Si eso no hace que Dios sienta orgullo de ti, entonces Él no es más que fuerza de gravedad, o el sueño la meta dorada. 245 Herman Altman ¿Seguí a la Verdad a donde me llevara, y me enfrenté al mundo por una causa, y defendí a los débiles de los poderosos? Si tal hice, sería recordado entre los hombres como fui conocido en vida entre la gente, y como me odiaron y me amaron en la tierra, así que no me construyan monumento alguno ni me erijan ningún busto, a menos que, aunque no me convierta en semidiós, se haya perdido la realidad de mi alma, y entonces los ladrones y los mentirosos, que fueron mis enemigos y me destruyeron, y los hijos de los ladrones y los mentirosos me puedan rebatir y afirmar ante mi busto que estuvieron conmigo en los días de mi derrota. No me construyan monumento alguno a menos que a mi memoria la perviertan a favor de la mentira y la opresión. Quienes me amaron y sus hijos no deben ser despojados de mí; yo debería ser la inmaculada posesión eterna de aquellos por los que viví. 246 Jennie M’Grew ¡No la figura encapuchada en el recodo de la escalera a oscuras, encogida bajo la capa ondeante! ¡No los ojos amarillos en el cuarto por las noches, que te miran desde una telaraña gris! ¡Y no el batir de las alas del cóndor cuando el rugir de la vida arranca en tus oídos como un sonido jamás escuchado! Pero sí en una tarde de sol, en un camino del campo, donde florece la ambrosía púrpura a lo largo de la cerca raleada, y el terreno está espigado, y el aire es sereno, ver recortarse contra la luz algo que es negro, como una mancha de bordes irisados: es esa la señal para los ojos que ven más allá... ¡Y eso fue lo que vi! 247 Columbus Cheney ¡Este sauce llorón! ¿Por qué no plantas unos cuantos para los millones de niños aún por nacer como hacen con nosotros? ¿Acaso no tienen existencia, o son células dormidas sin mente? ¿O es que cuando vienen a la tierra su nacimiento rompe la memoria del ser anterior? ¡Respondan! El campo de la intuición inexplorada es vuestro. Pero en todo caso ¿por qué no plantarles sauces como a nosotros? 248 Wallace Ferguson Allá en Génova, donde el Mont Blanc flotaba como una nube sobre el lago vino tinto, cuando algo soplaba una brisa desde el cielo azul vacío, y el Ródano rugiente se precipitaba bajo el puente entre los abismos rocosos, y la música a lo largo de los cafés se integraba al esplendor del agua que danzaba bajo un torrente de luz, y la parte más pura del genio de Jean Rousseau era la música silente de cuanto veíamos u oíamos— ¿Allá en Génova, digo, no era tan grande el arrebato porque no podía vincularme a mi antiguo yo de hacía veinte años, cuando vagaba por Spoon River? ¿Ni recordar lo que yo era o lo que yo sentía? Vivimos a la hora, libres de las horas pasadas. Así que, oh alma mía, si te pierdes en la muerte y despiertas en cualquier Génova vecina a algún Mont Blanc, ¿de qué preocuparse si no te reconoces como aquel que vivió y amó en un rinconcito de la tierra que llamaban Spoon River y se desvaneció hace una eternidad? 249 Marie Bateson Mira esta mano esculpida con el índice apuntando al cielo. Es esa la dirección, no cabe duda. ¿Pero cómo hacer para seguirla? Va bien abstenerse de matar y de fornicar, perdonar, hacer el bien al prójimo, adorar a Dios sin imágenes talladas. Pero después de todo son métodos externos más bien al servicio de tu propio bien. La médula interior es la libertad, la luz, la pureza— Yo no puedo más, halla tú la meta, o piérdela, de acuerdo con tu visión. 250 Tennessee Claflin Shope Yo era el hazmerreír del pueblo sobre todo de los cuerdos, como se llaman ellos, y también de los sabios, como el reverendo Peet, que leía griego igual que inglés. Porque en vez de hablar del libre comercio o predicar alguna forma de bautismo; en vez de creer en la eficacia de caminar sobre las grietas en el piso, de recoger los alfileres como debe ser, de ver la luna nueva por sobre el hombro derecho, o curar el reumatismo con un vidrio azul, yo afirmaba la soberanía de mi alma. Antes incluso de que Mary Baker G. Eddy comenzara con lo que ella llamó ciencia, yo dominaba ya el “Bhagavad Gita” y curé mi alma antes de que Mary empezara a curar los cuerpos con las almas— ¡Paz para todos los mundos! 251 Plymouth Rock Joe ¿Por qué correr con tanta prisa de aquí para allá a la caza de mosquitos o mariposas? Algunos se instalan solemnemente a escarbar gusanos; otros esperan a que se riegue el maíz. Es la vida, ¿no es así? ¡Kikirikí! Muy bien, Thomas Rhodes, sin duda que eres el gallo del corral. Pero ahí viene Elliot Hawkins, kluk, kluk, kluk, atrayendo seguidores políticos; ¡cuá, cuá, cuá! ¿por qué tan poética, Minerva, esta mañana gris? ¡Gati-cuá, cuá! ¡qué vergüenza, Lucius Atherton, el graznido ronco que arrancaste de la garganta de Aner Clute lo retomará más adelante la mujer de Benjamin Pantier como un grito de voto para las mujeres: ¡Ka-duk-duk! ¿Qué inspiración te ha llegado, Margaret Fuller Slack? ¿Y por qué tu ojo de grosella se revuelve tan mojado, Tennessee Claflin Shope? ¿Tratas de desentrañar lo esotérico del huevo? Tu voz está muy metálica esta mañana, Hortense Robbins: ¡casi de gallineta! ¡Cuá! Ese fue un suspiro gutural, Isaiah Beethoven; ¿viste una sombra de águila o tropezaste con los muslos de pollo que botó el cocinero esta mañana? 252 ¡Así seas caballero, héroe o pretendiente, metafísico, religioso o rebelde, jamás saldrás del patio de la granja si no te vuelas la cerca confundido con las conchas de papa y directo hasta el otro lado! 253 Imanuel Ehrenhardt Empecé con conferencias de Sir William Hamilton. Luego estudié a Dugald Stewart; y después a John Locke acerca del Entendimiento, y más tarde Descartes, Fichte y Schelling, Kant y de seguidas Schopenhauer: libros que el viejo juez Somers me prestaba. Todos leídos con fervor extasiado en el deseo de que me estuviese reservado tomar de la cola al secreto supremo y arrastrarlo fuera de su escondrijo. El alma se me remontó a una altura de diez mil millas, pero solo la luna lucía algo mayor; de ahí caí de vuelta, ¡feliz de estar en tierra! Y todo gracias al alma de William Jones que me mostró una carta de John Muir. 254 Samuel Gardner Yo, el encargado del invernadero, amante de árboles y flores, vi tantas veces en vida aquel umbroso olmo. Medía sus ramas generosas con mi vista y escuchaba el regocijo de sus hojas que se daban palmaditas amorosas murmurando con dulzura al viento, como debía ser: porque las raíces le crecieron tan vastas y profundas que el suelo de la colina no podía contener tanta virtud nutrida por la lluvia y calentada por el sol; se lo dejó todo a las raíces recrecidas que ascendieron y se le enroscaron en el tronco, y pasaron a las ramas, y por entre las hojas, donde la brisa cobraba vida y cantaba. Ahora, como inquilino de debajo de la tierra, puedo ver que las ramas de un árbol no sobrepasan lo que crecen sus raíces. ¿Y cómo iba a poder el alma de un hombre ir más allá de la vida que ha vivido? 255 Dow Kritt Samuel habla eternamente de su olmo— pero no necesito morir para saber de raíces: yo, que excavé todas las zanjas de Spoon River. ¡Vean mi olmo! Nació de una semilla tan buena como la de él, sembrada al mismo tiempo, se muere allá en la copa: no por falta de vida, ni por hongos ni insectos destructores, como piensa el sacristán. Ve, Samuel, donde tocaron roca las raíces y ya no pueden extenderse. Y mientras tanto la copa del árbol se extenúa y agoniza tratando de crecer. 256 William Jones De vez en cuando un yerbajo que no conozco y necesita un nombre de mis libros; de vez en cuando la carta de algún agricultor. De las conchas de los mejillones recogidos en la costa sale a veces una perla con brillo como de arrayán, y entonces una carta de Tyndall en Inglaterra con estampilla de Spoon River. Yo, amante de la Naturaleza, amado por mi amor a ella, mantenía esa plática de lejos con el grande que la conocía más que yo. Oh, no existe ni pequeñez ni grandeza salvo que la acrecentemos y logremos de ella un deleite mayor. Cúbranme con conchas recogidas en el río, cúbranme. Viví maravillado adorando tierra y cielo. Transcurrí en la marcha eterna de la vida sin fin. 257 William Goode A todos los del pueblo les parecía, sin lugar a dudas, que yo iba de aquí para allá, sin rumbo fijo. Pero de este lado del río se puede ver en el crepúsculo cómo aletean los murciélagos en zigzag de un lado a otro: deben volar así para cazar comida. Y si has perdido el camino en la noche en el bosque espeso cerca de Millers’ Ford, y cogiste por donde la luz de la Vía Láctea se abre paso tratando de hallar tu senda, deberías comprender ahora que yo buscaba el camino tenazmente, y todas mis andancias eran de andar en busca de respuesta. 258 J. Milton Miles Cada vez que la campana presbiteriana sonaba por su cuenta, yo sabía que era la campana presbiteriana. Mas cuando su sonido venía confundido con el sonido de la metodista, la cristiana, la baptista y la congregacional, ya no podía distinguirla, ni a alguna entre las demás, a ninguna de ellas. Y pues tantas voces me llamaron en la vida, no se maravillen entonces de que no pueda distinguir lo verdadero de lo falso, ni siquiera, al final, la voz que sí debí reconocer. 259 Faith Matheny Al comienzo no sabrás lo que quieren decir, y puede que jamás lo sepas, y puede que jamás te lo digamos: esas llamas súbitas en tu alma, como el rayo centelleante en las nubes nevosas a la medianoche con la luna llena. Vienen en la soledad, o a lo mejor estás sentado con tu amigo y de repente el silencio se abate sobre la conversación, y sus ojos sin un parpadeo fulguran para ti: ambos han visto juntos el secreto, él lo ve en ti y tú en él. Y se quedan ahí, conmovidos, con temor de que el Misterio se presente ante los dos y los fulmine con un esplendor como el del sol. ¡Sean valientes, almas que tienen visiones como esa! Pues sus cuerpos viven, pero el mío ha muerto, ustedes perciben ese pequeño soplo del éter que le está reservado solo a Dios. 260 Scholfield Huxley ¡Dios! No me pidas que dé cuenta de tus prodigios, reconozco las estrellas y los soles y los mundos incontables. Pero he medido sus distancias y he pesado y descubierto sus sustancias. He inventado alas para el aire y quillas para el agua, y caballos de hierro para la tierra. Extendí la visión que me diste un millón de veces. Y el oído que me diste un millón de veces. He volado por el espacio con el lenguaje y le he sacado al aire el fuego de la luz. Construí grandes ciudades y perforé las montañas, y tendí puentes sobre las aguas majestuosas. Escribí la Ilíada y Hamlet; y he explorado tus misterios, y te he buscado sin cesar, y te volví a encontrar tras haberte perdido en horas de fatiga— Y te pregunto: ¿qué te parecería crear un sol para tener al día siguiente a los gusanos escurriéndose por entre tus dedos? 261 Willie Metcalf Yo fui Willie Metcalf. Me llamaban “Doctor Meyers” porque, decían, me le parecía. Y él era mi padre, según Jack McGuire. Yo vivía en la caballeriza, y dormía en el piso junto al bulldog de Roger Baughman o a veces en un establo. Me podía arrastrar entre las patas de los caballos más salvajes sin que me patearan —nos conocíamos todos. En primavera vagaba por la comarca para recuperar la sensación, a veces perdida, de que yo tenía algo que ver con la tierra. Solía perderme, como dormido, acostado en el bosque con ojos semiabiertos. A veces hablaba con los animales —incluidos sapos y culebras— con cuanto tuviera un ojo al cual mirarle. Una vez vi una piedra al sol tratando de volverse gelatina. En los días de abril en este cementerio se agolpaba la gente muerta en torno mío, en completa quietud, como una congregación en rezo silencioso. Nunca supe si formaba parte de la tierra, con flores creciéndome por dentro, o si iba caminando— Ahora sé. 262 Willie Pennington Me llamaban el debilucho y el simplón, porque mis hermanos eran fuertes y hermosos, mientras yo, el último retoño de unos padres ya viejos, nada más heredé los residuos de su fuerza. Pero a ellos, mis hermanos, los devoró el furor de la carne, del que yo carecía. Los molió la actividad de los sentidos, de la que yo carecía. Los endureció el incremento del deseo, del que yo carecía, y les dio el renombre y la riqueza. Entonces yo, el debilucho, el simplón, guarecido en un rinconcito de la vida, vi una visión, y gracias a mí la vieron muchos, sin saber que era por mí. Así nació un árbol de mí, una simple semilla de mostaza. 263 El ateo del pueblo Es con ustedes, jóvenes que debaten sobre la doctrina de la inmortalidad del alma. Yo, quien aquí yace, era el ateo del pueblo, hablador, discutidor, ducho en los argumentos de los descreídos. Pero en una larga enfermedad con una tos a muerte leí los Upanishads y la poesía de Jesús. Y ellos encendieron una antorcha de intuición y de esperanza y anhelo que la Sombra, que me llevaba a toda prisa por las cavernas de las tinieblas, no la pudo apagar. Óiganme, ustedes que viven en los sentidos y solo piensan mediante los sentidos: la inmortalidad no es un regalo, la inmortalidad es un merecimiento; y solo los que se esfuerzan una enormidad pueden poseerla. 264 John Ballard En el arrebato de mi fuerza maldije a Dios, pero no me hizo caso: igual pude maldecir a las estrellas. En mi última enfermedad agonizaba, pero no cejé y lo maldije por mi sufrimiento. Y Él seguía sin hacerme caso; me dejó por mi cuenta, como siempre. Igual pude maldecir la torre de la iglesia presbiteriana. Me fui debilitando y me sobrecogió el terror: quizá de tanto maldecirlo había enajenado a Dios. Un día Lydia Humphrey me trajo un ramo y se me ocurrió amistarme con Él. Así que traté de amistarme con Dios; pero igual pude tratar de amistarme con el ramo. Ahora estaba yo bien cerca del secreto, porque en verdad podía amistarme con el ramo estrechando el amor que había en mí para ese ramo y arrimarme así al secreto, pero— 265 Julian Scott Ya al final la verdad de los demás era para mí la no verdad; la justicia de los demás para mí injusticia, sus razones para la muerte, mis razones para la vida; sus razones para la vida, mis razones para la muerte; mataría a quienes ellos salvaban y salvaría a quienes matasen. Y veía como un Dios, si era traído a tierra, tendría que actuar según viese y pensase, y no podría vivir en este mundo de hombres ni actuar entre ellos y a su lado sin chocar continuamente. El suelo para arrastrarse, el cielo para volar: por eso, oh Alma, cuyas alas crecieron, ¡dispárate hacia el sol! 266 Alfonso Churchill Se reían de mí para llamarme “profesor Luna” de niño en Spoon River, pues nací con la sed de saber de las estrellas. Se burlaban cuando hablaba de los montes lunares, y del calor y del frío pavorosos y de valles de ébano entre picos de plata, y los billones de Espigas muchas millas más lejos y la pequeñez del hombre. Pero ahora que se honra mi tumba, amigos, que no sea porque enseñé la ciencia de las estrellas en Knox College sino por esto: que mediante las estrellas prediqué la grandeza del hombre, que es nada más que una parte del diseño de las cosas para la distancia de la Espiga o la Nebulosa Espiral, y nada menos que una parte de la cuestión de qué es lo que este drama significa. 267 Zilpha Marsh Cuatro en punto a finales de octubre. Sentada a solas en la escuela rural, de espaldas al camino por entre campos agotados, y un remolino soplaba hojas sobre los cristales y cantaba en el caño de la estufa con la trampilla abierta enturbiando las sombras con el relumbre espectral del fuego que se muere. Sin mucho interés yo corría la ouija— y de repente se aflojó mi muñeca y la mano echó a correr sobre el tablero hasta deletrear “Charles Guiteau”, quien amenazó con materializarse ante mis ojos. Me levanté y hui del cuarto con la cabeza descubierta hacia la oscuridad, con temor de mi don. Y después de eso los espíritus acudieron en enjambre— Chaucer, César, Poe y Marlowe, Cleopatra y la señora Surrat— dondequiera que fuese, con mensajes,— puras patrañas, acordó Spoon River. Uno les dice disparates a los niños, ¿no es así? Y supongan que yo veo lo que ustedes jamás vieron y jamás oyeron, y no tienen la palabra que lo diga. ¡Debo decirles disparates cuando me preguntan qué es lo que veo! 268 James Garber ¿Recuerdas, viandante, el camino que seguía por el solar donde hoy está el teatro de la ópera, a paso vivo hacia el trabajo, a lo largo de los años? Ahonda en su significado: puedes caminar también hasta que los cerros de Miller’s Ford ya no parezcan tan lejanos; hasta casi verlos al alcance de la mano, tras cuatro millas de pradera; y hasta que el amor de la mujer haga silencio, y ya no diga: “Yo te salvaré”. Y hasta que los rostros de los amigos y los parientes se vuelvan retratos desvaídos, lastimeramente silenciosos, tristes por esa mirada que significa “no podemos ayudarte”. Y hasta que ya no le reproches a la humanidad que haya estado en alianza contra las manos alzadas de tu alma— ellos mismos contemplando a toda hora con la mirada fija sus destinos. ¡Y cuando lo hayas comprendido todo, piensa en mí, y en mi camino, adentrado hasta allí y ya enterado de que no hay hombre, mujer ni esfuerzo ni deber, oro o poder, que pueda calmar los anhelos del alma, la soledad del alma! 269 Lydia Humphrey De allá para acá, de acá para allá, desde y para la iglesia, con mi Biblia bajo el brazo hasta que me puse gris y vieja; soltera, sola en el mundo, hallé hermanos y hermanas en la congregación, y niños en la iglesia. Yo sé que se reían y me creían rara. Sabía de las almas águilas que volaban alto hacia la luz por sobre el campanario, y reían en la iglesia desdeñándome sin verme. Pero si lo alto del aire les placía, a mí me placía la iglesia. ¡Era la visión, la visión, la visión de los poetas democratizada! 270 Le Roy Goldman “¿Cómo harás cuando te llegue la hora si toda la vida rechazaste a Jesús, y ahora que allí yaces Él no es tu amigo?”. Una y otra vez lo dije, yo el predicador. ¡Ah, sí! Pero hay amigos y amigos. Y bendito seas digo, yo que ahora lo sé todo, tú, que has perdido antes de morir padre o madre, abuelo o abuela, algún alma hermosa que vivió con gran fuerza y te conoció por entero y te amó por siempre, que no dejará de hablar por ti y le dará a Dios una visión íntima de tu alma, como solo podría hacerlo alguien de tu propia carne. ¡Esa es la mano hacia la que se estirará tu mano y te conducirá por el pasillo hasta el jurado en el que nadie te conoce! 271 Gustav Richter Después de un largo día de trabajo en mis invernaderos dormir era una delicia, pero si te dormías sobre el lado izquierdo tus sueños podían tener un final brusco. Yo estaba entre mis flores y alguien parecía experimentar en su cultivo como para trasplantarlas con el tiempo a un jardín más amplio de aire más libre. Y yo era una visión sin cuerpo en medio de una luz, como si el sol hubiese venido flotando a tocar el techo de cristal como un globo de juguete, y luego estallado sin violencia, para eterealizarse en un aire dorado. Y todo era silencio salvo el esplendor inmanente al pensamiento, tan claro como una voz que hablase, y yo, cual pensamiento podía escuchar la Presencia pensante mientras él caminaba por entre los cajones entresacando hojas, buscando chinches y observando cualidades con un ojo que todo lo veía: “¡Homero, oh, sí! Bien, Pericles. César Borgia, ¿qué haremos con él? Dante, demasiado abono, quizá. Napoleón, dejémoslo estar por un tiempo. Shelley, más tierra. Shakespeare, necesita riego...” ¡Nubes, hey!— 272 Arlo Will ¿Has visto alguna vez un cocodrilo subir del pantano al aire a contemplar a ciegas el claror de la luna? ¿Has visto a los caballos en las cuadras por la noche temblar y recular a la luz de una linterna? ¿Has caminado alguna vez en lo oscuro cuando una puerta desconocida se abre ante nosotros y nos quedamos, así parecería, a la luz de mil velas de suave cera? ¿Has andado con el viento en los oídos rodeado de luz y hallado de repente que ella brilla con esplendor interno? ¡Fuera del pantano muchas veces, ante muchas puertas de luz, por entre muchos campos de esplendor, donde en torno a tus pasos se esparce una gloria silente como nieve recién caída, por allí pasarás a través de la tierra, oh tú, fuerte de alma, y a través de innumerables cielos hasta la llama final! 273 El capitán Orlando Killion ¡Oh, ustedes, jóvenes radicales y soñadores, ustedes, intrépidos pichones que pasan ante mi lápida, no se burlen del registro de mi capitanía en el ejército y mi fe en Dios! Una no niega la otra. Desfilen con reverencia y lean con atención cómo un gran pueblo, cabalgando con gritos desafiantes el centauro de la Revolución, espoleaba y foeteaba con frenesí, estremecido de terror, viendo la bruma del mar sobre el precipicio al que se acercaban, cayó de su lomo con el pavor atropellado para celebrar la Fiesta del Ser Supremo. Movido por la misma sensación de vasta realidad de vida y muerte, y con la carga igual que ellos del destino de una raza, ¿cómo iba yo, pequeño blasfemador, cogido en el torrente desatado de una nación, a seguir siendo blasfemo y capitán en el ejército? 274 Jeremy Carlisle ¡Viandante, el pecado más allá de todo pecado es el pecado de la ceguera de las almas para las otras almas. Y la alegría más allá de toda alegría es la alegría de haber visto en ti el bien, y ver el bien en el momento milagroso! Confieso aquí un altivo desprecio y un amargo escepticismo. ¿Pero recuerdas aquel líquido que Penniwit vertía sobre los ferrotipos, poniéndolos azules con una bruma como humo de nogal? ¿Y cómo entonces el retrato comenzaba a aclararse hasta que el rostro aparecía como si estuviera vivo? Así se me aparecieron ustedes, los ignorados, y también los enemigos, mientras yo proseguía con un rostro que se iba aclarando para ustedes, como el de ustedes se aclaraba para mí. Entonces estuvimos listos para caminar juntos y cantar en coro y entonar un canto a la aurora de la vida que es la vida entera. 275 Joseph Dixon ¿Quién esculpió esta arpa arruinada en mi tumba? Por ti morí, no cabe duda. ¿Pero cuántas arpas y pianos encordé yo, y tensé, y desenredé para ustedes haciéndolos melodiosos otra vez —con o sin diapasón? ¡Ah, bien! El arpa brota del oído del hombre, dicen, ¿pero de dónde el oído que ordena la longitud de las cuerdas hasta que una magia de número revolotea ante tu pensamiento a través de una puerta que se cierra contra tu pasmado asombro? ¿No existe el Oído que rodea al oído del hombre, que sienta a través de las cuerdas y las columnas de aire el alma del sonido? Me emociono al llamarlo el diapasón que capta las ondas de la música en fusión y la luz en lejanía, la antena del Pensamiento que escucha a través del espacio más externo. Seguramente la concordancia que regía mi espíritu es la prueba de un Oído que me afinaba, capaz de afinarme otra vez y volverme a utilizar si merezco ser utilizado. 276 Judson Stoddard En la cima de un monte sobre las nubes ondulando como un mar bajo de mí dije que ese pico es el pensamiento de Buda, y aquel otro la prédica de Jesús, y este el sueño de Platón y aquel de allá el canto de Dante, y este es Kant y este es Newton, y este es Milton y este es Shakespeare y este la esperanza de la Madre Iglesia y este —vaya, todos estos picos son poemas, poemas y plegarias que perforan las nubes. Y dije: “¿qué hace Dios con montañas que se elevan casi hasta tocar el cielo?” 277 Russell Kincaid En la última primavera todo el tiempo lo supe, en esos días últimos, me sentaba en la huerta abandonada donde allende los campos de verdor relumbraban los cerros de Miller’s Ford; tan solo para contemplar el manzano de tronco arruinado y las ramas marchitas y los retoños verdes cuyos brotes tiernos se esparcían por el enramado de esqueleto, para no fructificar jamás. Y ahí estaba yo con el espíritu envuelto en carne medio muerta y los sentidos embotados, y no obstante pensando en juventud y en la tierra en juventud— brotes fantasmales relumbrando de palidez sobre las ramas sin vida del Tiempo. ¡Oh, tierra, que nos permites estar hasta que el cielo nos toma! Fui nada más árbol para estremecerme con sueños de primavera y una juventud frondosa, abatido luego por el ciclón que me arrebató de la suspensión del alma donde ya no es ni el cielo ni la tierra. 278 Aaron Hatfield Mejor que el granito, Spoon River, es el retrato de recuerdo que conservas de mí, de pie ante los pioneros y las pioneras, allá en la iglesia de la Concordia el día de la Comunión. Hablando con la voz quebrada acerca del joven campesino de Galilea, aquel que fue a la ciudad y lo mataron los banqueros y los abogados; la voz fundida con el viento de junio que soplaba sobre los campos de trigo desde Atterbury; mientras las losas blancas en el camposanto en torno a la iglesia relumbraban en el sol del verano. Y allí, aunque mis propios recuerdos eran muy grandes para soportarlos, estaban ustedes, oh pioneros, las cabezas bajas liberando la tristeza por los hijos muertos en batalla y las hijas y los pequeños que desaparecen en la mañana de la vida, o a la hora intolerable del mediodía. Pero en aquellos momentos de trágico silencio, cuando se pasaba el pan y el vino, llegó la reconciliación para nosotros— a nosotros los labriegos y los leñadores, a nosotros los campesinos, hermanos del campesino de Galilea— nos llegó El Confortador ¡y la consolación de las lenguas de fuego! 279 Isaiah Beethoven Me dijeron que me quedaban tres meses de vida, así que me arrastré hasta Bernadotte, y me senté ante el molino por horas y horas donde las aguas retenidas se mueven en lo hondo sin que parezca que se mueven: ¡igual que tú, oh mundo! ¡No eres más que un lugar más amplio en el río donde la Vida mira hacia abajo y nos regocijamos porque se refleja en nosotros, y así soñamos y desviamos la mirada, pero cuando de nuevo buscamos ese rostro, vemos las tierras bajas y los álamos desgajados allí donde desembocamos en la gran corriente! Pero aquí ante el molino las nubes encerradas se burlan de sí mismas en el agua en remolino; y sobre su piso de ágata en la noche la llama de la luna corrió bajo mis ojos por entre una quietud de selva rota por una flauta en una choza en la colina. Y al final, cuando me eché sobre la cama débil y adolorido, rodeado de sueños, el alma del río había penetrado mi alma y la fuerza recogida de mi alma se movía tan velozmente que parecía en reposo bajo las ciudades de nubes y bajo las esferas de plata y los mundos cambiantes— 280 ¡hasta que vi un relámpago de trompetas sobre las almenas encima del Tiempo! 281 Elijah Browning Estaba entre multitudes de muchachos bailando al pie de una montaña. Sopló una brisa del este y los barrió como hojas y depositó algunos sobre la ladera... todo estaba cambiado. Había aquí luces que volaban, y lunas místicas, y música de sueños. Nos cayó encima una nube. Cuando se levantó, todo estaba cambiado. Estaba ahora entre multitudes que reñían. Entonces una figura en oro reluciente, y otra con una trompeta, y otra con un cetro, aparecieron ante mí. Se burlaron, bailaron un rigodón y se desvanecieron... De nuevo todo estaba cambiado. De un enramado de amapolas salió una mujer que desnudó sus brazos y alzó su boca abierta hacia la mía. La besé. Sus labios sabían como a sal. Dejó sangre en los míos. Me sentí desfallecer. Me levanté y ascendí a mayor altura, pero una niebla como de iceberg nubló mis pasos. Tenía frío y estaba adolorido. Entonces el sol me inundó de nuevo y vi las brumas debajo de mí ocultarse debajo de ellas. Y yo, doblado sobre mi cayado, sabía que mi silueta se recortaba contra la nieve. ¡Y sobre mí estaba el aire silencioso, perforado por un cono de hielo, sobre el que colgaba una estrella solitaria! Un escalofrío de éxtasis, un escalofrío de miedo me atravesó. Pero no podía volver a la ladera— no, no quería regresar. 282 Porque las ondas moribundas de la sinfonía de la libertad lamían los riscos etéreos a mi alrededor. Entonces trepé hasta la cumbre. Arrojé mi cayado. Toqué aquella estrella con la mano extendida. Me desvanecí de un todo. ¡Porque la montaña deposita en la Verdad Infinita a quienquiera que toque la estrella! 283 Webster Ford ¿Recuerdas, oh Apolo délfico, la hora del ocaso junto al río, cuando Mickey M’Grew gritó: “¡Hay un fantasma!”, y yo: “¡el Apolo délfico!”; y el hijo del banquero se burló: “Es la luz de los lirios en la orilla, imbéciles.” Y desde entonces, en el transcurso de los años silenciosos, muy después de que el pobre Mickey se mató al caer del depósito del agua, abajo, abajo, por entre la negrura aullante, cargaba yo con la visión que pereció con él como cohete que cae para apagar su luz en tierra, y la oculté por miedo al hijo del banquero, rogándole a Plutón que me salvara? ¡Vengado fuiste por la vergüenza de un corazón temeroso que me dejó en paz hasta volver a verte en la hora en que parecí volverme árbol de tronco y ramas cada vez más tiesas, que se hacían piedra, pero retoñando en hojas de laurel, en brotes de laurel radiante, vibrando, tremolando, encrespándose, combatiendo el entumecimiento, reptando por sus venas desde el tronco y las ramas moribundas! ¡Inútil es, oh jóvenes, volar al llamado de Apolo. Arrojándose al fuego, morir con una canción de primavera si habéis de morir en primavera. Ninguno que contemple el rostro de Apolo vivirá, y tendréis que optar entre morir en llamas o morir sufriendo de dolor por años arraigados con tesón a la tierra, sintiendo la mano aterradora, más aún en el terrible entumecimiento que en el tronco, y trepando hasta las hojas de laurel que nunca cesan 284 de florecer hasta que caes. Oh, mis hojas, muy marchitas para guirnaldas de corona, solo me sirven de urnas para los recuerdos atesorados, tal vez, como materia para heroicos corazones, para cantores y activistas valerosos— délfico Apolo! 285 La Spooniada (El difunto Jonathan Swift Somers, laureado de Spoon River, planificó La Spooniada como un poema épico en veinticuatro libros, pero desafortunadamente no vivió para completar ni siquiera el primero. El fragmento fue hallado entre sus papeles por William Marion Reedy y se publicó por primera vez en el Reedy’s Mirror del 18 de diciembre de 1914). De la ira de John Cabanis y el encono de los hostiles bandos, y su derrota infausta que llevó al pueblo llano hasta la causa de la libertad para Spoon River, y la caída del banco de Rhodes que acarreó sinnúmero de males y pérdidas a tantos, y engendró un intenso odio que encendió la tea en manos anarquistas para hacer arder al tribunal, sobre cuyas ruinas renegridas se levantó un templo más hermoso y se plantó el Progreso, canta, Musa, tú que encendiste en sonrisas el rostro del Quío 8, aquel que vio a griegos y troyanos bullir cual hormigas disputando el Escamandro, sobre la muralla, perseguidos o perseguidores, y las piras funerarias y las sagradas hecatombes, por causa de Helena, primero que huyó a Troya con Paris su amante; y la ira del hijo de Peleo, conminado a perder a Criseida, botín preciado de guerra y muy amada concubina. 8 Natural de Quíos: según la tradición, Homero, el personaje aludido en estos versos, nació en esa isla del mar Egeo (N. del T.). 286 Decid en primer término, tú, hijo de la noche a quien Momo llaman y ante cuyos ojos no existen los secretos, y tú, Talía, la sonreída, ¿qué fue lo que entre Thomas Rhodes y John Cabanis sembró mortal rencilla? La hija de este último, Flossie, de vuelta de sus errancias con una compañía de actores ambulantes, recorrió las calles de la aldea entre el tintineo de sus brazaletes y el relumbrar de sus anillos y sus palabras de serpiente sabia y aquella sonrisa astuta en la mirada. Y Thomas Rhodes, que mandaba en la iglesia y en el banco desaprobó en público a la doncella; y Spoon River murmuró y el ceño de los feligreses se frunció contra ella, y ella se dio cuenta de que era temida y repudiada. Mas para hacer burla de ellos dio ella un baile con flautas y violines traídos de Peoria, y muchos jóvenes, más adelante regenerados con los rezos de fervorosos curas y almas puras, danzaron gozosos en procura todos de bailar con ella, que portaba un vestido de tan bajo escote que los ojos se deslizaban por entre la hondonada nívea hasta perderse en la blancura. Con aquel baile la aldea pasó de la tristura a la alegría. La sombrerera, la señora Williams, no se daba abasto para tantos encargos de sombreros nuevos, y las costureras hubieron de afanarse en las agujas con los vestidos de estreno, se abrieron los viejos baúles y los cofres que guardaban encajes, 287 y de sus escondites resurgieron los anillos y los dijes, y las jóvenes andaban pendientes de sus trajes; circulaban esquelas, y a la puerta de más de una bella al caer de la noche llegaba un ramo de flores, y multitud de parejas se iban de paseo por las colinas que miran al río. Entonces, desde los píos bancos de la iglesia ya casi en abandono, se oyó decir a uno de los seres escogidos del Señor: “La mujer de Babilonia está entre nosotros; levantémonos, hijos de la luz, y echemos fuera a la impúdica”. Así que John Cabanis abandonó la iglesia y abandonó las huestes de la ley y el orden, límpida la mirada airada, y la causa de los liberales lo proclamó candidato a la alcaldía para derrotar a A. D. Blood. Mas cuando la guerra por los votos se desató furiosa y corrieron los rumores sobre el banco y los préstamos enormes que hizo el hijo de Rhodes para contrarrestar las pérdidas con el trigo, y muchos retiraron su dinero y dejaron al banco de Rhodes más hundido todavía, con las habladurías de los liberales acerca de otro banco que abriría pronto, he aquí que estalló la burbuja entre lamentos y maldiciones; pero los liberales se reían y en la sala de Nicholas Bindle sostenían sabias conversaciones y debates inspirados. Sobre un estrado más elevado que las sillas en las que se habían sentado por docenas, y presidido desde un burdo proscenio por un tosco retrato de Shakespeare, 288 igualito al peón de Christian Dallmann, de ojos saltones, barba en punta y mirada extraviada, allí estaba Harmon Whitney, hasta esas alturas elevado por mérito de impudicia y triquiñuelas, que a los rebeldes allí conjurados habló así: “¿Permanecer postrados permitiendo que una pandilla despiadada, insidiosa, ávida y cantora de salmos nos devore la esencia, haga quebrar nuestros bancos y diezme nuestros modestos ahorros apostándoles a los precios del trigo o el cerdo, o agazaparnos a la sombra de una torre levantada como albergue de una caterva de lacayos para satisfacer al banco coadjutor en su codicia? Esa es la cuestión. ¿Iremos a tener música y gozosa danza?, les pregunto, ¿o doblar de campanas? ¿Se paseará el romance entre los jóvenes por entre las colinas que rodean al río, floreciendo ahora a las lágrimas de abril, o habrá de permanecer en casa, o jugando al croquet, donde Thomas Rhodes lo pueda vigilar? Si la sangre juvenil se enardece y se subleva contra este régimen sombrío, ¿iremos a permitir que a nuestros jóvenes y sus doncellas se les tilde de libertinos y licenciosas?” Cuando terminó el discurso, una voz de mujer respondió “¡No!”, y se elevó un estruendo de sillas que se mueven, cual piara de cerdos que desborda el chiquero, y todas las cabezas voltearon a una, como cuando la bandada de gansos vira al unísono del cazador que acecha, y al momento se sacudió la sala en bulliciosa risa, pues de pie con su sombrero astroso 289 puesto de lado sobre la cabeza y el puño alzado como en desafío, estaba allí Daisy Fraser. De una buena vez la hubieran echado de la sala si no es por Wendell Bloyd, que invocó los derechos de la mujer, y la tonante voz de Burchard. Entre aplausos ella se apresuró al estrado, y depositó oro y plata para la causa y salió de la sala de inmediato. Entonces se levantó una figura gigantesca, barbudo como el hijo de Alcmene, de poderoso pecho y redondeada panza, y habló con voz atronadora: “Vosotros que aquí estáis, contemplad a un hombre que de verdad se enfrentó a su esposa— tal es nuestro espíritu— cuando A. D. Blood me obligó a que mudara el Dom Pedro”. Rápidamente antes de que Jim Brown pudiera terminar, Jefferson Howard le robó la palabra y habló: “Mal se aviene el tiempo con las payasadas, y banal es nuestra causa si lo único que importa es la ira de John Cabanis, quien de no ser por él estaría aún del otro lado y a nosotros vino por venganza. Hay más en juego que triunfar en Nueva Inglaterra o en Virginia, y poco interesa que se venda ron, o por dos años más como en los anteriores, el pueblo siga sin beber. —¡Ah, sí, cobrar impuestos para hacer aceras y alcantarillas, eso es muy bueno! Desearía con el alma que a esta lucha de hoy la inspirase una pasión distinta a la de andar salvándole el orgullo a Cabanis o a su hija. ¿Por qué 290 las contiendas memorables nacen tan solo de las nimiedades? En fin, si es así como siempre han de actuar los hombres, y es el ron el símbolo y el medio de nuestra liberación de la negación de la vida y de la esclavitud, ¡pues dadme ron entonces!” Estallaron gritos jubilosos. Ahora George Trimble logra vencer su miedo y su vacilación y va a romper a hablar, mas la puerta chirría y el idiota, Willie Metcalf, sin aliento y sin sombrero, y blanco como una sábana, irrumpe gritando: “¡Allá viene el alguacil a arrestarlos a todos! Y si supieran ustedes quién llega aquí mañana; escuchando estaba bajo la ventana donde el otro bando está haciendo planes”. Así que a una sala más pequeña a escucharle al idiota su secreto algunos se retiran, escogidos por quien los preside: el propio presidente, y Jefferson Howard, Benjamin Pantier, y Wendell Bloyd, George Trimble, Adam Weirauch, Immanuel Ehrenhardt, Seth Compton, Godwin James y Enoch Dunlap, Hiram Scates, Roy Butler, Carl Hamblin, Roger Heston, Ernest Hyde y Penniwit el artista, Kinsey Keene, y E. C. Culbertson y Franklin Jones, Benjamin Fraser, hijo de Benjamin Pantier y de Daisy Fraser, más algunos de menor notoriedad, y todos conferenciaron en secreto. 291 Pero en la sala el desorden reinaba y cuando el alguacil llegó y de tal guisa los halló, pues en fila los puso a marchar y a todos los encarceló. Mientras tanto en un cuarto trasero del sótano de la iglesia, con Blood conspiraban las mentes más sabias. Primero el juez Somers, sabedor de la vida, y junto a él Elliott Hawkins y Lambert Hutchins; y junto a él Thomas Rhodes y Whedon, el editor; y junto a él Garrison Standard, traidor a los liberales, que con labio recogido en mueca de desprecio y befa: “Tanto lío por el insulto a una mujer, una chica de dieciocho”, y también Christian Dallmann y otros desapercibidos. Había quien sin ser enemigo del trago repudiaba una ley que volviese a la democracia símbolo de vida libre y lujuriosa. Apenas la mañana de nevados dedos lanzó al cielo, cual naranja en plena fiesta al rojizo sol, cuando arrojados fueron de sus urgidos lechos las hostiles fuerzas, resonaron en las calles el trepidante ir y venir de ruedas, recogiendo votantes remolones y los gritos de los cabecillas de la batalla. Pero a las diez en punto clamaron fraude los liberales y en las urnas los candidatos rivales se gruñeron y a los puños se fueron. 292 Allí se comprobó cuán cierta era la advertencia del cuento del idiota en la víspera. De pronto recorriendo las calles apareció Ojos de Puerco Allen, terror de las colinas, morador de Bernadotte, a unas diez millas. Ningún otro pudo en este malhadado día levantar peñones como los que él lanzó, y cuando hablaba se estremecían las ventanas, y bajo el ceño suyo, como techado de paja de pelambre negra, relumbraban los ojillos del jabalí cuando enloquece. Y al caminar por las aceras traqueteaban las maderas, sí, al caminar retumbaba un canto amenazante. Se presentó así el paladín de A. D. Blood, comisionado para sembrar el terror entre los liberales. Muchos huyeron, como cuando el gavilán sobrevuela el gallinero. Pasó frente a las urnas y con mano juguetona tocó al gigante Brown, que cayó, como si fuera un niño, sobre la pared; así de fuerte era Ojos de Puerco Allen. Pero los liberales sonrieron. Pues al no más pisar la acera Ojos de Puerco Allen, siguiéndole los pasos apareció Bengala Mike, a quien Kinsey Keene, el de sutil mente, trajo para enfrentar a Ojos de Puerco Allen. No llegaba ni a tres cuartos de la mole de este, pero con brazos de acero y corazón de tigre. Matador de dos hombres y heridor de muchos en los pasados días, y temedor de nada. Mas cuando el de la mirada porcina vio a Bengala Mike, se le ensombreció el talante, las cerdas sobre los ojos crispadas por la ira, y bajó el volumen de su estentóreo canto. Vueltas y vueltas 293 dio en torno al tribunal con Bengala Mike, pegado de sus pies, provocándolo a cada tranco recorrido: “¡Vamos, elefante, párate y pelea! ¡Vamos, cobarde Ojos de Puerco! ¡Vamos, date vuelta y pelea conmigo, serpiente boba! ¡Vamos, bola de carne, pégame si puedes! ¡Saca ese cacharro que tienes por revólver, dame un buen motivo para sacar yo y matarte. Saca tu cachiporra, que te parto esa cabeza de marrano de un solo ladrillazo!”. Pero Ojos de Puerco no respondió ni una sola vez a esas palabras, solo caminaba en torno al tribunal, los dos seguidos de un tropel de chiquillos y la mirada de los hombres. El día pasaron rondando la manzana. Pero cuando Apolo detuvo su marcha sobre las colinas como para así ver el final, y todos los votos estaban depositados, y las urnas cerraron, frente a la puerta de la farmacia de Trainor, Bengala Mike le gritó a voz en cuello: “¿Quién fue tu madre, Ojos de Puerco?”. Y en un tris, como cuando en un día de agosto entre la maleza el jabalí se vira contra el perro que le clavó los dientes, Ojos de Puerco echó sus brazos de gigante sobre Bengala Mike y lo asió por la garganta. Hasta el cielo llegaron los chillidos de terror de los chiquillos, y los gritos de los hombres arremolinándose en la calle. Y Bengala Mike brincó de un lado a otro, y encogió la cabeza como para acortar su cuello, y se dobló a ver si rompía el apretón mortal de Ojos de Puerco; en medio de la ira atragantada y las fuerzas que lo abandonaban golpeaba con sus puños el pecho invulnerable 294 de Ojos de Puerco Allen. Y si algunos acudieron a apartarlos, muchos otros se quedaron contemplando, y la pelea cundió por todas partes, y a muchos espíritus valientes los abatieron porras y ladrillos. Mas dime, Musa, ¿qué dios o diosa rescató a Bengala Mike? En un último intento poderoso logró asir las mortíferas manos y en un giro patear a su enemigo. Entonces, como herido por el rayo, a Ojos de Puerco Allen se le desvaneció toda la fuerza, a los costados cayeron inertes sus brazos de gigante, y a su cara la cubrió la palidez del pavor y el sudor de la angustia. Y aquellas rodillas enormes, una vez invencibles, flaquearon con su peso. Y veloz cual el felino que salta sobre la herida presa, así Bengala Mike le dio con una piedra en la sien a su enemigo. Y aquel se vino abajo, y sobre su mirada la oscuridad pasó como una nube. Como cuando el leñador derriba algún roble gigante un día de verano y los cantores del bosque emiten su chillido, y el gran águila que guarda su nidada en lo más alto de la copa grita, y el fragor se escucha de las ramas cayendo entre los entrelazados brazos de los robles hermanos, así cayó Ojos de Puerco entre las lamentaciones de los amigos de A. D. Blood. 295 Y en aquel mismo momento cuatro hombres robustos cargaban al alcalde del pueblo, sobre su faz de hierro la soledad de la muerte se asentaba, hasta la farmacia de Trainor, mal herido por Jack McGuire, y se elevaban gritos de “¡A lincharlo!”, y el resonar de pisadas corriendo por doquiera se escuchó. Reclinado sobre 297 Epílogo (El cementerio de Spoon River. Se escuchan dos voces detrás de una pantalla de - corada con figuras diabólicas y angélicas en varias alusiones alegóricas. Una luz tenue se muestra vagamente a través de la pantalla, como si esta fuese un tejido de hojas, ramas y sombras) 9. Primera voz : ¿Jugamos una partida de ajedrez? s egunda voz : Por mí está bien. Juguemos. Primera voz : Muevo la Voluntad. s egunda voz : Juegas a ciegas. Primera voz : Y aquí viene el Alma. s egunda voz : La Voluntad le da jaque. Primera voz : ¡El Bien Eterno! s egunda voz : Y el mal eterno. Primera voz : Corro a la línea del Rey. 9 En el original en inglés varios parlamentos riman, y en su gran mayoría están constituidos por versos yámbicos de unas 4 o 5 sílabas métricas (N. del T.). 298 s egunda voz : No te quedes sin aliento. Primera voz : Movía la Vida. s egunda voz : Jaque de la Muerte. Primera voz : Muy bien, aquí va Moisés. s egunda voz : Y aquí el Judío. Primera voz : Próxima jugada: Jesús. s egunda voz : ¡Saco a San Pablo! Primera voz : Sí, pero San Pedro... s egunda voz : Debiste preverlo. Primera voz : Estás en fila de Rey... s egunda voz : ¡Con Constantino! Primera voz : Me devuelvo a Atenas. s egunda voz : Bien. Aquí tienes el Persa. Primera voz : Pues bien, la Biblia. s egunda voz : ¿Y en cuál versión? 299 Primera voz : Tomo el Buda. s egunda voz : No te servirá. Primera voz : Mahoma, desde la esquina. s egunda voz : Muevo al Turco. Primera voz : Se enredó el juego. ¿Por dónde vamos? s egunda voz : Tú, soñando mundos. Yo, en la fila del Rey. Mueve lo que quieras. Si no desmonto el plan, te bloqueo, te estorbo, te acoso, te doy jaque. Primera voz : Me cansé. Traeré a jugar a mi Hijo. Creo que él sí te gana... s egunda voz : ¿Cómo? Primera voz : Presidiré la convención estelar. s egunda voz : Muy bien, mi señor, permítame decirle que pondré en el juego toda mi atención. Primera voz : ¡Un juego, sí. Pero busco la Verdad! s egunda voz : Batido, y se va haciendo burla. Golpeo la mesa, desparramo las piezas. (Estruendo de mesa que cae y piezas arrojadas al piso) . ¡Ajá, tus ejércitos y tu armada, 300 tu gente y tus propiedades en un cataclismo— ¡por un solo día de ateísmo! (La pantalla se desvanece y entra Belcebú con una trompeta, que toca a muy bajo volumen. De inmediato Loki y Yogarindra saltan de las sombras nocturnas). Bel Ce Bú: ¡Buenas noches, Loki! l oki : ¡Igual te deseo! Bel Ce Bú: ¡Y Yogarindra! y ogarindra : Mis saludos, también. l oki : ¿De dónde vienes, camarada? Bel Ce Bú: De aquella pantalla. y ogarindra : ¿Haciendo qué? Bel Ce Bú: Haciéndolo molestar. l oki : ¿Y cómo lo haces? Bel Ce Bú: Me porto grosero en el ajedrez. l oki : ¡Buenísimo! y ogarindra : Me pareció escuchar una batalla. 301 Bel Ce Bú: ¡Sin duda! Traqueteé las piezas volteé la mesa y desperdigué las figuras de madera como a un ejército. y ogarindra : ¡Yo tengo un juego! Hagamos un hombre. l oki : Si tú puedes, mi red lo espera. y ogarindra : Y aquí está mi espejo para engañarlo con... Bel Ce Bú: Misterio, falsedad, creencia y mito. l oki : Pero el que puede darle forma, amigo, eres tú. Bel Ce Bú: Manos a la obra, sin más dilación. y ogarindra : Apura el trabajo, que se hace tarde. Bel Ce Bú: Empezaré de una vez. ¿Dónde está la arcilla? (Escarba en la tierra con las manos y comienza a moldear) . Con tierra, con lodo, un poco de herrumbre, y un poco de cal. Músculo y cartílago, mucina, piedra trituro en mortero, grasa y hueso, de ciénagas, de criptas, 302 materia molida gas y sales. ¿Es lo que llaman mente esta volátil, flotante, pálida y ciega alma del pantano que cabalga el viento? ¡Fuego fatuo, eso eres! Sueña con el cielo, empínate a las estrellas corretea a tus hermanos de un lado a otro que al final al pantano volverás. ¡Jilú! ¡Jilú! e l v alle : ¡Jilú! ¡Jilú! (Belcebú sigue escarbando. Desentierra una calavera) . Bel Ce Bú: Ah, viejo; ah, viejo. Ahora te parto, te muelo y te vuelvo arcilla para mi uso, déjame observarte: tú fuiste audaz, fuerte de cabeza, sólido de pies. Falso por dentro, duro de cara, exento de miedo. Pero tu cabello ocultaba lo que eras. Ahora, para revivirte— 303 (Tritura el cráneo entre sus manos y lo mezcla con la arcilla). Ahora eres polvo, piedra caliza y herrumbre. Te moldeo y agito y te hago de nuevo. e l v alle : ¿De nuevo? ¿De nuevo? (De la misma manera Belcebú modela varias figuras y las va recostando de los árboles) . l oki : Solo falta el hálito de vida. Si recuerdo bien, primero moldeas lo que creas y después lo pones en pie. Bel Ce Bú: De la gravedad saco la voluntad. y ogarindra : De la sensación les viene el mal. De mi espejo nace su error. ¿Quién fue tan cruel como para hacerlo esclavo de mí, la hechicera, de ti, el bribón y de ti, el maquinador, atrapadores de su pensamiento haga lo que haga, busque lo que busque? De esencia dual, de voluntad y mente, algo que ve, algo sin vista. 304 ¡Vamos! ¡Bailemos! Algo que lo odiaba nos puso sobre él y selló su destino. (Se toman de las manos y bailan). l oki : Pasión, razón, costumbre, reglas, creencias de las iglesias, erudición de las escuelas, tintura en la sangre y fuerza en el alma. Carne muy débil para controlar la voluntad; pobreza, riqueza, orgullo de cuna, sollozo, carcajada, sobre la tierra, los vuelvo a atrapar, caigan en mis redes, oh hijos del hombre. y ogarindra : ¡Mírense en mi espejo! ¿No es lo real? ¿Qué piensan ahora, qué tal se siente? Contemplen el oro como se amontona; he aquí la copa de festivo vino. Brotan los zarcillos, látigos se vuelven, el amor y sus pechos y los labios rojos. El hálito aspiran. Bel Ce Bú: El hálito de la falsedad. De la nada a la muerte vienen, salidos del moho, de las rocas ¡maravilla, parodia, paradoja! Espíritu que remonta, carne que repta, traga el cebo, y tiende la red. Denle hambre, tiéntenlo con la verdad, denle el iris de esperanzas de la Juventud. 305 Mátenlo de hambre, avergüéncenlo, húndanlo, que se lo trague el remolino de la aldea. Quiébrenlo, envejézcanlo, hasta que maldiga el rostro de idiota del universo. Una y otra vez mezclamos la arcilla— lo que polvo era cobra vida hoy. l os tres : Así es la herida de caos que nace en el infierno Pronto, pronto, vuelta y vuelta. Bel Ce Bú: (Agitando su trompeta) . ¡Tienen vida! ¡Márchense! u na de las figuras : ¡Qué raro! ¡Qué nuevo! Yo soy yo, y también otro. o tra figura : Yo era una hoja muerta, pero ahora ¿qué es todo este anhelar?— o tra figura : Bajo tierra yo era una semilla imantada atraída hacia abajo— o tra figura : Y yo era electrones atrapados en granito, me parece. o tra figura : ¡Cuánta soledad! o tra figura : ¡Para ti mis labios. Contigo hallo algo a lo que solo el amor adora! 306 Bel Ce Bú: ¡Fuera de aquí! No, esperen. Pensándolo bien, amigos, juguemos un juego. (Agita su trompeta). Vayan a aquellos aposentos verdes. (Las figuras desaparecen). y ogarindra : ¡Oh, sí, un juego! Eso está muy bien, creo, ¿pero y los espectadores? Debo arrojar ilusión sobre todos. l oki : Y yo debo cambiar el escenario, y enredar la trama. Bel Ce Bú: ¡Bien, sí que lo harás! Los espectadores vendrán de aquellas tumbas. (Hace sonar su trompeta un poco más alto que antes. La escena cambia. Se alza un estrado entre las tumbas. Baja el telón, ocultando las criaturas recién creadas, ilu - minadas a medias por luces espectrales. Belcebú queda de pie delante de la cortina). Bel Ce Bú: (Con un terrible estallido de trompeta) . ¡Juuuuuu! (De inmediato se produce un crepitar como de caparazones de cigarras agitadas por el viento; y cientos de muertos, incluidos los que aparecen en la antología, acuden presurosos al sonar de la trompeta). u na voz : ¡Gabriel! ¡Gabriel! m u Chas vo Ces : ¡El Día del Juicio! 307 Bel Ce Bú: Tranquilos, por favor, al menos hasta que caigan las estrellas y la luna. m u Chas vo Ces : ¡Sálvanos! ¡Sálvanos! (Belcebú extiende sus manos sobre los congregados en un gesto benevolente y res - tablece el orden) . Bel Ce Bú: Damas y caballeros, su atención. Les interpretaré la escena. Me esforzaré para que la fantasía esté al acceso de su comprensión, y puedan analizar parte de lo que se maquina. No estoy en ánimo de engañarlos, aunque soy el embustero y padre de la mentira, los salvaré de la fragilidad de su intelecto, aunque sea la falsedad mi arte y lo que amo. Abajo, en la morada de donde provengo, se expanden al infinito las raíces del pesar humano. Por largo tiempo las he visto succionar la fuerza que reside en la arcilla que nutren los muertos que se pudren. Por aquí un botón, por allá un tallo retorcido, acá una fruta que se pasma amargamente antes de madurar, allá la rastrera que se expande por la senda, alimento para el gusano verde que la convierte en limo. La roja manzana con corazón de corcho brota de una raíz que se enreda en el hueco, no hay diestra agricultura ni labor empeñosa que salve al árbol al que el rayo parte y tuerce. ¿Por qué el mastuerzo casi no florece, pero los insectos que de él se alimentan 308 proliferan y crecen, desde el momento mismo en que asoman las hojas y capullos? ¿Por qué un árbol lozano que pronto madura echa ramas torcidas cubiertas de escamas? ¿Por qué el árbol joven que menos prometía prospera y se mantiene, y los demás se mueren? Veo mucho bajo tierra. Conozco el suelo. Sé dónde la capa es gruesa y dónde está delgada. Veo las piedras que tropiezan la reja del arado, las torcidas raíces que el cura llama pecados. Sé todos los secretos, hasta las entrañas, qué será esa semilla, laurel, pino o roble; no la harán cambiar por mucho que lo intenten. El hombre es lo que él es, es esa la moral del diablo. Es lo que les pasa a las almas de este drama: nacen de cierta semilla en cierta tierra. Mírenlas, el ciclorama del diablo las proyecta, con la luz que cada cual merece. Ahora, a mi tarea: les daré una exhibición de cómo hay que mezclar los ingredientes del espíritu. (Agita su varita). ¡Ven, crisol, a cumplir con tu trabajo mágico, ven, fuego creador, ponte a su lado! Haré un alma, o mostraré cómo hacer una. (Agita de nuevo su varita. Aparecen llamas multicolores). ¡Esta es la mujer que ya verán! (Aparece una llama roja). Esta llama rojiza atemoriza a todos: atormentó a un soldado hasta roer su vida. Le parió una hija mientras tanto, 309 y a los treinta y nueve se murió de escrófula. Era una criatura dulce y atractiva, de obsesión por el sexo jamás vista. (Aparece una llama púrpura). ¡Vean! Esta significa sangre azul de la era en que Francia era gloriosa. (Aparece una llama azul). Y esta la voluntad que no se doblega en las cadenas que su padre enfrentó hasta que encaneció su pelo. El pesar y el fracaso lo volvieron frío, nunca amó a la niña cuyo infortunio muestro, por eso tanta pasión en ella por lo que el oro da en este mundo de arrogancia, lo único que él da. Al corazón humano que con hambre nace la riqueza ostentosa lo enamora, así de fácil es. Y la aspiración incumplida cubre la tierra como una selva de amargura y pena. ¡De celta fuego, de fuego galo, nuestra heroína! Valiente, altiva, apasionada y cruel. Astuta, vengativa y falsa, sin temor a pecar. Cabeza a menudo sangrienta, pero nunca doblada. Y si se encuentra un hombre, nuestro héroe, pongamos, a quien su química la una, pero también la enfrente, como cierta Borgia ante algún Nerón, ¡les parecerá triquiñuela de Satán! Pero así ha de ser. El gran jardín del mundo no es mío del todo. Yo solo siembro la cizaña. El trigo debe conservarse inmune, o el Guardián no volverá a meterse en las cosas del mundo. ¡Pero vayamos a nuestro héroe! Al apenas nacer 310 yo ya sabía lo que rechazaba y lo que lo atraía. La matemática del espíritu, sea fruto o espina, la pronostico yo antes de que ocurra. (Aparece una llama amarilla). Esta es la traición de un señor en un huerto contra una doncella a quien desfloró. (Aparecen llamas temblorosas). Y este es su recuerdo confuso y torturado, que marcó con su odio a la niña, pues ella odiaba. La señora de nuestra heroína era prima suya, pero ni el señor ni ella lo supieron nunca. La doncella tuvo más tarde amantes por docenas, pero luego se casó con todo un caballero. Y así nuestro héroe tuvo doble esencia: una mitad mala, una mitad buena. El diablo tiene que agotar su verbo para que se entienda tal rompecabezas. Cuando se encontraron heroína y héroe prendados quedaron, y a la repulsión la cubrió la Pasión, con sus redes que te enredarían hasta sofocarte. La ponzoña corría por la sangre del soldado, el espectro del huerto, el parentesco ignorado, y los amantes maternos del héroe rondaban, sombras sonrientes viendo jugar al Destino. La pareja se unió en matrimonio, esa fue la jugada. Y entonces la tragedia nació y se afincó. Era un marido amoroso. Pero al alejarse, las serpientes del huerto penetran reptando. Nuestra heroína no es por naturaleza demasiado fiel, 311 toma la fruta del conocimiento, deja el árbol de la vida. Se imagina en la Francia cortesana y corrupta, pronto olvida su deber conyugal. Ustedes saben el resto, en todo lo que atañe. Fue descubierta y la mató el esposo. Perdió la razón, por el amor que ella mancilló. Creyó que era de él— qué mal la conocía. (Agita la varita, y muestra a un hombre encerrado en una celda). Ahora está sentado esperando la horca— no puede contar su historia —quedó mudo. El amor, dicen sus poetas, es una gracia que santifica, yo lo llamo sufrimiento y martirio. El juez señala con el dedo y acusa: “Usted la mató”. Sí que lo hizo, pero hay una explicación: no pudo soportarlo. Yo, el hacedor de dramas, les muestro las verdades y su relación. (Agita su varita). Ahora, a comenzar. El telón se levanta, ellos toman el té sobre un césped florido. Bonito, ¿no es así? Cuánta dulzura en la unión de sus almas— El autor titula a su pieza Laoconte . u na voz : Es nada más un sueño terrenal. o tra voz : De eso estamos hechos. El celaje de un cometa sobre el curso de la tierra. o tra voz : Un sueño removido dos veces, una espectral confusión de la ilusión espantosa de la tierra. 312 u na voz lejana : Esos son los fantasmas de las costas desoladas. ¿Se unirán a ellos? Nada más persíganlos. Somos lo que llevamos dentro y nada más. En un lugar sin viento, lejos de lo húmedo, seamos como antorchas. Como llamas se elevan, lo único que es cierto, la Vida y el Fuego. (Belcebú, Loki y Yogarindra se desvanecen. La fantasmagoría se extingue. Donde parecía haber una asamblea de muertos, aparecen ahora tan solo montones de ho - jas. Hay una luz parecida al amanecer. Voces de la Primavera). Primera voz : La primavera ha llegado, ya se fue el invierno, despierta de su sueño y danza alegremente. Regresa el sol, se acaban los temores, la tierra ofrece el rostro ardiente, estrechada en sus brazos. El sol es un águila volando en protección de su polluelo, la tierra es su retoño y en ella ha depositado la semilla de la llama de la vida, el botón del deseo, hasta que el fuego se convierta en vida y la vida en fuego. 313 s egunda voz : Yo me evado y desaparezco, yo engaño tu vista, yo me hundo y yo asciendo, yo cambio y yo vuelo. Tú me tienes, tú me pierdes, quien bien me ha tenido, me halle y me use, estoy en la celda. t er Cera voz : ¿Ahí en una celda? Si tuviese varita con qué adivinarte... s egunda voz : No, mi niño, soy Dios. Cuarta voz : Cuando las andantes aguas salgan de sus camas de nieve, bajo la colina en los cuartos de piedra donde duermen cuando el hielo reina, las brisas de Abril se escurren entre los bosques diciendo “¡A cumplir! Despierten raíces bajo el manto de tierra: Primavera ha vuelto”. Y el sol se alboroza, la luna está en paz, y las voces convocan las sombras de plata a sacar a las flores de sus sueños. Y el anhelo, el anhelo llena mi alma de tristeza, mi corazón que se regocija en el vislumbre fugaz de un rostro radiante, y su cabellera que fulgura. Me levanto y camino y sigo a solas por horas el curso ondeante del río, a la caza de una luz evanescente, y una paz muy grande para la alegría. ¿A dónde me conducen, salvaje, ahora y para siempre? Sobre la colina, sobre la colina, y luego allá abajo a los prados del sueño. 314 e l s ol : Sobre las simas insondables del espacio a cientos de millones de millas vuela veloz mi alma, trueno silencioso, tañido de un arpa de fuego. Ante mis ojos orbitan los planetas y desfila el universo, yo apenas partícula de polvo suspendida en un vasto deseo. ¿Qué universo me obedece, obligado yo mismo a obedecer a una fuerza que me sostiene y me lanza rotando por un camino que no tiene final? Y ahí están mis hijos que me llaman grande, el dador del día y de la vida, a mí que imploro la vida y ni siquiera sé hacia dónde voy. Hay millones y millones de soles sobre mí, como si el telón de la noche hubiese caído sobre la llama de la creación, y luz se filtrase entre la tela, cada sol con sus mundos, y más mundos, y más mundos implorando la luz, cada uno arrastrado en un curso nadie sabe a dónde, como la vela atrae a la polilla. l a v ía l áCtea : Órbitas sin fin. Interminable vida. Fuerza infinita. u na voz : Sé entonces tú el señor, no la paz, sino la espada. No lo que desea el corazón— Lo que se aspira siempre. Adorar tu poder, conquistar tu hora, porfiar sin reposo, así has de vivir. l as Profundidades infinitas : Infinita Ley, infinita Vida. Índice Antología de Spoon River: la rebelión de los muertos 9 ¿Cómo fue que un libro de poesía llegó a convertirse en un éxito de ventas? 10 El texto 14 Pero, ¿qué es y cómo es Spoon River? 19 La estructura 21 El lenguaje y la forma 23 El cementerio 24 Antología de Spoon River 27 La colina 29 Hodd Putt 31 Ollie McGee 32 Fletcher McGee 33 Robert Fulton Tanner 34 Cassius Hueffer 35 Serepta Mason 36 Amanda Barker 37 Constance Hately 38 Chase Henry 39 Harry Carey Goodhue 40 El juez Somers 41 Kinsey Keene 42 Benjamin Pantier 43 La señora de Benjamin Pantier 44 Reuben Pantier 45 Emily Sparks 46 Trainor, el farmaceuta 47 Daisy Fraser 48 Benjamin Fraser 49 Minerva Jones 50 “Indignación” Jones 51 El doctor Meyers 52 La señora Meyers 53 “Butch” Weldy 54 Knowlt Hoheimer 55 Lydia Puckett 56 Frank Drummer 57 Hare Drummer 58 Conrad Siever 59 El doctor Hill 60 Andy, el guardia nocturno 61 Sara Brown 62 Percy Bysshe Shelley 63 Flossie Cabanis 64 Julia Miller 65 Johnnie Sayre 66 Charlie French 67 Zenas Witt 68 El poeta Teodoro 69 El alguacil del pueblo 70 Jack McGuire 71 Dorcas Gustine 72 Nicholas Bindle 73 Jacob Goodpasture 74 Harold Arnett 75 Margaret Fuller Slack 76 George Trimble 77 El doctor Siegfried Iseman 78 “El As” Shaw 79 Lois Spears 80 El juez Arnett 81 Willard Fluke 82 Aner Clute 83 Lucius Atherton 84 Homer Clapp 85 El diácono Taylor 86 Sam Hookey 87 Cooney Potter 88 El violinista Jones 89 Nellie Clark 90 Louise Smith 91 Herbert Marshall 92 George Gray 93 El honorable Henry Bennett 94 Griffy, el tonelero 95 Sexsmith, el dentista 96 A. D. Blood 97 Robert Southey Burke 98 Dora Williams 99 La señora Williams 100 William y Emily 101 El juez del distrito 102 Jack, el ciego 103 John Horace Burleson 104 Nancy Knapp 105 Barry Holden 106 El procurador del Estado, Fallas 107 Wendell P. Bloyd 108 Francis Turner 109 Franklin Jones 110 John M. Church 111 Sonia la Rusa 112 Isa Nutter 113 Barney Hainsfeather 114 Petit, el poeta 115 Pauline Barrett 116 La esposa de Charles Bliss 117 La señora de George Reece 118 El reverendo Lemuel Wiley 119 Thomas Ross, hijo 120 El reverendo Abner Peet 121 Jefferson Howard 122 El juez Selah Lively 123 Albert Schirding 124 Jonas Keene 125 Eugenia Todd 126 Yee Bow 127 Washington McNeely 128 Paul McNeely 130 Mary McNeely 131 Daniel M’Cumber 132 Georgine Sand Miner 133 Thomas Rhodes 134 Ida Chicken 135 Penniwit, el artista 136 Jim Brown 137 Robert Davidson 138 Elsa Wertman 139 Hamilton Greene 140 Ernest Hyde 141 Roger Heston 142 Amos Sibley 143 La señora Sibley 144 Adam Weirauch 145 Ezra Bartlett 146 Amelia Garrick 147 John Hancock Otis 148 Anthony Findlay 149 John Cabanis 150 El desconocido 151 Alexander Throckmorton 152 Jonathan Swift Somers 153 La viuda McFarlane 154 Carl Hamblin 155 Whedon, editor 156 Eugene Carman 157 Clarence Fawcett 158 W. Lloyd Garrison Standard 159 El profesor Newcomer 160 Ralph Rhodes 161 Mickey M’Grew 162 Rosie Roberts 163 Oscar Hummel 164 Roscoe Purkapile 165 La señora Purkapile 166 Josiah Tompkins 167 La señora Kessler 168 Harmon Whitney 169 Bert Kessler 170 Lambert Hutchins 171 Lillian Stewart 172 Hortense Robbins 173 Batterton Dobyns 174 Jacob Godbey 175 Walter Simmons 176 Tom Beatty 177 Roy Butler 178 Searcy Foote 179 Edmund Pollard 180 Thomas Trevelyan 181 Percival Sharp 182 Hiram Scates 184 Peleg Poague 185 Jeduthan Hawley 186 Abel Melveny 187 Oaks Tutt 188 Elliott Hawkins 189 Voltaire Johnson 190 English Thornton 191 Enoch Dunlap 192 Ida Frickey 193 Seth Compton 194 Felix Schmidt 195 Schroeder, el pescador 196 Richard Bone 197 Silas, el loco 198 Dillard Sissman 199 Jonathan Houghton 200 E. C. Culbertson 201 Shack Dye 202 Hildrup Tubbs 203 Henry Tripp 204 Granville Calhoun 205 Henry C. Calhoun 206 Alfred Moir 207 Perry Zoll 208 Dippold, el optometrista 209 Magrady Graham 211 Archibald Higbie 212 Tom Merritt 213 La señora Merritt 214 Elmer Karr 215 Elizabeth Childers 216 Edith Conant 217 Charles Webster 218 El padre Malloy 219 Ami Green 220 Calvin Campbell 221 Henry Layton 222 Harlan Sewall 223 Ippolit Konovaloff 224 Henry Phipps 225 Harry Wilmans 227 John Wasson 228 Muchos soldados 229 Godwin James 230 Lyman King 231 Caroline Branson 232 Anne Rutledge 234 Hamlet Micure 235 Mabel Osborne 236 William H. Herndon 237 Rebecca Wasson 238 Rutherford McDowell 240 Hannah Armstrong 242 Lucinda Matlock 243 Davis Matlock 244 Herman Altman 245 Jennie M’Grew 246 Columbus Cheney 247 Wallace Ferguson 248 Marie Bateson 249 Tennessee Claflin Shope 250 Plymouth Rock Joe 251 Imanuel Ehrenhardt 253 Samuel Gardner 254 Dow Kritt 255 William Jones 256 William Goode 257 J. Milton Miles 258 Faith Matheny 259 Scholfield Huxley 260 Willie Metcalf 261 Willie Pennington 262 El ateo del pueblo 263 John Ballard 264 Julian Scott 265 Alfonso Churchill 266 Zilpha Marsh 267 James Garber 268 Lydia Humphrey 269 Le Roy Goldman 270 Gustav Richter 271 Arlo Will 272 El capitán Orlando Killion 273 Jeremy Carlisle 274 Joseph Dixon 275 Judson Stoddard 276 Russell Kincaid 277 Aaron Hatfield 278 Isaiah Beethoven 279 Elijah Browning 281 Webster Ford 283 La Spooniada 285 Epílogo 297 Edición digital marzo de 2016 Caracas - Venezuela. 1 Palabra O pretexto del cuerpo Manuel Gerardi 2 No hables. Descifra despacio cada letra como quien oye un gallo a medianoche y siente que su canto, en vez de gritos es el pregón de un obituario. Eugenio Montejo, Guarda silencio ante el poema. –estos muertos son míos (señalando las palabras) –estos muertos son míos Arturo Carrera, Escrito con un Nictógrafo 3 ¿Dónde hallar, y a qué precio, rimas que estallen y de golpe maten? Quizá sólo sean cinco las rimas increíbles y sin estrenar, perdidas más allá de Venezuela. Vladímir Mayakovski, Conversación con el inspector fiscal sobre poesía. 4 I Anochece una palabra en la sangre misma del sueño y se fractura cada noche en la misma noche cada sueño en el mismo sueño hiriendo con su filo la piel de los silencios violenta licuadora del aquí de la memoria florece una palabra en la sombra misma del reflejo y cada día es como la misma trampa tantas veces día, día, día irredimible con el casi-ya en un puño pensando sólo en volver a su arboleda secreta pronunciar la hondura el temblor y la emboscada y volver y soñar una palabra: febril animal azul hemisferiocanto y paraninfo cuerpo tiniebla cometa escarabajo mutación y feudo 5 me entregué a contemplar como blanco del ojo: elemento soledad colofón beso caída péndulo praxis tempestad una palabra impensable que suena a: témpano y madreselva amalgama contrabajo absoluto abismo crema torvo latido firme luna extraordinaria al despertar: cosmonauta soberana quimera rayosol eeje ajáa túu síi yaa laa ehh ay (!) 6 tránsito perspicaz l u m i n o s aa [palabra] ¿cuál fue la palabra hermosa que anoche soñé? como una premonición mi gran descubrimiento la primavera y la miel y una cosa horrenda también escalofriante como aquel que dice mira, mira, mira señalando los pelitos del brazo al erizarse la piel de gallina un atisbo nada más una palabra escurridiza tardía lechuza fruta madura muy arriba espumosa cresta de las horas palabra del sueño del libre juego atómico vislumbre bajo la ciénaga de los párpados y dentro de las uñas y en el tuétano una palabra para desdibujarlo todo para escribir lo bello y lo bueno para definir al origami de mil lados y mil vértices por ejemplo el circuito perfecto en el diente de una ballena la nostalgia el error la culpa toda desmesura cabría en esa palabra y todas las flores y todas las demás palabras 7 es por eso que egoístamente quise recordarla y en el sueño me alistaba ya para escribir con ella lo mejor que nunca había escrito o escribiría jamás como escribir la madrugada llena del trinar de las aves escribir veneno y la risa y el amor escribir ternura escribir perdón escribir la mentira más terrible de todas ¿cuál sería? que al despertar no ha sido posible volver a soñar y por un momento me quedé dormido pero no hubo sueño ni bella palabra indescifrable ni sonido alguno me quedé en silencio esperando esperando el golpe seco sobre la puerta del mundo esperando un sonido gutural gruñido de dios perro telúrico esperando al menos un tajo mortal de filoso ideograma y despertar o morir y que entonces dijeran que fui un buen muchacho que me gustaba leer y nunca le hice mal a nadie porque no fui capaz no porque no quisiera sino porque no pude y que probablemente tampoco lo quise de verdad aunque haya mentido toda la vida y querido mentir todavía más para siempre a través de una palabra 8 espiral espiral-mordedura mordedura-ventisca ventisca-luz luz-espiral de lo que no se puede hablar es mejor callar y de lo que no se puede callar es mejor callar de todos modos de aquello [ ] que no se puede [ ] es mejor callar con la boca y con los ojos con las manos y el recuerdo callar con los pasos que uno da hacia ninguna parte con la postura al sentarnos o al apoyar el cuerpo contra una pared cualquiera y callar sobre todo callando no sea que malgaste uno ese silencio no sea que se atore la voz en un barranco y se haga grito ruido blanco estalactita y sin embargo desde aquel momento sólo quise recrear esa palabra como el imprudente o el tonto que ignora que no sabe aquello que no sabe 9 ¿Y cuál sería esa palabra claraboya? parlamento palmera boreal fortuna talismán victoria tridente luciérnaga ¿Dios? ¿Tornasol? ¿Camaleón? ¿Cataclismo? acostado agudizas el oído esperas que el silbido suene lejos para saberle cerca acostado alargando la mano para coger el fruto como abrirse paso entre una muchedumbre henchida de deseo la que habita nuestras ciudades más allá del sueño henchido de deseo el silencio mismo cargado de deseo no hay palabra sólo ruido blanco tinnitus manecilla del reloj si este fuese mi lecho de muerte en el bolsillo un poema arrugado caballo negro barriendo al galope todos los caminos dije poema no es verdad silabario no es verdad sombra en el llano de la palabra si este fuese mi lecho de muerte escribir la mentira más terrible de todas callar con las manos y el recuerdo ser el conejo alumbrado que aguanta quietecito quietecito 10 el pretérito imperfecto demasiado sentimental el ruido blanco demasiado sentimental soñar y morir de lo que no se puede hablar es mejor callar y si canta el gallo de la medianoche la palabra hermosa guardar silencio despertar y morir. 11 II Se cierra el poema ¿y dónde está mi fuerza? ¿de dónde viene este cuerpo enfermo de sentido? regresa a su vacante entre la roca y el río donde no es posible estar de pie ni acostarse y uno hace lo que puede o se lamenta entre la desnudez y el olvido como un sobresalto este cuerpo antepenúltimo gamín del tiempo que se aferra al musgo y crece hacia dentro y se desespera porque puede desesperarse y poco más [entre la roca y el río como una pausa ¿y qué es lo que sigue? ¿cuál es la desembocadura del murmullo? ¿qué otra cosa puede ser un cuerpo sino el pretexto del contorsionista y qué la palabra sino un pretexto del cuerpo? 12 Uno hace lo que puede y se acostumbra como acostumbra la mirada a disolver las cosas desdoblar y luego divorciar las cosas de sí mismas un cuerpo filtración o filtración del cuerpo hemorragia de forma y fondo liquidez de las siluetas espesor del corazón si das un golpe a la piedra con tu mano desnuda será siempre tu mano la que sangre: esto es ley o capricho infalible pues rige todos los descensos 1. El desgaste de la hibris vertebral 2. El agotamiento de todas las funciones fílmicas e histriónicas del ser 3. La extinción de una terca fauna en los paisajes de la memoria todo se cierra en el poema en su insolente geometría y sus ritos de vidrio molido luz zodiacal para volver cansado al meridiano con este cuerpo enfermo de sentido 13 cuerpo arrodillado cuerpo eclipse cuerpo antepenúltimo entre la desnudez entre la roca gamín el olvido y el río del tiempo cualquier día devenido hipérbole cuerpo que se aferra al musgo y crece hacia dentro y se desespera porque puede desesperarse y poco más como raspones naranja en el cielo atardecido como una pausa ¿y qué es lo que sigue? 14 III Borrar hacer de cuentas que nada pensarlo mejor hacerlo mejor alguna otra vez [quizás no esta noche correr esconderse al otro lado del otro lado después del horizonte de sucesos esconderse en un cementerio de elefantes digital vaciar la cantimplora en medio del desierto atrapar el viento en una red eliminar borrar vaciar es demasiado tarde para jugar es demasiado pronto para morir eliminar el archivo vaciar la papelera pensar que todavía somos jóvenes y todo está perdonado ¿acaso puede más la idea que la mano? el deseo de ser subvierte la misma fantasía el mayor acto de fe poética aprender a suspender la incredulidad entregarse a la incólume embriaguez del silencio la vida tan buena como orinar al vacío nuestra galaxia un chorro de urea cósmica 15 y anís estrellado todo forma parte de un gran malentendido sólo se puede fingir normalidad y lo que vendría a ser como una pregunta ¿sabes dónde estás parado? —CARAJITO, ¿sabes dónde estás parado? —No señor, no sé. no sé dónde estoy parado vine en tren y no miré por la ventana cuántas millas a ciegas como huyendo escóndete de lo que más quieras carajito el norte una aguja detrás de la cabeza esperar esperar esperar vaciar una piscina olímpica en medio del desierto borrar del mapa todas las islas cabos y penínsulas bajar la santamaría hacer masitas de aburrimiento anillos de hormigón alrededor del imaginario colectivo jugar una vez más los mismos niveles quedarse parado con la boca abierta esperando que llueva una lluvia conocida como cazando pegasos o murciélagos con cabeza de león moscas serán moscas sobre el chorro de urea cósmica sobre todas las promesas lo incólume el silencio limpiecito como un sol no me atrevo 16 como un embrión [la nueva página aquello que no supimos leer hacer de cuentas que nada borrar eliminar vaciar repetir. 17 VACIAR BORRAR ELIMINAR BORRAR ELIMINAR VACIAR ELIMINAR VACIAR BORRAR VACIAR REPETIR ELIMINAR BORRAR ELIMINAR VACIAR ELIMINAR VACIAR BORRAR VACIAR BORRAR ELIMINAR Ex nihilo nihil fit una blanca blanquísima cosa ¿el qué? en sus bóvedas todo el capital simbólico para meter la mano deslizarla una sombra y cómo muerde 18 La palabra del niño, la palabra de la madre, la palabra del herrero, la palabra de la jueza, la palabra del escriba, la palabra del mendigo, la palabra del campeón, la palabra de la reina, la palabra del viudo, la palabra del mártir, la palabra del señor, la primera palabra, la palabra de honor, la palabra sangrienta, la palabra prohibida, la palabra necia, la misma palabra, la palabra del duelo, la palabra del amor, la palabra titubeante, la palabra subalterna, la palabra clave, la palabra de los mares, la palabra de la escuela, de la casa, del jardín, del puente, de las puertas abiertas, de los techos altos y bajos, de la tasca, del estadio, de la cárcel, de la morgue, del burdel, del centro y de la periferia, de libres y esclavos, de vivos y muertos, de la piedra, del papiro, de la cera y el cartón, del centauro, de la bruja, de los santos, de la hora perdida y de la noche, de la prisa, de los nervios, del presente y del futuro, la palabra de la insólita sintaxis, la palabra pixelada, la palabra que destella en un letrero de neón, la palabra en pentámetro yámbico, en trova y jingle de refresco, la palabra aérea y la circunscrita, la palabra del caribe y de la Patagonia, la palabra del valle y de la selva, la palabra perdida, la palabra en susurros, la palabra cortopunzante, la palabra engañosa, la palabra desgastada, la palabra mezquina, la palabra pronunciada como tubo o como viga de acero, la palabra hablada, malhablada, balbuceada, rumiada, callada, vendida, comprada, la palabra enemistada con las demás palabras, la palabra registrada, la palabra pronunciada igual que otra, la palabra que se escribe igual y se pronuncia diferente, la palabra interrumpida, la palabra compuesta, la palabra que secretamente he guardado y que no me pertenece. Todas ellas en el mismo saco. En el mismo canto oculto. En-ca-le-ta-do. Se les ha advertido. 19 IV Rabia el rostro lleno de garganta y sed DESPLOME el sueño y caiga feroz [como hierro ardiente en este médano que reviente en duelo sus esquirlas negras por todo el viejo mundo semillas en lengua rota nutriendo cada grieta con su agua turbia para brotar al fin aquel veneno en rezo ceniza a las cenizas polvo al polvo mas en este instante verdadero si es que puede decirse lo que yo daría por un puñado de sal por una pizca de olvido y maravilla ¿cómo debe hablarse en el derrumbe? ¿con qué abandono conjurar eternidades? en las minas en el mar en la muerte de potro amado las gentes y sus gentes 20 los muros la carne el sueño brutal arquitectura de la asfixia esconde de la voz su amor en ciernes y del vidrio su reflejo. 21 V Voluntad salteadora de caminos caimanera vil hasta abrirse la escotilla del enigma estoy abajo «corazón» más hondo que el gris perlado de los huesos unido apenas por un pie y el otro pie en el paso sólo pido que me rimen las visiones más allá de Venezuela en todo caso la quietud y el vicio de bajar aviones con la lengua sé que canción rima con trenza y liebre que artificio rima con suspenso y que el suspenso son las algas con sus viejos espejismos he dicho que lo sé y no tengo nada por eso aguardo al costado del camino empujado hacia las muchas muelas por su lengua de ángel con mi amor tan impaciente y estas manos que han robado hasta la última aspereza cuento con los dedos cada cielo 22 despejado de furia maraña de serrín de pedazos de nube hecha costumbre desde abajo queriendo llenar mis palmas de su pleno fuego cascarón para llorar asfalto hirviente cuando mire impaciente en el otoño cuando mire una vez más y no distinga a una espada de su vaina alucinar entonces poseído por mis santos guerreros de plata como Áyax el Grande con la espada ensangrentada en mi pecho de cordero como Allen Ginsberg aullando que una vaina es una cosa es una vaina en el camino como ver las mentes más brillantes y toda esa vaina en el camino tan siquiera garabato asaltante en condición de pasajero y deme deso a' ve' a qué sabe «corazón» robar la otrora infancia bañarse en tibia amnesia vespertina saber agazaparse acometer y terminar en una zanja herido la primera vez que encienda el trueno 23 y la lluvia la lluvia sean los días. 24 VI Le pido que devuelva el verso caballero no se haga más el loco sálgase de la casa que ando ARREBATAO visceral como linaje de sordera joven soldado amanecido abre cancha Gilgamesh no creo en nadie abre cancha transparencia lo que debo es más de lo que he tenido 25 llevo 140 versos por el hígado calibre 12 con espaciado 1.5 años luz justificado por ambas caras del mercurio bañado de resignación de sentimiento hidráulico contranatura de indómito circulo morado tan vulgar como hablar de la noche tan vulgar como cháchara de guerra 26 devuelva el verso, caballero ¿pero a quién? 27 dele mecha a la trituradora de lo que yo de lo que pensaba que creía que imaginaba de la exósfera de los sentidos de la reacción en cadena de la güebonada del estudio prosódico de los lamentos y de la conmiseración pobrecito el animalito mucho te quiero pero de pan poquito 28 ontología de la gafedad basura cósmica cansarse orbitar desentender(se) Alebrestado: es la última bala y no eres malandro. 29 VII Oír decir oscuramente como quien dice la nada por lo más sagrado de todo lo sagrado dentro y fuera de noche y de día como yendo de la vida al pensamiento y todavía más al regresar. 30 VIII Este mi lugar urgente de par en par devorado su picor de otra violencia rompeolas el rabillo de estos ojos de buey por los que asomo la vista blandainmóvil que sopesa como un cisma en el azul eléctrico de nuestros días en esta altura de torre encorvada y su odiosa sombra a esta distancia en que cualquiera es okupa de la fantasía una extensa periferia sin centro bajo capas y capas de piel arrancadas a la bestia sin ver una sola constelación de aves o estrellas de brillante abolengo y sin embargo todas esas cosas me son indiferentes el espíritu del pastoral un fondo de pantalla animado en tu nuevo Xiaomi la cordillera de los Andes un spot publicitario para el último Ford Ranger la máxima aventura posible en asientos de cuero sintético a priori soy el fear of missing out una centella que atraviesa 31 desde el rojo del calcáneo hasta el otro extremo castigado del alma cuerpo un corte en plano sagital para pensar con una voz el pensamiento más bicéfalo soy la yegua que atraviesa el camino de los diosa como cruzar la calle sin mirar a quién cortafuegueando como quien dice antes que el incendio nos queme las idea de quemarnos como cruzar la calle cosiendo a saltitos la extensión del paralelo 38 pasear por el frente occidental deshojando margaritas o surcar por medio de Caribdis y Escila llevando la correspondencia entre el lenguaje y el mundo a tientas como hormiga en su temblor envuelto en el secreto pero todo envoltorio tamborileo ansioso la mirada desencanto apurando el final de un verso y beber o ajusticiar o figurar entonces falso positivo en la contienda de los siglos amarrado a la maroma del guerrero carnada de una vida para vivir sonámbulo en balcones 32 donde incluso el sueño se descuelga. 33 VIII (otra vez) Cautivo en ámbar, beso las dulces manos del científico. Javier Bê La ciudad parpadea y se encoge ha venido a morir en la miel de mi pantalla con sus ángulos de pixel todos borroneados como viejo Tamagotchi fundiéndose en un sueño de hambruna eléctrica como si soñase bestia eléctrica los sueños de una chispa y de su sombra la sombra de un fantasma preservada en ámbar meticulosamente atrapada en ámbar como larva de los cielos una larva creída extinta por todas las personas vivas y muertas creída extinta incluso por los dioses y por el polvo pero atrapada al fin con absoluta precisión atrapada en un guarismo como el 20 o el 14 34 el 9995 el 3, el 7, el 1.000.000.000 el 2001, el 2014, el 2022 a las 7 de la tarde o las 7 menos cuarto el 1 (uno), 2 (dos), 3 (tres), 4 (cuatro), 5 (cinco), 6 (seis), 7 (si e te), 8 (o c h o) 9 (nueve), 10 [sic], 11 (once), 12 (do c e), 13 (tr e c e), 14 (cato r) ce, 15 (q), 16 (s), 17 ( ), 18 ( , 19 ((((( 20! como el 20 más ámbar y más eléctrico como 150 pulsaciones por minuto que para mí son demasiadas y para esta ciudad colibrí es como el último de los estertores pero mañana sacará sus cuentas y mañana sacará sus cuentas y así irá sacando cuentas sin prisa alguna pues igual de lejos que de cerca se encuentra siempre del cero. 35 8 (dos serpientes se entrelazan y muerden su cola la una a la otra; un uróboro en modo cooperativo) 5° 51′ 27′′N 73°57′56′′ O he aquí las coordenadas de La Belleza [Municipio de la República de Colombia] según su artículo de Wikipedia en cambio la belleza como experiencia humana o como cualidad de lo bello parece carecer de coordenadas o de parada de bus designada por lo visto si hubiese un bus de la belleza te embestiría a 300km por hora como un monoplaza de F1 por cruzar agüeboneado o por estar parado donde no debías si fuese como un águila gigante te raptaría con sus enormes garras cual marmota recién levantada todavía en interiores y el café sobre la mesa o te elevaría a más de 10.000 pies como ardilla desprevenida que iba tarde a su juicio con Hacienda y se sentía triste seguramente por perder el bus de la belleza si hubiese un bus de la belleza podrías quedarte esperando 36 y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando y esperando como un reloj de arena en el traspatio de los dioses ¿Qué hora es? 37 Salir a caminar: lo mismo entre la más pedestre de las sensibilidades 38 [repetir] 39 Our language is an ancient city, maze of interlocking streets and squares. To know it, we must walk it, crawl through sewers, feel our way by night along the walls. Most answers squat before us, humble questions (...). Jan Zwicky, Wittgenstein Elegies ahora sé que nada se perdió y aprendí que el verso más claro está garabateado sobre la pared de los baños y voy recitándolo con voz sonora en medio de la calle Enrique Verástegui, Primer encuentro con Lezama 40 522 Diez minutos hasta la calle Atocha por un pasillo hecho de manojos de malamadre pelambre de la noche cruzando está la puerta giratoria umbral rebobinante del vals celeste sol y luna sol y luna tres años hasta la calle Atocha. 41 1192 Interpela su Santa Fe humarada y aguardiente la calle lleva nombre de asesino se extiende más allá del bien y el mal es cómplice y también un giro mal dado una palabra inesperada un carajo que te ofrece su amistad tosca y sofocada cual trinchera cual guamazo pa' arrancar los engranajes de la todopoderosa moledora de carne a las 4:00 de la madrugada o aquel otro que te ofrece dos coñazos por hacerle un feo a su par de medias a buen precio [un coñazo por cada media, para ser justos a las 4:00 de la madrugada mientras esperas ese bus maldito un esguince en lo más fundamental del aparato civil y suenan como piezas sueltas cuando te meces de derecha a izquierda y se te van cayendo aspiraciones trasnochadas y ese augurio innombrable o vuelco indecible 42 o calma pendular que no lleva a otros lugares sino que simplemente pasa el rato contigo y se te olvida y lo que parece que llega no llega porque desde siempre se está acabando el mundo pero no se acaba de una vez y en cambio la ciudad es bella y susurra palabras de amor a las almas más puras recoge a todo marginal como tú o como yo ciudad recogelocos con sus brazos abiertos en cruz nos da un besito en la frente y un abrazo y a mí me dan ganas como de llorar cual niño que piensa haber hecho mal y le rompe la ternura la ciudad es bella pero cada día vuelves como a un sueño a medias los rostros y las manos un raro collage de inteligencia artificial febril y embarrado a medias suena un bandoneón y sintes bien puyúos muelen y rascan a pocos centímetros de tu cara legañosa así en todas las esquinas parado todo gafo siempre a metros del destino como un mexican standoff la sospecha y la cajita de 20 mentolados y quizás un Riko Malt a las 4:00 de la madrugada sinécdoque veneca a las orillas de la Plata 43 más acá del bien que del mal algo sale a toda mecha como un espanto una visión divina de criatura de repente antropomórfica de repente angelical como una bofetada y frío la gente sube y baja Piazzolla detrás de un gato detrás de un árbol no quisiera más expectativas quiero que salga el sol para quitarme de en medio quitarme como a quien lo quitan con aires de falso emperador ser el parpadeo de un caracol entiéndase el espacio de tiempo que transcurre mientras abre de nuevo sus ojitos vesiculares y se desvanece entero lo real ser como un espasmo en la jarra mugrienta que chilla al hervir la leche en algún cafetín del metaverso y si debo hacer de mí mismo cada vez quisiera interpretarme al menos con la dignidad de Nicolas Cage seguir pagándola pero activo en la pista entonces llegue la máquina móvil transformada en órgano humano el frío del metal y dentro un corazón acompasado al ritmo de una percusión ancestral 44 grite el colector: próxima parada vientre de culebra mantenga las manos dentro del vehículo en todo momento y al bajarme sea nuevamente de noche en la avenida Pueyrredón. 45 780 Hubo que vaciar nuestras bondades y limpiar de querencias los objetos más extraños dos bombonas de butano decorativas un bol repleto de mecheros afanados persianas que sólo bajan cual áncora oxidada en las mesetas del tiempo los cadáveres de mis amigos guardados en cada recoveco bombillas, pomos, grifos, cerraduras una bañera para ahogarse y volver hecho canción una cama acrópolis de arañas y de osos polares esa lámpara de techo rota tras el swing de una katana [otra araña coja rendijas, baldosas, bisagras, gavetas, pestillos qué falta hacía derramarse charco fronterizo ni la cosa delimita al sujeto ni el sujeto a la cosa sino el diálogo y mira que hemos hablado paja aquí sentados este suelo ha dado todo de sí se sostiene únicamente en su propio peso las plantas de plástico en función clorofórmica convierten el pegoste y las escamas y el alcohol en alimento para las bacterias 46 bacterias color arcoíris latón las bacterias los morfemas los caballos del hipódromo del microcosmos que han crecido de más y abarrotan ahora los cuartos cuartos fosas comunes con los cadáveres de todos mis amigos no cabemos más el sofá cacri para jugar Majora’s Mask o fundirse en un bareto matemático los maullidos de la gata y todas sus enemigas el amarillo del techo el rosa Blade Runner del cielo madrileño qué falta hacía salir con la cara entre las manos como si fuese el primer umbral el primer sueño de cobijo en la niñez no es la casa de Escher ni la casa de Cristiano Ronaldo un piso cualquiera con puertas y sillas y mesas radiadores, enchufes, rodapiés macundales, corotos, peroles trataré de no volver por error de no cruzar las calles por automatismo acabar al pie de la escalera y frente a la puerta junto a las rejas, buzones, timbres y notas escritas a mano «no abra a los desconocidos por su seguridad» no se abra ni a usted mismo si no se reconoce si no recuerda el santo y seña Apolo 13 la luna queda demasiado lejos 47 hubo que darse vuelta y fregar toda intrusión contener el impulso de firmar con nuestros nombres verdaderos la copia casi exacta de una victoria renunciar a los glaciares con su mitología dejar dentro las llaves del recuerdo y hacer lo que hacemos todos llegado el momento trabajar, cambiar y sentir que alguna cosa se quedó en el camino con la justa precaución de no preguntarnos más. 48 28004 Lo mejor es valerse del método anticonceptivo de la amnesia para no embarazarse de recuerdo preñarse por error de una nostalgia de esas que hacen mella en el delirium tremens bichitos peligrosos que habitan las fronteras de lo que no es y que alguna vez fue mundo con su encanto silencioso que hace ver la vida como esculpida sobre aguas tenues como la foto kodak de aquel cumpleaños en McDonald’s el tejado con aleros, las payasitas, los motivos infantiles uno no piensa en el entramado ideológico-publicitario que se usaba para vender comida ultraprocesada a los carajitos sino en esa desenfocada sencillez y lo acolchado de la sillita con el monstruo morado el ladrón de hamburguesas y la pájara aviadora que no sé para qué necesitaba un avión pero volviendo al tema del olvido no hablo de partirse uno la caja negra o de tener un traumatismo pellejo-encefálico o psico-corporeo olvidándonos de todo hasta cómo nos llamamos y dónde estamos porque eso sería lo mismo que morirse y jodernos la siguiente vida a la vez hablo de agarrar la imagen astillada afanosamente nuestra y aplicarle una densa capa de látex 49 para que no nos alcance su viscosidad o en el peor de los casos meterle al recuerdo unas 15 dosis de MisoprostolTM trascendental y desligarnos así de lo que creemos que fuimos y que pudo ser hablo de Alfredo diciendo a Totó que no regrese a Sicilia de Sandy aprendiendo a vivir sin Papo y de no creer que antes todo fue mejor sólo porque el Happy Meal venía con sendos jugueticos coleccionables ¿será que la nostalgia me interpela meramente como un consumidor? qué vergüenza no obstante la vida sigue sigue a punta de pequeñas pero disciplinadas dosis de amnesia selectiva la nostalgia como hacer un balance contable a veces súper mal y entonces la bancarrota del presente. 50 20XX [El centro de la urbe como el centro del universo] fui tan feliz que sentía que todo el mundo se divertía conmigo tanto como yo ahora la vida se hace más pequeña y más pequeña cada vez dislocación de la eterna perridad plazoleta desnuda en el pueblo del fin del mundo. 51 200X En medio de la plaza como el busto seco de aquel prócer sin nombre ¿cómo explicar el influjo del sol en la mirada baja? la cabeza rueda y mis pies se escurren hacia el brío de los árboles. 52 199X SER infrasónico inaudible y desmesurado como los árboles y crecer y crecer y crecer y crecer y reventar varicosos adoquines y llenarme el buche con el ron del sol enemistado con el paso de las gentes en silencio con frondosos pajaritos en el cofre abierto del pecho por la noche embelesado con los vientos que han huido de las más recónditas praderas y bajaron rodando de la sierra como haciendo shhhhhhhhh y que se tinglen las orejas amarillas de tanto suelo y su melífera reina me enjambre la vida y llorar por fin hasta la sed desramado contra el cielo aserradero mientras una fila de niños al otro lado del mundo canta al árbol debemos solícito amor y me recuerdo camisa roja cantando yo también sin saber que una palmera no es exactamente lo que se diría un árbol. 53 ¿199X? A Carlos Iván Padilla. Como una chicharra asomada al interior de la casa se hincha en bullente plegaria la voz de aguacero como una chicharra asomada a los bordes prohibidos sopesando la caída del alma en las mareas de una flor como una chicharra no puede sino preguntarse si esas lluvias guardarán consigo el universo del recuerdo. 54 Y2K Los bloques tiran hacia abajo hacia el fondo grises y verdes el movimiento de los brazos es imperativo el cuerpo espeja con la voz por esta calle a 120 hertz se igualan las formas se iguala el soplo trazas durmientes celebran la pausa dame un chance saco roto mecanismo de la perversión. 55 XXXX Desandar el palo de agua las paredes del agua las mesas del agua la famélica gota en lo oscuro el sobante cabello del agua sobre la cara que enciende en la cara adonde tiemblan sus ondas coger el fruto del agua y ponerlo bajo la almohada oírle hablar en sueños con la lengua de Fausto su canción premonitoria su regusto de ultramar embravecido ¿cuánta verdad se ha dicho nunca? ¿cuándo habrás parado de volver? 56 [volver] 57 Volver como la luz después de un apagón: autodidaxia del consuelo 58 IX Abre la ventana aguarda en la cornisa a que baje el sereno y llene de semblanzas tu tierra mojada has crecido extraño como un accidente tu vida una veloz plegaria cual botella a ras de sol fugaz iridiscente inútil al igual que la belleza o la filosofía todo cuanto has deseado cabía en una silla de mimbre en la mano que guiaría la tuya al interior del jardín pero ha anochecido pronto puede que no baste con abrir la ventana para ver árboles y flores perderse en ellos como en la resaca como perderse en las fabulaciones de los peces como perderse hoy serás el último en decir adiós un espectro sobrevuela 59 tus insomnios arrastra consigo el designio marchito y la casualidad hoy serás el último en decir adiós dos ojos nucleares irradian sin parar y te queman la espalda los nombres se funden en la brisa fresca todas las ciudades en la misma calle larga hoy serás el último en decir adiós aguarda en la cornisa a que baje el sereno y llene de semblanzas tu tierra mojada. 60 X Quien está dormido abre los ojos bajo el agua y el mundo le aparece como ebrio de aurora perdido en suave alear a borbotones quien recuerda flota así como entre algas tenues en la más sinuosa de las horas habita su lugar-membrana pajariforme espacio liminar entre vapores y cristales se vuelve hacia la boca de la lluvia hecho cuajo sangre de hojarasca al mismo tiempo saqueador y peregrino aquel que ama siempre sabe qué decir pero no sabe dónde ¿cómo va a ser? 61 CEROCOMAUNO He hecho en definitiva lo que he podido y lo he terminado. Gelindo Casasola Este es el primer poema que escribo al ayer pertenece la prehistoria a su vientre nebulosa que chispea cuando estrella aquí lo tienen vestidito con su estreno de año nuevo lo levanto lo exorcizo lo derramo cacareo tripa en viento de su ahora parafuera con la yema de los dígitos bien flaca de mañana atrás quedó el país de los atrases en la exigua coseidad del horizonte atrás todo eso se acabó ya-no-me-acuerdo se acabó y será mejor decir que se empezó por vez primera más qué fino en su finura el equinoccio y bam bam bam y no decide y pum pum pum no decide empero en la nostalgia si está elástico o fosfóreo si alcoholiza o si se entuerta 62 si entrompa todo hambre y a mansalva como tren de los delirios emplumado vagabundo colormismo del camino lejana ya la lucha del Escorpio lejanos los mamíferos en su afán de élite política ya lo dijo Casasola ya lo dijo Papasquiaro ya lo dijo El Mío el que tal el mismo que viste y calza y así es que te quería ver sucio lambucio de la mancha mi poema crepitar mi poema mi poema asido como echando broma para que creyesen como dicho en los albores la comedia del autor echando bruma como el dueño de su histeria ha sido mi poema y esa fiera lucidez de mano santa que no pude cuanta pena que no fue. Índice Portada Prólogo, por Pablo García Casado Ya nadie se llamará como yo Frontispicio, por Antonio Gamoneda I. Como si hubiera perdido la fe en el sueño II. Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro (oración) Créditos y agradecimientos Poesía reunida (1998-2012) Creta Lateral Travelling Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus Joan Fontaine Odisea Carne de píxel Antibiótico Créditos Notas Te damos las gracias por adquirir este EBOOK Visita Planetadelibros.com y descubre una nueva forma de disfrutar de la lectura ¡Regístrate y accede a contenidos exclusivos! Próximos lanzamientos Clubs de lectura con autores Concursos y promociones Áreas temáticas Presentaciones de libros Noticias destacadas Comparte tu opinión en la ficha del libro y en nuestras redes sociales: Explora Descubre Comparte PRÓLOGO La poesía avanza cuando conquista territorios. Cuando abdica del miedo y del confort. Cuando asume que su epidermis debe ser porosa, que debe mancharse y poner en crisis los discursos y desdibujar las fronteras. Cuando no acepta paternidades, filiaciones o atajos ventajistas. Avanzar en poesía significa comprender el hecho cultural como algo arbóreo, plural, desestructurado. Aceptar el desorden como naturaleza, para mirar otra vez las cosas, como decía Kerouac, como si fuera la primera vez. Pero estas ideas, aceptadas mayoritariamente en otras artes y disciplinas del conocimiento, no tienen demasiado predicamento en la poesía española actual. A pesar de Freud, de los Sex Pistols o de Kubrick, aún hoy perviven sin demasiadas dificultades propuestas estéticas que ya tienen más de doscientos años. Aún hoy los bulevares parisinos siguen pareciendo revolucionarios y decir vanguardia genera un ambiente de sospecha. Quizá sea por su posición periférica en el mapa cultural, por su lejanía del público o por el manto protector que sobre ella genera cierta filología. Por ser un arte dado al autoconsumo donde se sigue dando validez al ripio y al juego floral; donde el sujeto parece no estar puesto en cuestión; donde la autoría es sinónimo de autoridad; donde la realidad parece unívoca y bidimensional bajo los férreos auspicios de la física de Newton. Sigue teniendo la poesía la asignatura pendiente de ser un arte ciudadano, una herramienta de presente continuo. Quizá porque no pocos poetas y críticos han buscado, consciente o inconscientemente, el abrigo intelectual, la cita respetuosa para dejarse llevar por la corriente. Lo mejor, lo más confortable, es respetar al maestro, o todo lo más, matar al padre reivindicando al abuelo o al bisabuelo. Es verdad que ese retraso en la puesta al día tiene excepciones que nos sacan de esta resignación colectiva. Gente que ya en el pasado decidió levantarse del sofá, quitarse los zapatos y buscar entre la hojarasca y el ruido. Gente que subió trabajosamente las montañas y nos trajo frutos silvestres. O excavó en la basura de las ciudades. También hoy, como digo, hay poetas que ya están apuntando hacia otro lugar. Escritores dispuestos a abrir puertas y ventanas y a asumir que la entropía es el orden natural de las cosas. El libro que tiene entre sus manos recoge la poesía que Agustín Fernández Mallo ha escrito durante casi veinte años. Nacido en La Coruña, pero alimentado y crecido en toda la Pangea, no se puede enmarcar su poesía dentro de un grupo generacional, sino que en sí misma es un discurso. Nos hallamos ante una obra total y en proceso, inorgánica, plural y multiforme. Una muestra completa donde los lectores de su narrativa encontrarán interacciones y correspondencias, aunque aquí desde una propuesta más esencialista, más de velocista que de maratoniano. No me corresponde hablar de su poesía como filólogo y sí como un lector interesado, como un compañero de viaje. Y hablaré de su poesía describiendo cómo he ido incorporando a mi bibliografía emocional cada una de sus entregas. Y así, el primer acercamiento que tuve a la obra de Fernández Mallo fue Joan Fontaine Odisea, un libro que, ya desde sus primeros versos, anuncia que es otra cosa, que viene de otro lugar. Hay una aceptación de los discursos plurales, de la convivencia entre el lenguaje científico, el amatorio, el cinematográfico. Hay negación del sujeto, múltiples géneros que conviven caóticos y a la vez ordenados, que se relacionan de manera arbórea sin relación de causalidad. Hay otros ritmos versales y otros sonidos. Es, en definitiva, un ejercicio de indagación en nuevas posibilidades expresivas. No es el canto estéril a la tecnología, como un hecho aislado del lenguaje poético, una rareza para reformular las metáforas; es una confianza ciega en que el lenguaje científico ya es plenamente poético, válido en sí mismo. No propone un discurso a la contra, es una poética que se funda en unas bases distintas. No es que el Binomio de Newton sea más bello que la Venus de Milo, como decía Pessoa. Es que ya no existe el Binomio de Newton. Y la Venus de Milo es ya una imagen pixelada. Precisamente esa unidad digital indivisible es la palanca que activa su segundo libro, Carne de píxel. Un libro que trufa el lenguaje poético de elementos narrativos y audiovisuales, aunque de una forma más controlada, más consciente de dirigir su discurso en una dirección. Si Joan Fontaine Odisea era un abanico de posibilidades, Carne de píxel es una tesis en sí misma, un cuerpo plural de combate, donde invita al lector a bucear hacia el origen de las cosas a partir de la metáfora de la unidad mínima de significado digital. Casi de forma simultánea a la publicación de Carne de píxel, Fernández Mallo avanzó el término postpoética, que cristalizó en un libro que le valió en 2009 ser finalista del Premio Anagrama de Ensayo. Ahí el autor plantea de forma clara qué desea de la poesía del siglo XXI y qué debe dejar atrás. Y hay un libro donde se avanzan esas primeras líneas: Creta Lateral Travelling. Un experimento híbrido, de poema en prosa, que, partiendo de una jugosa experiencia sensorial, incorpora la abstracción filosófica y (otra vez) la física como metáfora abierta. Semejante planteamiento se repite, con matices, en la que sería mi quinta experiencia lectora con Fernández Mallo, Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus. Con independencia de su lectura singular, ambos libros comparten una manera multidimensional del hecho poético. Además de superar las barreras poesía/narrativa, o por plantear la validez de los textos individualmente y a su vez de manera conjunta, el poeta incorpora el hipertexto web, el vídeo y la imagen proyectada. Tres soportes que no son un mero adyacente al texto, sino aspectos sustanciales. De hecho, aunque la poesía de Fernández Mallo es válida en sí misma y no necesita para ser leída más que unos ojos atrevidos y sin complejos, la vertiente audiovisual e hipertextual añade unos elementos muy significativos y coherentes con la experiencia cultural total que plantea el autor. Es en Antibiótico donde Fernández Mallo lleva la enumeración caótica a uno de sus máximos extremos. De hecho, en el desarrollo del mismo, ejemplifica de manera paradigmática un poema postpoético, en el que abundan las interferencias, niveles de lenguaje y secuencias puramente líricas, y al que sigue un fragmento de lo que sería su estúpidamente polémica versión de El hacedor de Borges, como si el arte del apropiacionismo, que con tanta pasión defendió el argentino, fuese un pecado mortal para un gallego posmoderno. Al fin y al cabo, todos trabajamos con materiales usados, con palabras que no nos pertenecen en exclusiva. Iggy Pop, Buster Keaton, las Tablas de la Ley y una foto del ticket de compra de un supermercado comparten, sin jerarquía, un espacio poético capaz de generar emociones plurales. Este volumen se inicia con su última entrega, Ya nadie se llamará como yo, un libro de arrastre mucho más personal e íntimo. Quizá pueda verse como el más cercano, el que abandona los excesos de su escritura expansiva. Pero esa búsqueda de intimidad ya contiene, contaminada, todas las claves de su obra. No es el libro confesional de un poeta al uso, sino el de alguien que ya empieza a dudar de sus propias fuentes, de la física misma: un ser humano enfrentado a sus miedos y perplejidades. La muerte, que en sus libros anteriores discurre yuxtapuesta y en igualdad con los juegos, el cine o la música, aparece aquí como una sombra total, oscurecedora y al tiempo reveladora de una escritura más doliente. Aquellos que quisieron ver, equivocadamente, una cierta ligereza pop en la obra de Agustín Fernández Mallo, deben aterrizar en la lectura de Ya nadie se llamará como yo, en la que el autor abre una puerta desconocida para él mismo y para todos. Porque no es el regreso a la normalidad de la corriente fértil de una poesía acomodada en la melancolía; es un nuevo paso adelante para un escritor que en cada poema se descalza para subir a la montaña. Esa pulsión exploradora la defiende en este último libro otro buceador en el lenguaje como es Antonio Gamoneda, que le ofrece unas palabras a modo de frontispicio a. En él, nos invita a la posibilidad de no comprender, de sentir antes que saber y de aceptar la contradicción como un hecho natural en la escritura. Dos escrituras, la del gallego y la del leonés, que buscan los perfiles escondidos de las palabras. La obra de Agustín Fernández Mallo abre campo, desdibuja las fronteras de la poesía. Actualiza el concepto posmodernidad desde el alimento plural, abriendo un horizonte jugoso para que la crítica y la filología actualicen sus planteamientos de salida. No desde la sustitución, sino desde la yuxtaposición, porque una cosa puede ser válida y también la contraria. Es una apuesta por la superación de la poesía como reducto intelectual historicista y esclerótico, por un discurso activo, potente, lleno de actualidad y significado. Por poemas que saben nombrar el caos, la acumulación sucesiva de mensajes y palabras, la comunicación en el mundo contemporáneo. Es una espita de provocación para escritores que quieran atreverse. Porque es una poesía que viene de otro sitio y que, sobre todo, se dirige a otro lugar. Que le gana centímetros a la nada. Una poesía, la de Fernández Mallo, que invita a un lector más valiente, menos constreñido, capaz de atreverse a mirar con ojos nuevos. Un lector nuevamente ilusionado. PABLO GARCÍA CASADO YA NADIE SE LLAMARÁ COMO YO FRONTISPICIO, SI LO ES, PARA UN LIBRO QUE ESCRIBIÓ, SI LO ESCRIBIÓ, AGUSTÍN FERNÁNDEZ MALLO, POETA Y VIVIENTE, DICEN* To be or not to be o apenas parecer ser, that is the question. W. SHAKESPEARE (SUBREPTICIAMENTE AÑADIDO). Esta mañana me advertí sorprendido por un pensamiento, quizá un pensamiento, que me sorprende todos los días. Pensé, si es que pensé, en un animal amarillo; posible o imposiblemente amarillo. Algunos, yo p. ej. , le dicen «el animal del llanto». No se sabe por qué. Tampoco sé por qué acabo de escribir esto. Es, no sé, me parece, falso, pero me inquieta la posibilidad de haber tenido un pensamiento. Y el correlato del asunto: para haberlo tenido yo habría de estar en mí. Pensando, además. Ayer también, más bien hoy, de madrugada, podría ser, quizá no, estuve leyendo, supongo, un libro de Agustín Fernández Mallo, que así se le dice; leyendo algunas afirmaciones probablemente excesivas, p. ej. : ... la carne reivindica en esos momentos su porqué /... o ... Ya nadie se llamará como yo, / ... o ... Nunca fui el hombre que él creyó ser... etcétera. Estas afirmaciones, si lo fueran, serían, como digo, probablemente excesivas, pero también, si lo fueran, muy inteligentes. La dificultad estriba en que Agustín Fernández Mallo sea carnal y efectivamente Agustín Fernández Mallo, y que lo sea en sí mismo. Pensando, además. ¡Cuánta extrañeza! Cósmica o espiritualmente hablando —es un decir— estimo ininteligible esa mínima inteligencia que digo: ser en sí mismo (puede verse que me atrae el balbuceo ontológico, una afición inútil, estimo), porque Efe Eme, yo, cualquiera, ¿en sí mismo? Ininteligible, ininteligible. Efe Eme dice también, si las dice, otras cosas interesantes: ... no me gusta usar el cuchillo antes del crepúsculo... / o ... un cuerpo empieza / en cualquier parte y termina también en cualquier parte. /... Sí, bien, el cuchillo crepuscular me interesa por su condición improbable, pero más me interesa lo del cuerpo y sus imprecisos o inexistentes límites. Una espléndida aproximación a la única normalidad razonable, a la normalidad de no ser. Interesante, interesante. Efe Eme lo refrenda razonadamente poco antes o poco después, informando sobre un ... gato que dentro de una caja estaba vivo / y muerto... /. Aun tratándose de un gato, es razonable, muy razonable. No explica nada y nada se entiende. Como debe ser. Dijo Eliot, se dice, que «la poesía es antes sensible que inteligible». No era tonto Sir Tomas, aunque ya Aristóteles... Así ocurre también cuando Efe Eme manifiesta su deseo de ... evitar / todo contacto con aquello que no soy, ... /. Quiere decir, sea o no sea así, evitar todo contacto con su realidad posiblemente imposible, con su particular, intrínseco nadie. No obstante, no obstante... Algo parecido me ocurre a mí, creo o descreo, no sé y no me tomo el trabajo de averiguarlo, si soy o no soy nadie efectivamente, si fui o voy a ser nadie, si únicamente, apenas parezco ser etcétera. Pero Efe Eme tiene preocupaciones, se diría. Le preocupa, p. ej., si ... [¿] beben agua los peces [?]... Si se diera o diese la circunstancia epicúrea de que charlásemos en jardines, si los hubiera o hubiese, esperando a Epicuro o no, le contaría a Efe Eme que en la Hacienda San Jorge (Isla de La Palma, Municipio de los Cancajos) comprobé, si comprobación hubo, cómo un pájaro africano, azul y cautivo dormía con los ojos abiertos. No es lo mismo pero se parece. Voy ya, aunque pronto, perlas de la vejez, algo cansando de hacer notas en manera más o menos perifrástica, intentando que sean y no sean. De aquí en adelante voy a hacer más llana la causa expositiva: «Al pan pan y al vino vino». Una falsedad, sí, pero una falsedad declarada comporta atenuante, jurídicamente hablando, dicen. El propio Efe Eme suscribe opiniones análogas en cierto modo, hasta cierto punto, a esta tal opinión, véase: ... las cosas sólo adquieren valor cuando son falsificadas— /... Coincidimos, pues, en asuntos y, podría ser, podría ser, en causas, aunque no siempre, no siempre, porque vamos a ver: Efe Eme informa de que desde que ... en 2013 se confirmó la existencia del bosón de Higgs, (el aparato escribe «Higos», por algo será) / el vacío no es la nada (el subrayado es mío y lo es por «mor» —aféresis detestable ésta— de artificio tipográfico), sino un lugar.../. Sí, ya, pero ¿quién confirma la existencia de los confirmadores (me acuerdo —¿me acuerdo? ¡Quién sabe!— y la escribo a cuento de nada —«nada», sí, pero no asustarse, que es simple homofonía—, de la tan bella serranilla de Iñigo López: «... y fueron las flores / de cabe Espinama / los encobridores»), de los confirmadores, decía, de Higos, del bosón, que no sé lo que es? Y dice también Efe Eme: ... buscarte en el vacío o en la nada... Pero ¿no da igual, amigo? Ha de ser ya «pasante» la siesta «en hora menguada», porque leyendo, leyendo, me he quedado dormido y, obviamente, despierto. Ha sonado el teléfono y, como es natural dormido y despierto, no he descolgado. Ha venido mi nieta, encantadora, encantadora (nacida el día 18 de julio de 1998, ¡qué cosas!), con el periódico y sus sedicentes últimas noticias y, naturalmente, he dejado las sedicentes para mañana (qué sabrán ellos de ultimidades). Por lo demás, Efe Eme me ha procurado muy enjundiosas (no sé lo que significa o no significa «enjundiosas», algo significará) y poéticas páginas (... la nada se pudre... —No estaría mal), de las cuales no daré testimonio porque éstas, además, son en sí mismas, caso de ser, muy enjundiosas y poéticas, suficientes en sí mismas, caso de ser. Contrariamente, observo que mi párrafo, mi hiperversículo anterior o lo que sea o, naturalmente, no sea, va cojo, rítmicamente hablando. En fin, pongo el ojo en la página 98 y leo: todo era mentira y verdad al mismo tiempo. Podría cerrar aquí mi protocolo, dado que todo queda así dicho ya, pero no; tengo vocación o algo parecido, parece ser: ya descansaré si mi dudoso cuerpo necesitara o necesitase —suele decirse gramaticalmente hablando y lo vengo diciendo por suntuoso capricho sinonímico— descanso. Y leyendo, leyendo, ahora sólo despierto, parece ser (qué pobreza la mía: no tengo ni para un mal entresueño), doy con un hermoso final poemático que es, a su vez, preámbulo, donde Efe Eme, por segunda o tercera vez, libro atrás libro adelante, comienza a decir: ya nadie se llamará como yo, (passim) para inacabar diciendo: ... ten fe en la materia sobre todas las cosas. Bien están el cit. redundado y los vid. elididos (¿será correcto «elididos», término descalabrado que escribo por primera y última —queda bien aquí el sinsentido— vez?), pero... Pero yo me pregunto y, naturalmente, no me respondo, ¿cómo tener fe en una fe, si tal fe, si es, no es materia o sustancia? A no ser, a no ser... A no ser, es decir, no siendo pero posiblemente siendo, que se entienda lo ininteligible, circunstancia imposible, quizá posible en Efe Eme y en Italo Calvino, al parecer. Cabe entender que soy yo quien no entiende lo inteligible. Doy por tanto por bueno lo que concierne a la fe insustancial. Lo doy seriamente por bueno. O no. Efe Eme ha entrado o está a punto de entrar en un bosque, dado que dice Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro; lo dice 45 veces, más o menos. Pero el bosque no acaba de aparecer aunque, podría ser, esté ya casi aparecido. Mientras tanto, Efe Eme ha decidido hacer numerosas anotaciones (históricas, biológicas, lingüísticas etcétera) o en el peor de los casos, que pudiera ser el mejor, apenas empíricas, rigurosamente científicas, plausibles todas ellas (las anotaciones digo), aun siendo mentira y verdad al mismo tiempo, como está ya anunciado y es natural. La verdad es que el libro, haya sido o no escrito por Efe Eme o por Nadie y habiéndolo leído yo o no (la segunda posibilidad, si se ha dado, no ha sido por falta de voluntad o deseo, sino por la dificultad de echar mano de mí mismo en mí), es magnífico aun pudiendo no serlo. Tan sólo le sobra una imprecisa «a» levemente cacofónica a su penúltima línea, sólo una. ANTONIO GAMONEDA En un poema nada cabe de naturaleza sentimental. Quiero decir que, como cualquier máquina, debe carecer de ingredientes superfluos. Su movimiento es un fenómeno de carácter más físico que literario. WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS I Como si hubiera perdido la fe en el sueño Necesito un mapa que me muestre el mundo prehistórico coexistiendo con el mundo presente. ROBERT SMITHSON Detectan su fin, van haciéndose transparentes los cuerpos, ves cómo se funden con el paisaje —ves a través de ellos el paisaje—. Es paradójico porque más que nunca la carne reivindica en esos momentos su porqué —una flecha se clava en el aire y se hace aire y luego telón y cae y levanta un polvo sin propietario—. Ya nadie se llamará como yo, me dijo. 4.30 de la madrugada, no podía dormir, como si hubiera perdido la fe en el sueño. Nunca fui el hombre que él creyó ser, pero sí en el que hasta el final confió heces y sueños. Caminé doce kilómetros hasta el inicio del valle —pasa un animal, dentro un humano que me mira y desaparece—, no sé qué significa que a un grupo de casas no llegara la Guerra pero sí Internet. Mi hermana mayor me pregunta por qué no como fruta, le digo que no me gusta usar el cuchillo antes del crepúsculo. Acumulo cosas que no me necesitan, tampoco la lluvia cae sola, la conduce su peso. Valle (definición, Geol.): depresión más larga que ancha. Los árboles derrochan clorofila, la puntas de las hojas anotan frases abstractas como tu caligrafía, un cuerpo empieza en cualquier parte y termina también en cualquier parte. Donde la luz crece ordinaria los niños van haciendo ablaciones a las flores, era verano. La fruta, muda, nos parece ahora un búnker. No era aquello la lógica de los malos poemas: saquear tu intimidad sin ofrecer nada a cambio. Y de pronto la urna, cilíndrica, azul mate, del mismo color que las cenizas que iban dentro. Abrimos la losa de mármol, apenas unos centímetros, eché una mirada dentro —la linterna del acomodador barre el patio de butacas y lo ensucia para siempre—. Como aquel gato que dentro de una caja estaba vivo y muerto al mismo tiempo. El radio de esta noche no es la mitad de su diámetro. Me gustaría bañarme en mi propia saliva para evitar todo contacto con aquello que no soy, sin embargo oigo dos ruidos. Que levante la mano quien no haya pasado horas mirando cómo por un hilo un charco desagua en otro charco. Sobre una guía telefónica, que llena de números muertos da mucha pena, descansan pocillos de café, platos mal apilados, pareciera que en cualquier momento quisiera convertirse en un fregadero. O el trigo y el arroz: nunca han sido del bosque los alimentos que han salvado a los humanos. Pelo una manzana hasta unas lágrimas sólidas que hay en su corazón. Las como. Los ejes chirrían. Cada vez que oyes un ruido, hay un eje. Cada vez que oyes dos ruidos, una conversación. Nadie habla solo. El tic-tac de la lluvia está pensado para numerar el mundo, mejor dicho, es el vivo retrato del mundo pero en abstracto. El agua de la bañera está desnuda —el mar es otra cosa, no consigo responder esta pregunta: ¿beben agua los peces?, ¿tienen sed?, ¿son sus agallas el aro roto de un recién circuncidado?—. Oigo dos ruidos. Sale el sol, imprime el mundo en papel continuo, por eso no te enteras. El hombre del tiempo estará agujereando las nubes, te pido que aceleres, me gustaría llegar a la desembocadura del valle antes de que la noche nos agujeree a nosotros. Hablamos de la arbitrariedad de las constelaciones, de trazar otras líneas entre esos sedimentos del big bang y los neumáticos del coche. Con las yemas de los dedos amplío y reduzco el tamaño de tu rostro en la pantalla, también una vez vi a un panadero amasar una mezcla de cereal y agua. Manifiéstate. Siempre estaba viajando, siempre solo. En un maletín, como un dique desprendido, acosado por las olas aguardaba nuestro futuro. Nos traía chucherías de los aeropuertos. Es ahora —oigo dos ruidos, oigo tantos ruidos— cuando por primera vez viajamos juntos. Eres utópico porque no tienes un lugar asignado. La llama del calentador se apaga, lo hace de pronto, como si a la cañería que conecta la bombona con el mundo se le esfumara el alma. Todos lo hemos visto. Continuamos comiendo. Hablan de lo bueno que ha salido el televisor, veinticinco años al frío y la humedad en una casa deshabitada, un televisor —insisten— de los malos, de hipermercado, y entonces creo que ese electrodoméstico me habla sólo a mí —un médico ausculta unos pulmones, cree oír voces dentro, las cosas sólo adquieren valor cuando son falsificadas—. Comemos corzo, lo trajo un anciano del pueblo de al lado, manos de pólvora y arrugas de maqui también de veinticinco años, dijo que su barriga estaba tan caliente que parecía tener un horno dentro. No he parado de oír ruidos toda la noche, el televisor es ahora una gota de ámbar, el sol una esfera domesticada, la casa una estrella cuya luz acaba de tomar otro rumbo. Todos lo hemos visto. Todos continuamos comiendo. Vuelven las mariposas monarca, milagro de la navegación, una vez al año. Hay dos clases de sombra, la que viaja en contacto con el objeto y la que se proyecta a distancia —vuela un avión y la ves correr allí abajo sobre campos como el caudal de un río liso—. De la primera habló Rosalía de Castro, de la segunda Lucrecio y los astrónomos en general. Hay una tercera sombra, nunca citada, efervesce en el interior de los cuerpos, donde no llega la luz y el cielo es un mar completamente aplanado. Delirio de la eficiencia energética, hoy sólo una mariposa monarca ha regresado. Nos han encerrado afuera. No podemos entrar en la casa. El cielo de la mañana era una mueca, y vacía aún la tumba aproveché para mirar dentro. Desorden en mi idea de lo que es y no es eterno. En la pared hay brotes de ladrillo —esqueleto de fuego que, como ellos, arde sin descanso— y manchas de humedad en el suelo porque sube el lenguaje de los cuerpos —mi abuela por ejemplo—. Un manto de líquenes cuelga en la pared lateral, parece el cartel de un muro de un solar que nadie construirá, cerramos la losa, las truchas se van por unas puertas que tiene el agua del río, la corriente dibuja garabatos, ves en ellos tantas cosas que da risa, no hay espacio en mi cabeza para más ideas. El cura dice algo. Minutos antes —no obstante agosto—, había dejado de llover, el sol ahora iba y venía entre los agujeros de las nubes, cazadores —supe luego— acababan de matar un corzo dos montes más allá, una ráfaga de aire deshizo los peinados, las gafas de sol tampoco valían, éramos un spot publicitario al que le hubieran retirado el producto anunciado. Por parejas, todos se abrazaron. El perímetro de los árboles también se erguía seco. El tintineo de unas monedas en mi bolsillo acelera la sangre. Sellaron aquello con cemento más blanco que un ojo ciego. Fue la primera vez que no vi llorar a mi madre. Desde que en 2013 se confirmó la existencia del bosón de Higgs, el vacío no es la nada, sino un lugar lleno de partículas. Queda así la nada reservada para el lenguaje de la poesía, las religiones, el ámbito de lo que algunos llaman lo difuso. La realidad, por mediación del lenguaje, como un río se ha creado a la vez que escindido. Ello me plantea un problema, radical duda que se hunde en el lodo de mi lenguaje aprendido: buscarte en el vacío o en la nada, en cuál estás tú ahora. Mordemos el anzuelo de agosto, por la noche mis cuñados y yo salimos al corral, un cigarrillo, uno dice que el suyo es de contrabando y entra en sus pulmones todo el Atlántico que lo trajo, el otro sueña con tumores y fractales y pareciera que allí afuera estuviéramos también fuera del mundo. Las ventanas mostraban una luz que ya no nos pertenecía. Las montañas no son románticas, sólo reales, digo. El canto de los grillos sugiere una sola alma. Comentamos algo de una crisis financiera que pasará y se llevará nuestra parte iluminada —la casa emitía luz por otras muchas rendijas—, el azul de la ceniza será la primera incandescencia —¿no ves acaso fuegos fatuos en los ojos de los gatos?—. El agua y la tierra de río no comparten naturaleza pero envejecen al mismo tiempo. Alguien nos llama para la cena. Tres colillas aplastadas a punto de formar una letra. Esta noche el objetivo es aumentar de volumen, imitar al agua que no corre, alcanzar el estado del hielo. Las imágenes no vienen de afuera sino del fondo de los ojos, arca donde metimos todas las especies. Las olas baten contra el acantilado del rostro, nada importan petroleros, cargueros, barcos de recreo, el mar carece de memoria, cómo si no la arena de edificios y de tantas cosas que sin agua serán. La llama de la chimenea tiene un aire a cartílago pintado, y el olor a miseria y frío que recrea. Cuántas motas de polvo hacen falta para dar marcha atrás y componer un hueso. Llevo dentro de mí un secreto al cual no tengo acceso. En el cielo hay resplandores que no pertenecen al cielo, sino al aro de la circuncisión. Mi pene es un lugar prestado. Una cigüeña aguarda quieta, como tomada por la alucinación de ser árbol o piedra —el brillo en sus ojos la delata—, alza el vuelo cuando me acerco, un batir torpe, ávido de ternura, batir de souvenir traído de pronto a la vida. Tu presencia adquiere entonces un rango de fósforo mojado. La cresta de los montes una cremallera que podría reventar en cualquier momento. Estos días no han parado de pasar aviones, por algún motivo que tiene que ver con la temperatura del aire dejan una estela, tardará en desvanecerse toda la mañana. Eligen lugares inhóspitos, rutas remotas —dicen en el pueblo—, así en caso de caer no pasa nada. La iglesia no está fría, tiene frío, nos espera para que nuestros cuerpos calienten santos de yeso, tallas de madera, bancos de mimbre y paredes —por ese orden— de pizarra y mica. Durante la media hora larga no dejo de darle vueltas a qué clase de agua es la bendita, repaso todas las marcas comerciales, como quien cuenta ovejas o tras una ventana ve coches pasar y repara en colores que nunca había visto, o acaso se trata de agua del río, la misma que no sé cómo aquellos días remontaba el cauce —quiero llamarlo médula— en busca de un manantial nunca suficientemente geolocalizado, y da lugar a toda clase de leyendas: en los bancos del fondo un hombre se palpa todos sus agujeros, una mujer mueve los dedos sobre un rosario a una velocidad que parece masticarlo. Afuera —no obstante agosto— sobre un ganado que de pie y muy quieto parece no esperar nada llueve, no sobre el microchip, que muy caliente entre su piel y el músculo escenifica otra ceremonia de tránsito. Puede que esa brasa de silicio sea la única huella que el animal deje en la tierra. Sólo una mujer se acerca a recibir el misterio en la lengua. Nadie la conoce. La carne genera por igual peregrinos y bacterias. Seguro que ahora mismo afuera un avión —llevará retraso— traza la hipotenusa del cielo. No lo sabía: el mármol se friega como se friegan unas escaleras. Así como degradados orientalismos creen ver en pi al Más Allá en virtud de su pertenencia a los números Irracionales Trascendentes, así reposaba en el suelo de la cabina del piloto de Ryanair una bolsa de supermercado que la puerta, entreabierta, me dejó ver, de modo que hoy no hablaré del fruto de la nada sino del fruto de la manzana que crece y se hincha hasta que nuestro cuerpo coincide con ella en altura, anchura y profundidad, si la manzana es un cubo, somos un cubo, si la manzana es una esfera, somos una esfera, si la manzana es una estrella, somos una estrella, encajamos en el molde tan exactamente que no queda ni una lámina de aire para respirar: la nada se pudre. ¿Cómo serán los gusanos de la nada? El piloto extrae otro fruto. Esa bolsa algún día nos matará a todos. Llueven flores con la velocidad del granizo, mi sobrino coge la urna —parece una bombonera a la que hubieran extraído todo el azúcar— y no sabe por qué le toca trasportarla. Me he despertado a las 4.30 de la madrugada, la oscuridad dibuja rostros en coma, a mi lado otro rostro dice que no le dejo dormir —aún es joven, siente frío, y eso es algo que no entiendo—. Me levanto, en menos de 1 segundo el ruido de mis pasos viaja de punta a punta de la casa, temí que el rumor de la cafetera los despertara a todos —que estarán en mitad de sus respectivos sueños, modelan imágenes de estrellas en explosión, extractos de cuentas bancarias, topos venidos a la luz, sus pupilas tiemblan—, y decidí salir al centro del silencio, que era mentira pero me daba igual, el anorak, identidad o exoesqueleto que encontré en el armario de la entrada, el frío seco —no obstante agosto—, y la misma esponja seca el asfalto. Me pareció que las casas deshabitadas, y los chopos que junto al río rugían su digestión comunitaria, y los coches aparcados en batería casualmente combinados de manera que dibujaban la bandera de Francia —salvo el color añadido de un Renault negro—, y las pisadas de las vacas en el barro y yo mismo, éramos carne de interior, comida rápida a la espera de ser descongelada, pero por quién —toda comida rápida es lentísima para un ruido que en menos de 1 segundo cruza de punta a punta la casa—. A contraluz, la torre de la iglesia —sin campanas, las robaron en el 88— parece el monolito de 2001, las vacas mastican una clase de hierba que no conozco, arranco una brizna, la pruebo. El río, muy lejos —ya casi no lo oigo— no detiene su hemorragia. A la luz blanca le brotan colores para anunciarnos que se va al recreo, al lavabo, de vacaciones, pero va de compras —la luz compra el mundo, siempre ha querido comprar el mundo, ocuparlo todo es su misión, nunca ha descansado y nunca descansará, incluso los agujeros negros se hallan saturados de luz, auténticas multinacionales de la luz—, pero aquí, ahora mismo, es noche cerrada y la de las estrellas no satisface lo anteriormente dicho —mucho menos la de la luna: llega con la suciedad de lo adquirido en segunda mano—. El páramo se curva más que el ojo, así que es inmenso, el viento husmea en el frío un boquete de salida. Algo brilla entre unos matorrales, me agacho, una tarjeta de crédito. La había perdido años atrás, las espinas de los cardos perforan la banda magnética, roedores han limado la media luna de sus dientes en la fecha de caducidad, un manto de liquen cubre los dígitos de control y mis apellidos, no mi nombre, me dejan huérfano. En seguida recuerdo: mi primera cuenta corriente, Caixa Galicia, un amigo había dicho «así me ayudas a que me prorroguen el contrato, después la olvidas y ya está». La meto en el bolsillo —un acto reflejo—. Al instante la dejo donde estaba. NOTA: Entonces sentí algo muy raro, como si todos los signos se quedaran sin referente, como si decir liquen, matorrales, roedores, tarjeta de crédito o contrato fuera nombrar objetos sin vida nuestra, sólo vida de ellos, muy adentro de ellos, opaca a mis manos como es opaco el Universo más allá del horizonte de sucesos, los alimentos más allá de la fecha que los caduca de veras, o el sistema nervioso de esta lagartija que ante mis ojos se tumba sobre la banda magnética y espera la salida de un sol que no cubre el mundo sino que lo atraviesa. Me siento en un tronco, espero con ella. Imagino que años más tarde alguien dice acerca de mí: «tras adentrarse en las montañas del Norte para nunca más ser visto...». FIN DE LA NOTA Tú no eres mi objetivo, ni tan siquiera mi deseo, sino la herramienta, el metro con el que medir la altura y profundidad, pero sobre todo la anchura de las cosas, la gota de aceite que en busca del agua se extiende para después, esférica, no mezclarse, los poetas también han hablado del sol, de las manzanas, de la luna, de los ojos, de las bolas de fuego y de las lágrimas, todas ellas esferas, hemos vuelto a la mitología de lo tangible, como si nunca hubiera existido el aura de la basura o el magnetófono, como si los que se fueron hubieran estado alguna vez entre nosotros, como si tu recuerdo se erigiera en catedral sin órgano —creo distinguir una nota, tan lejana y abstracta que podría ser la de una misa a la que jamás he asistido, la de una radio de un chiringuito que no pisaré—. Las raíces expían su amargor de genciana bajo tierra. Los ríos subterráneos están ahora mismo vaciándose. Un todoterreno se hunde hasta los faros. En el tronco de un álamo del último bosque encuentro una hoz y un martillo, no fueron grabados por una hoz de verdad y un martillo de veras, creo recordar el abrecartas, la fantasía burguesa que residía en su punta de rayo, eficaz tan sólo en materiales blandos, cosas borradas por la rotación de la Tierra, la hierba lanza un mugido y revienta el cielo y todas las leyes de la gravedad que hemos ido inventando, la afasia es un estilo en sí misma, más allá, la nieve se muere por indagar sus propios sueños, crecer hasta suplantar al lago que nivela el mundo, pero sigue dormida, hoy como luz y vomito luz, los dibujos de niños que nunca regresaron a pesar de haber dado los pasos adecuados. A esa hora en la que los tallos de los arbustos son relojes de sol, y sus pequeñas ramificaciones dan la hora como relojes de muñeca, y también las abejas pero móviles para mostrarnos la relatividad inherente a los cronómetros, a esa hora, digo, como luz y vomito luz. Al mismo tiempo, a 1.500 kilómetros de distancia, en otra isla yo también escribía: 1 de agosto: El homo sapiens que cazó y dio muerte al último neandertal cazó también para nosotros la primera imagen. Cráneo (definición): Caja ósea que contiene al cerebro. En algún lugar de esta oscuridad hay una isla. Lo sé por la luz del faro. 2 de agosto: En El castillo y en El proceso, la ambigüedad de los personajes respecto a las autoridades evoca la ambigüedad del plancton frente al agua de mar. También escribir es indiferente. Quince años atrás, nadando a crol. Los aparatos de aire acondicionado morían al sol. No tenían ánimo de evangelizar, buscaban mero entretenimiento. 3 de agosto: Lo que comúnmente llamamos amar, es un instante. Su continuidad, el agujero que nos practicamos a fin de observarlo. Cada gaviota un fósforo a punto de ser encendido. 4 de agosto: En el océano Ártico, mar de Kara, hay una isla que pertenece a Rusia pero tiene forma de ojo de faraón egipcio. Se llama Lonely Island. Sólo una persona, meteorólogo aficionado, la ha habitado. En 1927 encontraron bajo el hielo sus instrumentos de medición. Ni rastro del cuerpo. El último parte que emitió por radio, 4 de agosto de 1926, y cuya grabación se conserva, dice: «Hoy hace un día espléndido, han llegado las gaviotas y...». Se llama Lonely Island porque las últimas palabras resultan inaudibles. 5 de agosto: La superficie del mar presenta una textura de estrías similares a las que aparecen en los muslos y glúteos de personas que engordan y adelgazan súbitamente. Pero eso se ve mejor desde el cielo. Cabezas, piernas, manos, pies, todo allí abajo. Hoy en las Olimpiadas unos corredores creyeron dejar exhaustos los cronómetros. 6 de agosto: En cualquier casa, la única cosa que nos es dado tocar son las manillas de las puertas. En ésta tienen forma de caracol. Dependiendo de las habitaciones, unos de mar, otros de tierra. Vengo fijándome en que todas las iglesias huelen igual. Se trata de un paisaje continuo, virus que secretamente asegura la propagación y supervivencia de un hábitat, de un clima, de una especie. A un mecanismo similar se acoge el perfume de los grandes almacenes, el sonido del interior de los cuerpos, el vaho que en la confrontación se eleva desde las trincheras. Si pudieras hacer un molde de dos bocas cuando se besan, verías algo totalmente irreconocible. 7 de agosto: El silencio con el que se lee un libro guarda relación —por no decir que es el mismo— con ese otro silencio que aparece cuando se cuida a un enfermo terminal. Incluso la luz aquí no partió de ningún sitio. Siempre fue paralela a sí misma. 8 de agosto: Esta noche he estado trabajado en la siguiente idea, que extraje de un libro del paleontólogo Stephen Jay Gould: su profesión se enfrenta a una frustración irremediable, los registros fósiles siempre son sólidos, principalmente huesos y dientes que nada informan de las partes blandas de los cuerpos, sujetas a descomposición. Así, los paleontólogos deben inferir esas otras partes, o fiarse de relatos orales o dibujos en caso de existir. Creí entender entonces que no sólo la paleontología sino todas las reconstrucciones del pasado, ya sea remoto o reciente, se hacen a través de esquemas ciertos (residuos sólidos) y material inventado (partes blandas). Así la historiografía, así las religiones, así las ideologías, así los noticiarios. Hallamos hechos como se hallan dientes y huesos, estructuras sólidas a las que cada generación añade órganos de innumerables formas hasta conformar su propia idea de cuerpo vivo y muerto al mismo tiempo. Ya nadie se llamará como yo, me dijo. Pasas por delante y te detienes a oír sus ronquidos, lenguaje que ni un tigre de Bengala ni los pájaros de Alaska hubieran podido descifrar. Imposible anticipar en aquel momento su calavera de Damien Hirst, playa de diamantes en la que hablan de sus cosas los muertos. La carretera parecía un rostro rotulado por un cirujano, las casas techadas con centeno sobreviven 2 veces más que las techadas con trigo: resucitan. La Edad de Bronce, la Edad de Silicio, la Edad de Estiércol. El escarabajo refuta la idea de que el avión pequeño reposta en el más grande, la ventisca —no obstante agosto— echa por tierra la idea de que llevas un sistema solar en el centro del corazón. Una señal informa: pendiente del 10 % y le añado un 0 y me hundo verticalmente en este asfalto antiguo y excéntrico. «Esta tarde, estábamos en los postres, hundí la cuchara en la tarta al whiskey, pensé en una pareja pescando en el lago Tahoe, y casi me hace estallar en lágrimas», me ha escrito hoy un amigo. La memoria evoluciona hacia una apariencia de molusco pero no termina de abrir su concha ni brindar su vulva. Cosas que sólo pueden ser vistas en la oscuridad. Años atrás, en el centro de otras calles ordinarias como novelas, sentada en un portal una pareja comía patatas fritas de una misma bolsa. Se besan. El bolo alimenticio expresa una felicidad como otra cualquiera. La cantera que suma piedras en vez de vaciarlas, el bolígrafo que recupera su tinta —y la memoria de la tinta—, el barco que en vez de abrir cierra el mar a su paso, sudor que vuelve a la entraña y se hace charco. Veo el cubo que sube el agua del pozo —parcheado por un hojalatero, pasaba una vez al año, tocaba un pito y sonaba a escape de gas aunque quisiera parecerse al canto de un pájaro desconocido— y pienso en toda esa gente que cuelga fotos de animales en Facebook, la excitación de carácter zoófilo que les impide dejar de mirarlos. Veo el cubo que sube agua del pozo y pienso en cuántas manos hicieron falta para traérnoslo lleno —una vez conté las manos que aparecen en los 31 deuvedés del documental, Segunda Guerra Mundial, las imágenes definitivas, y comprobé que había más dedos que balas—. Veo el cubo que sube el agua del pozo y una lectura de Chéjov se derrama como si el relato corto fuera un trozo de agua acorralada y sola, —tengo 8 años, una trucha platino tiembla en un tridente, una orquesta de verano tiembla ahora en mi cabeza—. Veo el cubo que sube el agua del pozo y lo veo a él dibujando un almacén para semillas, como ese del Norte de Europa pero aún más enterrado —me refiero al que se hunde en una isla del Ártico noruego, millones de plantas llevadas desde los cinco continentes. Sólo se abrirá en caso de que todo se extinga—, deja el portaminas sobre el papel cebolla, se quita las gafas y me dice, «¿por qué el fin del mundo se imagina siempre en una isla?». No veo el cubo que sube el agua del pozo porque en el 77 se cayó al fondo —si había luna llena podías ver su reflejo—, y el pozo se cerró para siempre. No sé qué clase de monstruo será ahora la anguila, el cuchillo, el litio, la nube de azor que le crecía dentro. Las cosas caen al cielo, el cielo es el lugar al que caen las cosas, cogimos arándanos sin romperlos, vimos acequias por las que los romanos transportaban agua para lavar oro cientos de kilómetros más allá, la magnitud de las montañas emulaba una tarta con demasiada levadura para la boca de un niño. Fue cuando mi hermana quiso ir a esperarnos a nuestro regreso. Su bicicleta patinó en la gravilla gravilla común, pública, gravilla sin propietario. Se rompió la cabeza y tres dientes. No reconocía a nadie salvo a mi madre. «Vuelve otro día, de momento sólo eres un niño sin nombre», me dijo bajo una sábana —por unos tubos le extraían la luz—. Pensé entonces que mientras él me enseñaba a coger arándanos, mientras seguíamos una acequia que a cientos a kilómetros lavaría oro para levantar un Imperio en Roma, ella, tirada en el asfalto y sin memoria ya no era de nuestra familia. Se hizo mayor para siempre. Basta con que una gota de sudor caiga sobre este huerto. Sé que nada hará crecer. Basta con que una nube de insectos le dé algún uso, y desaparezca. Las imágenes se retiran lo justo para poder ser contempladas. «Son los plomos», dice alguien en tanto se va la luz. Quiero detenerme en el instante (1 segundo, 2 apenas) que tarda la habitación en hacerse total oscuridad, el modo en que las sillas, la panera, el calentador, el reloj de pared, el almanaque y los rostros, sobre todo los rostros en torno a la mesa, desaparecen con una lentitud que pareciera decirnos que será para siempre, cómo en 1 o 2 segundos las pieles se granulan, los rasgos decaen a manchas, luego a esquemas, las expresiones se hielan y lo último en apagarse son los ojos, de pronto guías o estrellas de un cielo nocturno que dura 1, apenas 2 segundos, y ser tomado por la extrañeza de que esos astros existen a pares. «No. Es de allá», corrige otra voz mientras en el aire «son los plomos» aún suena. Lo vivo no retrata tan bien como yo. A partir de cierto punto que no coincide con el de la independencia económica pero se le parece, todo acto se encamina a armar un mundo opuesto al miedo que tejió el edredón de la infancia. No sé qué me distanció de él. ¿No es rara esa necesidad exclusivamente humana de dar nombre a cuanto existe por el mero placer de sentir un sonido golpear la lengua? ¿Cuánto tiempo hemos perdido en ello mientras los inviernos pasaban, las ciudades se demolían y en su lugar levantábamos otras o las mismas? En los rincones de esta cocina crecieron cosas que no tendrán otra palabra que el dialecto o la lejía. Lo vivo no retrata tan bien como yo. A un paso de saber a trucha, el agua del grifo sabe a piedras de río, le falta un infinitésimo, siempre la recuerdo así. Un buen vino, una excursión al cemento, las aterradoras figuras a tamaño real de dálmatas de escayola. Hoy sabemos que tan cierto es que la Tierra gira alrededor del sol como que el sol lo hace en torno nuestro, depende del sistema de referencia que elijas. Algo similar ocurre con la muerte y la vida. El hallazgo de Walden, la vida en los bosques, es que su autor se anticipa 100 años a Walt Disney: establece la primera relación delirante del humano con plantas y animales. Tengo para mí que lo que verdaderamente molestó a Dios no fue que Caín matara a Abel sino que después lo enterrara para intentar ocultarlo de su vista: primera versión de la mentira. Lo había hecho a imagen y semejanza de un pájaro al cual vio enterrar a otro alado muerto —dijo—. Hay algo que el coleccionista no entiende, lo que está hecho para siempre no puede ser guardado. Los mansos anos de los animales salvajes —toda su energía desviada a sus fauces— se opone a la incesante actividad de los anos domésticos. Un coche encalló en el barro, nadie supo más de sus ocupantes. Como si un cuadro que parece de Hockney trajera el aroma a cloro de todas las piscinas de Los Ángeles y algo despega definitivamente en mi cabeza, el magnífico splash de una posguerra de la que sólo sé por fotografías. Mi rostro no anuncia nada que merezca la pena, el sol viene quemando cuantas historias cedimos al sistema solar, en su jersey crecían nubes de lana, tomarían en las radiografías todas las formas conocidas, tampoco olvides el órgano interno y democrático que tardarás años en reconocer como tuyo: es su último corazón eléctrico lo que ahora echas en falta. Partía cada noche una manzana en cuatro hemisferios, como si multiplicara mapas y sueños de vecinos que ya dormían. Y yo miro todo eso desde el interior de una radiografía, pasa una vaca, sus ubres mojan la noche y nadie sabe dónde va esa vaca si esto no es la India. Más allá de los acantilados del miedo (y con ello hago notar que no eran de mármol sino de miedo), más allá de los meandros de los deltas y las arenas movedizas, más allá de los campos de humo y del cristal sucio del cielo, más allá del trigo que por mucho que te empeñes nunca fue silvestre, más allá de los pájaros entendidos como polinomios, más allá de las esferas de tomate y de las ubres que manan sin hostilidad, más allá de las hojas de pino que resuenan como cuchillos y las de los álamos que lo hacen como sonajeros, más allá de la curva donde crecen cardos junto a fresas salvajes, más allá de las mañanas de color rosa y las coníferas, más allá del claro donde los lobos abandonan la piel mudada, más allá de donde los ojos pierden su bruma cortesana y resplandecen en color arcilla, más allá de los arbustos que parecen limpísimas escobas, más allá de los cielos que maduran y se pudren y caen a trozos sobre tu cabeza, más allá de los bosques de sacarosa, llegué a la cabaña de Heidegger (en un principio no la reconocí como tuya), derribé la puerta de una patada (y con ello hago notar que mi pierna y el nazismo a pesar de opuestos eran más sólidos de lo que pareciera), accedí a una estancia no vacía, diferentes penumbras, que hacían de tabiques, se alternaban con la luz procedente de las ventanas, me senté a una mesa, dispuesta como para comer y a juzgar por su aspecto años atrás abandonada, moví la mano bajo el tablero de la silla, palpé unos objetos pegados, duros como piedras, eran chicles, allí donde ha habido vano espejismo no puede no engendrarse vida. Un tipo sale por la tele, el subtítulo informa que pertenece a Global Nature o algo así, «en este incomparable marco las aves nos deleitan con sus trinos», siento ganas de vomitar. Mi madre toma el fajo de billetes que mi padre había guardado en una lata, lo palpa. Ya no hay vida en ese dinero. La sístole de la casa es ahora la de esa lata, bombea cosas que no son recuerdos pero tampoco olvido, como cuando ni te echan de tu puesto de trabajo ni te mantienen, tan sólo te apartan a la espera de un diagnóstico definitivo. 4.30 de la madrugada, temí que el ruido de la cafetera los despertara a todos. Ni una estrella así que el Universo acaba de anular todas las distancias. Quemo mi identidad en el anorak de la entrada, el teléfono filma nubes como de Dreyer, la luna hematoma de aire, el columpio óxido y trigonometría, fuego las ramas de los cerezos, piso hierbas del tamaño de un niño, tienen un vicio en la punta, parecen art déco. El galope de un caballo cose ahora mismo la tierra. Mi madre se levanta, mira por la ventana y dice algo en un idioma que desconoce. Todos damos un grito. Todas esas cosas desaparecerán esta mañana. La muerte es una fiesta de la objetividad. Si hoy estuviera interesado en experimentar la felicidad iría al supermercado, compraría leche entera, helados grasos, buen vino de oferta, transformaría los productos en fantasmas personales, haría coincidir la agenda del teléfono —fijo como un pilar, un cimiento, una columna que siempre hubiera estado ahí— con la del teléfono móvil, copiaría cuanto tengo en discos duros repartidos por la casa: desplazar mi cerebro del mismo modo que la tela de araña —que todo lo siente— es un desplazamiento del cerebro de la araña, y en un vaso transparente metería un montón de monedas de 1 y 2 céntimos de euro —la miseria impostada tiene mejor aspecto vista a través de un cristal, a ser posible curvo—. Pero la mímesis no asegura la supervivencia, algunas orugas simulan ser brotes de matorrales y el jardinero las poda, hay insectoshoja que se comen entre ellos porque se toman por hojas reales, la simulación de la identidad conduce a la homofagia, incita al canibalismo. La muerte es una fiesta de la objetividad. Una flecha de sombra se clava en el agua y la sombra de la flecha se clava en mí e ilumina lo que vengo inventando. Me das la mano, acontece el seísmo. Un problema: iguales son las heces de todos los humanos pero no hay dos humanos iguales. El vidrio de la ventana parece una estrategia de la luz, la difunde sin esfuerzo. Las tumbas aguardan vacías como un vaso aguarda la gota que lo desborda. Bajo este prado otras vallas nos contienen. El álgebra sustituye números por letras para operar sin necesidad de calcular, por eso escribo. Cada instante se cierne sobre el inicial y lo enhebra, la fiesta se prolonga hasta que el confeti acoge a la mosca, se posa y antes de partir dicta su mensaje. El cosmos está lleno de esta clase de fantasmas, estrellas cuya luz nos engaña incluso muerta. No es que el agua no tenga forma, acaba de olvidarla. Tu caligrafía, abstracta como la Historia. Rebasé la ermita y canturreé una canción de Parade, Víctor, mi padre, hace tiempo que no pienso en él, mi padre. Él deseaba un hijo, y me hizo. Consecuencias de un mal uso de la electricidad. Las llamas de las velas —para mí que son voces— no queman. Encastrado en el hueco de la chimenea, un televisor humea un programa concurso, alguien responde: «ya nadie se llamará como yo», chaparrón de aplausos. En el armario hay un libro que contra todo pronóstico conserva la tinta, hecha con el mismo plomo con el que se fabrican las balas. Hervimos la leche, emerge una capa de nata —toda cosa lleva un náufrago dentro—, como si en el blanco existiera otro blanco aún más blanco, o como si a la leche le saquearan su rumia y su luz. Creo no haber dicho que crucé el puente, un solo ojo de piedra lo domina y en el crepúsculo, como HAL, se pone muy rojo, pasa el caudal y finge que le escucha. Esa agua —esto es seguro— jamás ha alcanzado la temperatura de un cuerpo humano. Creíamos haber atravesado un desierto, pero por la mañana, tras dormir los cuatro junto a una gasolinera, aún estábamos en Kansas. Esa noche habíamos escuchado muchas veces un disco de Durutti Column, ella descorchó una botella y contó la anécdota: el nombre del grupo provenía de que en una calle de Manchester habían visto un cartel de un partido político situacionista en el cual Columna Durruti estaba mal escrito, y se lo pusieron a la banda. Supieron del error ortográfico y de que se trataba de un batallón de milicianos cuando mucho tiempo después fueron a tocar a Madrid. Sentados en el capó, helado a esas horas, nos reímos mucho con la confusión, el mundo de la música está lleno de cosas así, son unos brutos de cuidado, en otra profesión estarían despedidos pero en ellos hace gracia. Esa noche nos quedamos dormidos con la vista fija en el neón, cada 3 segundos rasgaba en rojo la cortina, parecía una llamada al averno. Desayunamos en la gasolinera un café de máquina y algo parecido a un donut primitivo, todo era como en las películas, nos pusimos en marcha, y recordé de pronto: 44 años antes, traje oscuro, corbata, un coche de cambio manual y sin seguro de accidente ni tarjeta de crédito atravesabas esas mismas carreteras de Kansas —faltaba 1 mes para que yo naciera—. En arreglo a criterios genéticos seleccionabas vacas para llevar a España. Luis dio entonces un volantazo —fue sólo una intuición— y al momento estábamos entre campos sembrados, el parabrisas una sábana de polvo no pisado desde sabe quién cuándo, hasta que en mitad de ese animal eviscerado que es el Midwest nos paramos. Bajo un molino un rebaño de vacas saciaba su sed. Giraron todas la cabeza al mismo tiempo que la girábamos los humanos. Me miraron a mí, fijamente, como quien contempla un espectro de su propio pasado. Rumiar (del lat. rumigāre): Masticar por segunda vez, volviéndolo a la boca, el alimento que ya estuvo en el depósito que a este efecto tienen algunos animales. Después alguien se acercó y todas salieron corriendo. http://www.youtube. com/watch?v=- VdwAcSt50A Un manto de luz del color del liquen nos ha cubierto. Me dan pena las cucharas, las ruedas, los vasos, las persianas, las afeitadoras, no saben para qué fueron fabricadas. O se les olvida vivir. Atravieso habitaciones, el interruptor de la luz es otra cosa, anticipa un deseo. En la chimenea la llama verde del álamo, la chocolate del roble, la transparente del chopo, la negra de algún plástico que se nos coló, ninguno sabemos qué color tiene la de los huesos. Antes de llegar los días en que los cables de cobre condujeron la felicidad, existió otra felicidad más discreta que a decir verdad nadie echa de menos. Cuántos guerreros regresan al lugar que han devastado —el humus emite allí una única nota—. Hicimos un arco y una flecha con todo eso, y el cura un cretino que se acercó a la tumba como quien se acerca a la barra de un bar y pide que le inviten a algo. Después hubo que darle 100 euros, los dejamos en un agujero de un cuerpo de yeso que quería ser Jesucristo. Llamó muchas veces, no cogimos el teléfono, y si lo hicimos fue para decir que nada recordábamos de aquellos billetes. Fermenta el día como fermenta el dinero. Al mismo tiempo, a 1.500 kilómetros de distancia, en otra isla yo también escribía: 9 de agosto: ¿Qué fue de Second Life? ¿Existen habitantes en Second Life? ¿Quedará algún escaparate en pie en Second Life? ¿Y los cementerios de Second Life? El mismo día que aprendes a hablar conoces el miedo. 10 de agosto: Cualquier periodo histórico dice todo lo que puede decir y ve todo lo que puede ver. La vida se da en su máxima potencialidad. Incluso el miedo. Hoy fuimos a caminar por las rocas, un paisaje lunar. El sol evapora el agua de las oquedades, queda la sal. Hemos estado recogiendo esa sal. Cada cristal viene generado por su impureza. Estará después de lo que vemos. 11 de agosto: En, La Mer, Jules Michelet habla del infructuoso intento de atrapar con sus manos un pez: «me pareció idéntico al medio en el que se desenvolvía, y tuve por un momento la confusa idea de que el pez sólo era agua, agua animal, agua evolucionada». Pero ocurre con todo. Corazón (definición): isla de arcilla. 12 de agosto: En 1965 Antoni Tàpies pinta Materia con forma de pie. En 1965 Peter Higgs propone el Mecanismo de Higgs para explicar el origen de la masa del Universo. Adivinación (definición): llegar a una previsión de acontecimientos futuros mediante la interpretación de presagios construidos como evidencia. 13 de agosto: Hoy me he cruzado con un desconocido y ha emergido su cara desde un lejanísimo barro en mi memoria, el corcho que de repente sale a flote tras disolverse la botella a la que era solidario, he estado toda la tarde intentando ubicarlo en alguna escena, no es lo mismo una repetición que un recuerdo, ya de noche, en la cama, he pensado que en todas las corrientes, en todos los remolinos, en todos los huracanes y en todas las mareas hay un punto, un ojo, que nunca se mueve. 14 de agosto: Creo lícito preguntarme si ha existido alguna vez un humano no tocado por la luz del sol. El mejillón, esputo de mar, ola sólida en la boca. 15 de agosto: ¿A partir de qué distancia una guerra puede denominarse Mundial? Supongo que cuando sus efectos alcanzan lugares, ciudadanos y viviendas que nada tienen que ver con la contienda. Un planeta globalizado asegura que toda guerra (también la doméstica, incluso la de uno contra sí mismo) es Mundial. Si mientras un rostro sonríe pudieras hacer un molde de su mandíbula, verías que se trata de la misma mueca que cuando dices «¡ahhhh!», exclamación de dolor más común en la especie humana. 16 de agosto: Si pudiera separar los sonidos del mar encontraría la combinación de ondas que día y noche me dice, «has estado aquí antes, es fácil encontrar el camino». No sé por qué motivo el ruido de la calle molesta más dentro que fuera. 17 de agosto: He llegado a pensar que la revolución operada en el Renacimiento, por la cual el hombre (el humano) se hace medida y centro de todas las cosas, no es tal, sino un efecto exactamente contrario: la disolución de nuestra especie en cuanto nos rodea. Así lo atestigua, por ejemplo, la Revolución Copernicana: el planeta Tierra deja de ser el centro del Universo. Da inicio entonces un proceso de dispersión o multiplicación muy nuestro que culmina —he llegado a pensar— con el Test de Turing. Alan Turing (1912-1954), quien sentó las bases de la computación, enunció así su famoso Test: consideremos tres elementos, a saber, un humano, una máquina y un juez, encerrados en habitaciones separadas aunque con posibilidad de comunicarse vía, por ejemplo, telefónica. Si el juez, a través de preguntas y respuestas, no puede distinguir quién es el humano y quién la máquina, entonces ésta ha de ser considerada como un ente exactamente igual a nosotros, dotado de inteligencia y sensibilidad. Tal fingimiento o tal suplantación de la realidad —he llegado a pensar— además de involuntariamente constituir uno de los fundamentos del posmodernismo, certifica la culminación del proceso de dispersión del hombre (del humano) que había dado inicio en el Renacimiento. 18 de agosto: Las cosas —también los humanos— cuando mueren no cambian. Es un proceso muy parecido al destilado: se convierten en la esencia de lo que eran. Este faro me hunde en la actualidad y en la distancia. Me despierta un ruido en un sueño, me levanto y el ruido estaba fuera, pero no es la cafetera, ni alguien que hace correr agua en la cisterna, ni la puerta que cada verano pierde 2 gramos de cola y cruje en tanto yo sueño con serpientes —todo esto algún día estará bajo el mar pero no será un pecio—, ni gente con la que comparto nombre y no conozco —me he buscado en muchas ciudades del Planeta: abro la guía telefónica y aún nadie se llama como yo. En Monterrey hay uno que tiene mi nombre y mi primer apellido, en Turín otro lleva mi nombre y mi segundo apellido, y es tonto pensar que soy la fusión de esos dos hombres pero lo pienso—, todo ocurre al menos dos veces, comienzo de nuevo, me despierta un ruido en un sueño, me levanto, el primer rayo de sol no tiene memoria e indaga una antigua pista en el espejo, anticipa la voz de los que duermen, sobre la mesa papeles manuscritos emulan un libro, quieren ser un libro —cómo sufraga un objeto su fracaso—, el paquete de tabaco exhibe la fotografía de unos pulmones, son las alas del Ángel de la Historia, un pájaro golpea la ventana y dice que desde hoy nos da la espalda. Vaciamos la casa para irnos, sus paredes un poco abombadas, ligeramente curvos los marcos de las ventanas, tomada por una lógica de ojo de pez, de lente que dentro de tu corazón enfoca exactamente el centro de todo cuanto ya no te irrita. Era aquel día, todo él, con su amanecer y su luz que húmeda tiembla, con su pendular sol en lo alto y su frío de la tarde, con su sacrificio de cerdo degollado y sus pezuñas que no sé por qué llaman manitas, con su crepúsculo del color del vino y su lápida que como una mascota al instante reconoce la novedad de unos huesos, era aquel día, todo él, digo, una Máquina de Turing: «aquello que puede fingir que es humano, deberá ser definido como humano». Me repito como en el crepúsculo la tierra repite el calor que durante el día ha ido acumulando. Los cuerpos: nudos de luz. Alguien la apaga. Lavamos su última ropa, da vueltas en el tambor y cuando llega al punto más alto se desploma. Cualquiera diría que ese pijama busca su propio enterramiento. Al otro lado de la ventana hay un árbol, cien años dando manzanas a pájaros y a humanos. Las palabras escritas en mármol no avanzan, pierden su dialéctica cuando la muerte entra en la cocina, mi hermana pequeña friega y sé que tararea la Canción del Elegido, hay algo antiguo y cenital en el modo en que mueve vasos y cuchillos y filmo esas manos y después la película desaparece en la papelera del iPhone —fue ahí cuando supe que el iPhone no tiene papelera, nunca como entonces he odiado tanto ese cacharro, un pájaro picotea la manzana en busca del gusano—. En ese momento, en el sótano de la casa, alguien cuenta los radios de una bicicleta. Un soleado día de enero en Santa Mónica, un artista llamado Baldesari fue a unas rocas junto al mar. No puede decirse que se tratara de un acantilado, pero casi. Aunque sabía que no le veían, brazo en alto comenzó a saludar a cuantos barcos pasaban. Permaneció todo el día metido en esa actividad. Después contó la historia: meses atrás, en un armario de la casa familiar había hallado una fotografía en la que aparecía su padre, aún joven, en el puerto, despidiendo con el brazo en alto a su madre, quien emigraba a América en un carguero. Él aún no había nacido. Él sólo quiso repetir el gesto. Recordé esa historia cuando hoy, 4.30 de la madrugada, no podía dormir, me levanté y por miedo a despertar a todos no hice café. Abrí un cajón y encontré una fotografía. En una calle de una población española de los años 60, mi padre posa sentado en una moto —su primera Ossa—, mi madre se sienta atrás, mis hermanas también encima y la calle se fuga en un punto que en ese momento aún nadie podía precisar. Yo aún no había nacido. Yo sólo quise repetir el gesto. A veces pienso que en mi vida todo ocurriera dos veces, —mira los trajes que cuelgan en las tintorerías, me dijo, parecen ciudadanos muertos—. En el televisor una mujer da de mamar a su hijo de dos años y reactualiza el mito de la pederastia. Veinticinco años en una casa vacía, tiempo suficiente para la confección de una programación propia. 4.30 de la madrugada, pasa un tractor por mi cabeza y me despierta, ara un campo que en el sueño no tiene materia pero no es ni una estela ni un sonido. Me levanto, todos duermen, inquieto el fondo de sus ojos —veo topos correr hacia una estrella, cuentas corrientes que quieren ser libros de arena—, no busco revelaciones sino herramientas con las que abrir las cosas como se abre una conserva. Me acerco. En torno a la urna el vuelo de un mosquito dibuja una mariposa porque todo animal en movimiento genera individuos de otra especie. Del mismo modo que sólo existe clase media y lo demás es fantasía estadística, el día avanza hacia la noche y después sólo busca el retroceso al mediodía. Mi madre come un bistec y cuando llega a la mitad piensa que todo ha terminado —por cómo posa los cubiertos sobre el plato lo sabemos—. Se levanta, abre el grifo, un vaso de agua, es del pozo, está helada, se agacha, recoge un papel, es el código de barras de un pijama, mira esas barras como quien mira cenizas reunidas, dormirá con ellas desde entonces. «El litio de las baterías cotiza más alto que el oro», dice ahora en la tele la mujer que nos mostró el modo en que caían dos torres en Manhattan, y después afirma: «de esta manera hoy recordamos el día internacional de las mascotas», como horas más tarde afirmaría un sacerdote: «de esta manera hoy recordamos a nuestro hermano José Antonio». Mi madre, frente a la ventana, se pregunta cómo es posible que desde hace horas no pase un solo coche, el código de barras aún en sus manos y un pantano en la mirada. Algunos envases de comida llevan una laca aromática, un perfume —murmura en voz baja—, que sólo detecta el subconsciente. Desde nuestra luz vemos las luces del pueblo y no entiendo por qué no vemos las bombillas, estirpe de abrazos multiplicados, un panal de deseos abrevia el trecho que nos separa de la pretecnología. La rebanada de pan se colapsa bajo el peso de la mermelada, es monocroma. Quedamos nosotros. Todas las manzanas del mundo. Nuestra mochila es memoria química y la memoria el punto que contiene otro punto ligeramente descentrado: lo más parecido a una semilla real. La lluvia —no obstante agosto— no mengua las fachadas, las empaqueta. Los guijarros se emancipan del asfalto y brillan. No son trozos de luna, son lunas. Como todos los que creen saber algo pero no saben nada yo te hablaba del Segundo Principio de la Termodinámica. Tú del Tercero, el trabajo se anula en el cero absoluto de temperatura, lo escribes para mí, se cumple para la coz del caballo, la cabeza de un tornillo, la firma de un contrato de trabajo, la plusvalía que sale en El capital, las cenizas del Estado del Bienestar, pero no para tu espermatozoide, que aun siendo ceniza suda agua de río. El mar se arruga en mí como un mapamundi que tirita. Desde nuestra luz vemos las luces del pueblo, esta casa no es la suma de ángulos rectos, y no entiendo por qué si entre todos acabamos de demoler a hachazos la fábrica de la luz. Al mismo tiempo, a 1.500 kilómetros de distancia, en otra isla yo también escribía: 19 de agosto: Bajo el agua hay un cuarto oscuro donde se revela cuanto ves en la superficie. Lo que era ficción se convierte en documento, y lo que era documento en ficción. Unos niños pescan peces microscópicos. Sus madres, crema factor 100 hecha carne, aguardan el melanoma que las disuelva para siempre. Qué lejos estas algas de los colmillos de un corzo. 20 de agosto: Alguien ha ido a la playa en bicicleta. He confundido las huellas de las ruedas en la arena con rastros de serpiente. Hay objetos situados fuera del tiempo. No sabes si preceden al mundo o lo recuerdan. Cruzo la mirada con una mujer que pasa, reconozco en sus ojos otros ojos (exactamente los mismos, quiero decir) que vi en una catedral de Ámsterdam. Botellas en la orilla. Toda basura es un recuerdo que se manifiesta en estado de monstruo. 21 de agosto: El ojo humano puede engañarse hasta exasperar la fantasía, o esos peces de rarísimas formas que nacen, se desarrollan y mueren a 5.000 metros de profundidad sin jamás ver la luz. Donde no hay luz crecen amorfas las siluetas. Escribir: estar a 5.000 metros de profundidad mientras la memoria simula que hace surf. 22 de agosto: Hoy hemos pensado en el gigantismo. Cómo es posible que 2 metros de ADN quepan en el interior de una célula, o que tus pulmones, desplegados, abarquen una superficie del tamaño de esta misma isla. ¿Tiene sentido llevar dentro una cartografía más grande que el Planeta? La oscuridad que ahora veo también está aquí dentro. 23 de agosto: Creí que era debido al agua: el café tiene sabor metálico. Pero he probado cada uno de sus componentes por separado —leche, agua, sacarosa y grano de café— y en ninguno encuentro ese sabor. Está por toda la ciudad. Volví a sentirlo cuando, en el supermercado, mientras buscaba monedas en el bolsillo sostuve unos instantes la factura entre mis labios. 24 de agosto: Tras la cópula, la mantis religiosa comienza comiendo la nuca del macho, continúa con la cabeza hasta que, tras ingerir todo el cuerpo, deja las alas y se va. Qué no tienen esas alas. 25 de agosto: A veces la comida tiene un rendimiento negativo: en su fabricación y transporte se ha gastado más energía de la que luego, una vez ingerida, aportará a tu cuerpo. El fenómeno es máximo en el caso del agua embotellada. Aquí el agua de mar no erosiona la costa, la corroe. 26 de agosto: Algo que hace de la memoria un objeto único es que sólo existe en primera persona. Los aparatos de aire acondicionado se abren como cangrejos al sol: una relación tan sagrada como si fuera bendecida. 27 de agosto: El conocido ensayo La parte maldita —en el que el heterodoxo pensador francés George Bataille desarrolla teorías acerca de los intercambios simbólicos y económicos dados entre las diferentes culturas— arranca con la ocurrencia de que el sol nos alumbra constantemente con un aporte de energía potencialmente infinita, energía que queramos o no deberemos gastar. Así, el derroche, el sacrificio incluso, no son elecciones políticas o religiosas sino inevitables procesos que nos definen en tanto que formas de vida evolucionadas. Sin embargo en la vida de cualquiera existe un único punto cuya visión directa es negada, un lugar al que nunca podemos mirar, y ese punto no es otro que el sol, el cual por ello se convierte en algo absolutamente negro para nosotros. En ocasiones me he visto conmovido por esta idea: lo que nos alimenta de infinita energía sin pedir nada a cambio, se nos niega estéticamente como experiencia directa de visión. Sólo nos es posible observar el sol a través de diversas técnicas de representación —dibujos en la antigüedad; fotografías y cine hoy mayormente. Aparece entonces la inevitable analogía: hay otro punto cuya visión directa también se nos niega, y ese punto es lo que comúnmente llamamos el yo, objeto excéntrico en tanto que siempre se halla desplazado de sí mismo, y que no obstante llevamos dentro. En efecto: la visión del yo sólo nos es dada mediante técnicas de representación en diferido, nunca directas: textos, grafismos, pinturas, estudios científicos, indagaciones psicoanalíticas, etcétera. Pero aquí y ahora nada me interesa el yo, sino el tú. Sonaron las campanas, todos preparados, mi madre se puso el reloj de oro que él le había comprado el día de mi nacimiento, mi tía el broche de plata que le había regalado cuando se hizo ginecóloga, mis hermanas y yo engastamos en aire la herencia de lo que sobraba. Sonaron de nuevo las campanas, parecían la batería de God Save the Queen, la iglesia una playa a la que le hubieran retirado la arena, y un icono que reza: «Usted Ya No Está Aquí». El camino, largo —no obstante 100 metros—, nos obliga a pasar bajo el peral que él había plantado, perfume de animales territoriales, los abrazos estaban llenos del resto de la vida. Diez rostros, diez nubes de probabilidad en primera fila. Fuimos pisando barro hueco, ídem regresamos. Una mirada, una iluminación, que no vimos. Pasas a su lado y te detienes a ver sus orejas, crecientes como las de una Luna. Sólo sale cuando él duerme. ¿Hace el mismo frío dentro del sueño que fuera? Los gatos se tumban —pantone 134—, sabana de fuego a sus pies. Pasas a su lado y te preguntas qué temperatura hay en un sueño. Los codos del jersey fabrican nubes que yo mismo barro y después me arrepiento: desde el cubo de basura un trueno sin relámpago me despierta. A la gente se la entierra vestida. Aún es más raro que esa ropa tenga bolsillos. Con qué los llenan. Con qué habrán de llenarse. Los mapas no son los países, sino su memoria —pero entonces también su cerebro, es complicado—. La flauta de hueso entonó su himno de prosa desarbolada, de arena continua, de jilgueros en minas de carbón abandonadas. Flauta de hueso calcinado. El cielo es la tierra, dice Silesius (1624-1677), y tiene razón, basta ver cómo las manzanas caen, cómo los rayos de sol descienden, el precipitado de la lluvia, los aviones se estrellan, en fin, recuerda al modo en que en las frases los sujetos avanzan hacia la caída del predicado, a veces los ves correr, hacen mucho ruido —una detonación, un aplastamiento, qué sé yo— y tocan fondo, espero de tu cuerpo el movimiento contrario. NOTA: Creo haber escrito: Las cosas —también los humanos—, cuando mueren no cambian. Es un proceso muy parecido al destilado: se convierten en la esencia de lo que eran. Se lo oí a un personaje de una teleserie y ahora me doy cuenta de que Silesius y ese personaje dicen exactamente lo mismo. FIN DE LA NOTA En qué momento se instala el laberinto en tu cabeza. Antes de existir O2 las únicas formas de vida habitaban bajo tierra. Un año más tarde, con pasmosa fe en lo silvestre ella cortó unas rosas —habían sido plantadas pero tanto tiempo atrás que las raíces lo habían olvidado—, y unas hierbas verdes de cuneta, hierbas de las que nadie podría decir su nombre, la seguí hasta la tumba y en un tarro que a mí me pareció de mermelada metió el ramo, vertió agua. En un beso hay tres millones de bacterias. También en la boca de un recién nacido. Las pseudomonas limpiaron el cielo de la Capilla Sixtina, en esos dos famosos dedos que se rozan dieron fin a su tarea y con ello también dieron fin a su tarea los dos dedos. Ante el ramo estornudé tanto y tantas veces que creí vaciarme. Sospecho que muy lejos, tras una puerta unos labios —labios globales, labios que son todo un cuerpo—, rezaban. Los seres vivos más antiguos del planeta son bacterias, medio millón de años atrapadas bajo el hielo y respiran, están ahora mismo respirando. Cada día me resulta más raro que a la gente no se la entierre en el metro cuadrado de tierra donde le llega su último aliento. Yo aún no había iniciado mi peregrinación al desierto de la portada de Kid-A. La huella es algo que al ver comprendes de pronto. Aparece humo —no obstante agosto— en las chimeneas de las casas, asciende unos metros y flota como excremento en agua salada, no son lágrimas sino el cloruro sódico que toda familia lleva dentro. Todo eso ya es estadística del tiempo, tablas de doble entrada, genes que ebrios de certeza cabecean contra los cristales, no migran, no pueden ser luz, y el montón de discos duros que escondí entre las conservas de leguminosas. Nada se transmite de un cuerpo a otro, el árbol genealógico sólo era una de esas sofisticadas bromas que todo experimento necesita para poder salir en Nature. Pienso en el aire de los neumáticos que sin pedir nada a cambio nos traía cada verano, busco pulmones de caucho en desguaces a un lado y a otro de la carretera. Los kilómetros repiten la insignificancia de un trozo de mica que alguien ha estirado porque sí. La lentitud de los cuerpos me parece ahora un batallón de glaciares —trémulos, pasamos de largo—. Este atardecer no es oro, pero sí dorado. Me dice: «repite conmigo sin parar Silicon Valley, Silicon Valley, Silicon Valley, Silicon Valley..., a que suena a algo muy primitivo, como quien dice Cuevas de Altamira o Valle de los Reyes». Todo lo que había en mis ojos por sí solo se ha ido cayendo —como si el mundo fuera postilla de una herida que no cicatriza—. Miedo (definición): nadie llama al ascensor pero llega vacío. No hemos sido extraídos sino arrancados de las formas orgánicas, somos esa cosa que, medio viva y medio muerta, a través de un cable de cobre busca su regreso. Pero adónde. Cuanto era amargo y triste —aunque perfectamente entendible— se transformó en una estúpida combinación de inocencia y paz. La poesía no es literatura, y de ser algo es su ciencia. En toda casa —fíjate— hay una ventana por la que nunca entra directamente el sol, y no necesariamente es la que da al Norte. Vivo por y para la basura de esas experiencias. También la carne de corzo es intraducible, ha de permanecer en su medio. Ahora sé que la muerte existe y es analfabeta. Eché de menos los días que hablabas y en tu boca todo era mentira y verdad al mismo tiempo, incluso cuando ya no me reconocías te esmerabas en cepillarte tú mismo los dientes, o años atrás, cuando en cada excursión al mundo —domingo por la mañana, un helado italiano, un petrolero que se hunde, creo que era el Urquiola—, el tiempo no estaba sujeto a la propiedad conmutativa. Son las matrices, dijiste. Y los contenedores de basura más en silencio que nunca. La noche se pega a los objetos y no entiendo cómo brillan. La luna, una mancha de nacimiento. La barandilla de la terraza, exactamente paralela al horizonte demuestra que es posible construir aquí dentro una Tierra completa, el prestigio social de la medicina hipocrática, el clamoroso timo de la homeopatía, la crítica literaria, conjuro que en un matraz mezcla jurisprudencia y estadística —nada saben aún de la probabilidad—. Echo de menos otra exhibición de tus poderes. Hemos regresado a la casa, no sabes en qué momento tu cuerpo se separa de ti, es voz en otros, hallamos una cafetera deformada, dibujos de cómo deshacer nudos creo que imposibles, perchas vaciadas pues toda percha es una caja abstracta. Pierde lo doméstico su temor a parecerse a caminos de montaña, y tu cara de niebla en la mía que también es niebla. Eché de menos cuando en cualquier comarcal acelerabas y nos adelantábamos al tiempo. Todo esto nada tiene que ver con la fábrica de la luz de la que me hablaba mi madre, río arriba manan truchas y piedras porque las piedras son las tripas de las truchas y cada piedra lleva dentro la ciudad que podrá ser construida, y sin embargo a veces me parece llegar al otro lado de la casa, lo antiguo se convierte en maleza, el invierno deshace los clavos de las puertas —química que conspira para abrirnos la que conduce al invierno—, el claxon del panadero llegaba mucho antes que el pan, no así la fruta que —volcánica su pulpa— ya nos ardía dentro. Para ser Tom Sawyer sólo hace falta leerlo, para vivir como Tom Sawyer hay que destruirlo, la palabra ser no significa nada en la creciente maleza al otro lado de la casa. El mundo tiene un plan para dominar el mundo. El reflejo de tu cara en el río anuncia lo que crecerá infinitamente incomunicado pero contigo. Hay en cada poro un paraíso y una catástrofe. Una trucha desova y cada huevo es el tictac de un segundero, me cronometra a distancia. Un guarda ríos hace la vista gorda y tal prevaricación nos ilumina, llevaba botas de plástico, un cordel a la cintura y una camiseta que decía Iowa, —fue la primera vez que vi una w más allá de un papel, y la primera vez que leí la palabra Iowa—. Las tumbas no están quietas, avanzan hacia el centro de la Tierra, los esqueletos convierten calcio en hielo, y allí hierven. Esperamos vapor de agua. El agua es fuego que, invertido, regresa. Pero dónde están sus manantiales. Cabezas, manos, pies, todo allí abajo. La fruta la componen trozos de agua sucia, unidos. Las películas son muertos que hablan por boca de otros. El viento avanza helicoidalmente: un tubo de vacío. Estamos 20 mil leguas por debajo del centro de la Tierra. La pantalla se llena de agujeros que tienen silueta de letra, cuanto escribo se va por esos huecos —esa imagen es tan buena que no la arruinaré explicándola—. Somos los cyborg del dolor porque hemos sido preparados para aguantarlo. Si digo somos las piedras del dolor la imagen funciona igualmente. ¿En qué momento se instala el laberinto de las permutaciones en tu cabeza? «Está calculado que el número de vueltas que da el motor de un coche durante su vida útil es aproximadamente igual al número de latidos del corazón en la vida de un mamífero.» ¿Y qué? —pregunto—. Nadie tuvo en cuenta el marcapasos —responde—. 4.30 de la madrugada, no podía dormir, como si hubiera perdido la fe en el sueño. Nunca fui el hombre que él creyó ser pero sí en el que hasta el final confió heces y sueños. Caminé doce kilómetros hasta el inicio del valle. La carretera, paralela a los chopos, otra llama helada. Me detuve en un prado, última extensión civilizada antes de las montañas en las que nace el viento. Creo haberme detenido en este mismo lugar 40 años atrás. Las hierbas que hoy lo cubren no son las mismas, ni la corteza de los chopos, ni sus ramas ni sus hojas, tampoco la tierra —al menos en sus primeras capas— puede ser la misma, ni el muro de piedra, ligeramente oval, que lo circunda como las costillas perimetran un pulmón gastado, y sin embargo reconozco todo al instante, como si por debajo del lugar permaneciera algo físico y material, algo que se halla más allá de la memoria y por ignorancia o abreviar llamamos espacio. O puede que nada tenga que ver con todo eso sino con el camino que acaba de traerme hasta aquí, hasta este cuerpo que a pesar de inerte —diría que en cenizas— reconozco mío. Por todo cuanto no son se propagan los muertos. Elijo otro sendero de regreso mientras ensayo la conversación que algún día tendré contigo. Náufragos que de pronto no saben hacer fuego con dos palos, hemos atravesado la noche, el automóvil avanza en contra de la rotación de la Tierra, los vinilos se enmohecen en las discotecas, sus surcos son pictogramas a los que toda lengua secretamente aspira. Siempre tuve la virtud de romper el ambiente. Los cuerpos muestran el conflicto de un salario intermitente, la marea es el único reloj que pasa de la arena. Aquí no hay ensayo-error. Me acuesto en la misma habitación donde esta noche mi cerebro emitió un sueño, ni él ni la habitación lo recuerdan. Faltaban muchos años para exhibirnos en la publicidad de los barrios, la infancia carecía de sabor digno de ser recordado. Las celdas de las células tenían otra idéntica afuera: alguien nos espera en el mar, climatología de estómago, y la hez, ese ojo opaco. Hay algo religioso y sin sentido práctico en estas flores que cuelgan al sol boca abajo, cuerpos secos y rancios, los pájaros son sacos pensativos, llevan consigo las llaves de todas las jaulas, entre dos cuerpos se alza un animal de palabras, mimbre de esa legendaria cesta que contiene todas las podridas. Entre la ciudad y los conglomerados rurales existe un lugar no pisado, pongo un pie y mi miedo es un miedo estándar. Los días se suceden concéntricos, de modo que son un solo día. Las balas que para festejar la conquista de un territorio alguien disparó al aire en un país lejano, confiadas en su chorro de energía vienen a caer a este valle, no lo hacen más fértil pero tampoco menos habitado. Llegamos a los umbrales del asfalto blanco, el instante se sustancia y apareces tú. Domingo por la tarde, una cuerda une la orilla con la barca, flotaba y parecía magia, nos observa gente de corazón boca abajo, como si al nacer la gravedad rotara o se plegara a un miedo luminoso e inguinal al mismo tiempo. Todo movimiento es esbozo de otro que temes, y llega. Al calendario se le amputa un día, cronofagia para poder palpar la tartamudez que al final asalta las costas más tiernas de los cuerpos. Resulta ensordecedor ver crecer las hojas de los árboles, las camadas de conejos, la edad de los astronautas allí arriba mientras aquí se nos encogen los huesos, o el beso: economía cuyo hematoma más exacto es el dinero. Tengo esta visión: mis hermanas y yo de la mano, en una playa. Después dejas de ver la muerte como algo sustancialmente distinto a ti, la desplazas, como si la ropa sucia la metieras en los bolsillos de la que usas, o esos hijos adoptados que no sabes por qué buscan a sus padres biológicos. Soy una espina de cactus que bajo el sol no espera nada. Me turba pensar que las paredes de esta habitación llevan dentro animales triturados, finísimo polvo de insectos, algas de río, conchas marinas, cuernos de vaca, mamíferos de gran tamaño, algo que tuvo la alucinación de ser vida. Cuando dos trenes AVE se cruzan los separan 600 kilómetros por hora, y ni se rozan, la lámina de aire que media es la guerra del vacío contra el cuerpo, de la glucosa contra el aspartamo, de las academias contra las ciudades y los pueblos. Mirábamos fotografías y convocábamos voces, oíamos voces y convocábamos fotografías, no todos los círculos presentan tal esterilidad, mira si no la rueda que sube el agua del pozo, la rotación del disco duro y la de la Tierra, la masturbación o la duplicidad de las Torres Gemelas. Somos figuras a punto de dejar la Tierra, lo afirmo en el mismo sentido en que los brazos siempre están a punto de dejar el cuerpo, y las manos los brazos, y los dedos las manos, y así hasta llegar al aire que por no ser nosotros —precisamente por no ser nosotros— necesitamos respirar. Flotan y descienden las hojas del río, son ya partículas de río. Si pudiera dibujar sus trayectorias vería filamentos de un músculo al cual el cauce da forma y los cantos rodados alimento. Primer atlas de anatomía. Y de pronto el caudal gira y se convierte en ruleta, carrusel, noria, isospín que a derecha y a izquierda separa para siempre las partículas en el núcleo atómico. Yo no vi a Dios, estuve dentro de él, especialmente en sus testículos, esponjas empapadas de un barro muy oscuro, pizarroso y basáltico, aprietas y ordeñas renacuajos a los que resulta imposible encontrarles un comportamiento racional, una pauta. Hasta los 25 años no vi un desierto, no pertenece a mi experiencia de niñez, tarro vacío que voy llenando de cuanta esencia se me va ocurriendo y construyo una segunda niñez, y luego otra, y otra y otra: la serie tiende a infinito: una pista de despegue. Partículas de polvo llegan desde el desierto, nos buscan porque somos su alergia, el mar imita a las piscinas, veo un grupo de gente en la arena, juegan al balón, comen fruta, tumbonas de apagados colores, una niña y un anciano mojan los pies en la orilla, y una radio que a volumen muy alto susurra: «play it, Sam, play as time goes by», siento la necesidad de aproximarme, decirles que deseo ser uno de ellos, la identidad es la alucinación del ego, tampoco valías para el tiro al blanco, el blanco iba dentro de ti, creo que no hay genios en mi especie. Oyes gritar pero es imposible saber qué cosas trae un grito dentro, tampoco al futbolista le importa qué átomos contiene el balón, ni al contable cuánta miseria cabe en un billete, todo esto carece de cocción pero viene a mi mente como un haz de luz e ilumina tu nombre. Hemos vuelto a la casa, tiene un aire de escuela antigua pero hipertecnificada, mi madre prepara café aguado, miro por la ventana, se aproxima una tormenta, mi futuro se halla a cinco minutos de mí. Creo no haber tenido infancia. Las miradas tienden a infinito, tienden muy rápidamente, entre esa vegetación apareces tú: cuchillo que se desfunde en sus metales pero no quema. Todo ha pasado de moda, estamos en la postmoda del ser humano. Traen escopetas, la mirada inclinada como farolas de urbanización, luz curva de crepúsculo, la España subdesarrollada, baquelita y calcio en los cimientos de esta casa deshabitada once meses al año —programación propia—. El principio no fue la luz, ni el verbo, ni el conflicto, el principio fue mal tiempo y borrasca en los pañales, revalidar el pacto entre el cuerpo y su extrarradio, así nacen los reyes. Bajo tierra corren los animales hacia su metamorfosis, las patas se alinean con el campo magnético terrestre, después lloras sentada en la cuneta, «cómo podremos llegar al final del valle», me dices. Tengo esta visión: un pájaro se desploma y dibuja un polinomio en la acera. Al pie de los árboles vimos frutos pasto de roedores, grumos de hormigas sobre los dátiles, hablamos toda la noche de nada pues de un jardín sólo emanan cosas imposibles. Amanecía cuando oímos el disparo. Más allá de las montañas alguien abatía una criatura salvaje. Creo firmemente que algún día nos veremos en el cielo de la carne, la maquinaria del frío está en marcha, en todas la lenguas hay palabras que no existen, ballenas u otros bichos que de vez en cuando aparecen varados en la arena, miles de kilojulios, sofisticados kilojulios, un voluntario jadea como si diera a luz y jadeo yo como si diera a luz cuando por la noche corro en círculos en tanto mi semen expresa su violencia —mi miedo es un miedo estándar—. Como esos finales de canciones que ganan impulso a medida que se desvanecen, un féretro recorre los últimos centímetros antes de que alguien cierre la compuerta por la que se hará llama. El misterio de la Santísima Trinidad lo componen tres espejos, habías comprado un sofá tapizado con flores que no existen, toda una vida para entender esas flores. La muerte es múltiple, carece el rostro de solución única, imprecisa es la mirada de un bebé, cada tres olas llega la mortal, también mortales son estas ráfagas de amanecer en el que todos duermen y por no despertarles he caminado hasta el final del valle. Me sale al paso —no tiemblo—, me dice: «ya nadie se llamará como yo, pero te dejo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro, todo dura cuanto desees, no hay nada que razonablemente se oponga a la dicha de contemplar un trozo de agua, un fragmento de sol. La seguridad, te dejo, de que la piel envejece porque somos un horno, y que la noche tiene agujeros que conducen a otra noche, el corazón es entonces un órgano poroso, lo ilimitado nace de las limitaciones, no te disculpes por buscar tu posición exacta en la Tierra, no es cierto que haya que vislumbrar la muerte para apreciar lo vivido, sólo es una alternativa, ya nadie se llamará como yo pero te dejo un detector de latidos en los objetos, y los músculos y vísceras que haya podido tocar, y la idea de un camino — también te dejo— que conduce a unas alas de mariposa: activa las tormentas: evita las ceremonias: huye de la literatura: ten fe en la materia sobre todas las cosas». II Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro (oración) La poesía de lo invisible, la poesía de las infinitas potencialidades imprevisibles, así como la poesía de la nada, nacen de un poeta que no tiene dudas sobre la fisicidad del mundo. ITALO CALVINO Un ser indeterminado vaga por los valles, aúlla en las cumbres, duerme bajo la nieve, sus huellas cobran en todo momento varias direcciones. Sin embargo, siente el campo magnético terrestre. Lo sé porque sus pisadas siguen las vetas de ciertos minerales. (Cardiología) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Las células de la retina son las mismas que las de la piel porque cuando somos embrión la retina forma parte de la piel. Esto nos da una pista de por qué la literatura de cualquier civilización establece multitud de analogías entre los ojos, la epidermis y aquello que las relaciona, la luz. (Grandes migraciones, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. El lobo nos expulsa porque sabe que en su tórax hay una zona, no más grande que el hueso de una cereza, increíblemente dulce para un paladar que creemos haber olvidado. (Zoofilia, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En una gran superficie vi niños jugar con los balones del expositor, pedalear y en cualquier parte abandonar la bicicleta, saltar a la comba, sin pauta golpear sacos de boxeo; los que no gritaban reían. «Éstos ya han crecido aquí dentro, no conocen otra cosa», me dijo. (Momentos fundacionales, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. La tierra batida empleada en el juego del tenis se obtiene del triturado de miles de ladrillos de urbanizaciones abandonadas. (Grandes migraciones, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Ante el objetivo de la cámara los animales posan no porque se sientan mirados. La pose es anterior a sus miradas, incluso a sus cuerpos. La pose es ciega pero olfatea, se orienta. (Espeleología, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En el medio rural la Naturaleza se halla estrictamente separada del hábitat humano: entre la casa y el campo son levantadas barreras físicas y climáticas dispuestas a asegurar la supervivencia. En las ciudades, el paisaje urbano forma un continuo con el interior de los edificios, la ciudad entra en los apartamentos en forma de color, olor, materiales y fauna y flora incluso. Es esa continuidad lo que asegura la supervivencia de los habitantes de un medio urbano. (Climatología extrema, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En mí no hay cuerpo: soy una nave que viaja en la misma dirección que la Tierra. (Mascota, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Respecto a los antiguos y sus lenguas, hoy muertas, hay que señalar que sólo conservamos sus textos, las grafías que nos han dejado, no el registro sonoro, de modo que no tenemos idea de cómo pronunciaban las palabras. Si pudiéramos oír hoy a un griego del siglo 4 a. C. pronunciar poiesis, o a un romano decir rosae, es posible que oyéramos lo que para nosotros serían rugidos o el canto de un pájaro. Sólo pensar en la Cleopatra de Elizabeth Taylor emitiendo sonidos como de perro, ballena o robot, un escalofrío echaría por tierra gran parte de nuestra idea de Historia, de civilización incluso. Nos queda la materialidad muda de aquella escritura y nos procuramos un paisaje sonoro, construido como fantasía. Así, lo único que convoca en tiempo real y de verdad el pasado es el sonido. De ahí la importancia que se les da a las voces en el espiritismo, en los conciertos en directo, en los mítines propagandísticos, etcétera. La voz humana más antigua registrada son los 35 segundos de recitación del poema «America», leído en 1890 por su propio autor, Walt Whitman, y grabado en un primitivo cilindro de cera. 35 segundos en los que, además de parecer llegar el poeta desde ultratumba, es fundado el año cero del habla humana tal como hoy la conocemos. (Manantial, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Lo normal es que la última visión que conservamos de una persona sea su cuerpo atravesando una puerta. De una habitación, de un portal, de una tienda o de un coche, pero siempre una puerta. (Cuando la vida y sus automatismos te obligan a elegir entre dos cosas aparentemente iguales, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Aquí las hormigas parten bajo tierra y trepan en dirección al campanario, pero no se valen de líneas rectas. Una leyenda afirma que el día que alcancen la campana, ésta sonará de tal modo que resucitarán todos los insectos que alguna vez han existido. (Sistema nervioso, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En los diferentes trabajos que cotidianamente acometo, las manos y la mirada siempre llegan tarde al encuentro que para ellas yo había preparado. Las formas quedan en suspensión durante cierto tiempo. Es entonces cuando ocurren los desarreglos que de verdad importan. (Realismo complejo, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. El estado de la materia al cual llamamos hielo, es más elemental que la roca, pero necesita de más sofisticadas herramientas para ser entendido por las manos. (Manantial, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. No estamos seguros, pero creemos que antes de los cinco años de edad los dos hemisferios del cerebro aún no han diferenciado totalmente sus funciones. Esto da a entender que procesos también expansivos como el big bang o la aparición de las diferentes lenguas a partir de una común llamada indoeuropeo, son eco de ese mapa indiferenciado que en la niñez fue nuestro cerebro. Tampoco estamos seguros, pero creemos que ambos hemisferios vuelven a juntarse en la duermevela. (Isomorfismo, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Los salmones del Pacífico regresan a sus aguas de nacimiento y allí todos, sin excepción, mueren. No así los salmones del Atlántico, que sobreviven para, como espejos, al menos una vez más reemprender la ruta. (Lección de geografía, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Las últimas palabras que Óscar Pérez, alpinista malherido en un resalte del Latok I, Himalaya (7.125 m), le dijo a su compañero Álvaro López, quien se disponía a descender para organizar un rescate que finalmente nunca llegaría, fueron, «súbeme tabaco». (Mejor poema del año 2010) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Los animales disecados retienen en sus ojos lo último que vieron: la mirada de la muerte. Es costumbre cerrarle los párpados a un muerto. (Lección de geografía, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Se ha llegado al convencimiento de que los conflictos asociados a la autoría de las cosas, especialmente a las obras de arte, hunden su origen en el hecho cierto de que la Historia ha sido construida y relatada por varones, no por mujeres. Dicho de otro modo: la identificación de la maternidad siempre está asegurada, no así la paternidad, que podría corresponder a cualquiera. (Grandes migraciones, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Hay una línea continua entre Lucrecio (De la naturaleza de las cosas), Walt Whitman (Hojas de hierba) y David Foster Wallace (La broma infinita), pero no necesariamente en ese orden. Quiero decir que no es esa línea un vector, sino un músculo, una red, carece de dirección privilegiada. La demostración es demasiado amplia como para tener cabida aquí y ahora. (Cardiología, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Prefiero los mataderos a las grandes superficies comerciales. Ni en las moscas ni en los cuchillos, ni en las tripas que de pronto se desploman detecto vestigio alguno de mi fin. (Cuando la vida y sus automatismos te obligan a elegir entre dos cosas aparentemente iguales, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En un bote, que después guardé en el frigorífico, he mezclado tu sangre con la mía. Borrar nuestros respectivos rastros. Que nunca pueda ser analizada. (Grandes migraciones, 4) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Las ideologías se desarrollaron por manchas informes: la humedad del mundo. Cuando el desierto las secó —y sólo cuando las secó— aparecieron siluetas humanas, casi siempre con cabeza pero sin caras. (Lección de geografía, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. A finales del siglo XIX, los dos temas de estudio más repetidos en las revistas científicas eran la posibilidad del color en las fotografías y la futura construcción de un túnel que atravesase el canal de la Mancha. Ambas hablan de lo mismo: cómo ver arriba y cómo ver abajo. (Espeleología, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Te dispones a comer y te preguntas por el origen de esos trozos de carne. ¿Pertenecen a un mismo animal o son la reunión de diferentes individuos, venidos desde varios puntos del planeta a la fosa común que, en ese caso, es tu plato? Cómo es posible tener ante ti un pollo con dos patas izquierdas. No menos extraño resulta el plato compuesto por trozos de carne de un mismo animal, llegado desde la muerte para ti y sólo para ti: una relación de tú a tú con esa vaca, con ese pollo. Los ritos de matanza — sobre todo del cerdo— son verdaderos ritos porque se ejecutan sobre uno y sólo un individuo. Esto acostumbra a culminar con la reunión, casi siempre numerosa y en torno a una mesa continua, en la cual, una vez cocinado, se degusta lo recién eviscerado. En los Estados Unidos de América, el día de Acción de Gracias un pavo completo, sin trocear, se pone sobre la mesa para que pueda ser observado por todos antes de ser trinchado. Lo mismo ocurre con el cordero pascual en la tradición judía, hoy ampliado a la católica. Tal unicidad del ejemplar digerido es lo que da cohesión al clan. Por su parte, la tribu ciudadana, cuya carne de consumo acostumbra a provenir de dispersas bandejas de supermercado, hubo de inventar rituales que la mantuvieran unida. Hechos ciertos como no mezclar vajillas en una misma mesa, no mezclar clases de agua o de vino, la continuidad de las lenguas de asfalto, la unión humana que supone el alcantarillado o las oficinas del paro, son ecos sustitutivos de aquel único cerdo que una vez eviscerado todos juntos alguna vez comimos. (Cuando la vida y sus automatismos te obligan a elegir entre dos cosas aparentemente iguales, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. El tiempo es la casa de quien no tiene otro lugar. Pero el lugar es la casa de aquel que se ha visto defraudado por el tiempo. Al contrario que el fotógrafo, no busco el «momento decisivo» sino un intervalo de tiempo cualquiera. El ratón repite su ruta hasta que el corazón le dice basta. Un bote de lejía vacío yace en el huerto, pronto será un balón. (Mascota, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En el sótano del Museo de Historia Natural se sumerge otro museo: animales en vitrinas o amontonados sin fecha ni continente. ¿Soñó alguna vez el oso polar compartir una molécula de aire con la iguana? En ese sótano, sólo una vez al año el vigilante acciona el interruptor de la luz. Apenas 5 segundos, y apaga. (Climatología extrema, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. A menudo pienso que no es la vigilia quien conduce los sueños, sino al contrario, fue creada para ilustrarlos. (Dibujo técnico) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Para que un sistema biológico, químico o físico, sufra alguna clase de inestabilidad se necesita, en primer lugar, la existencia de al menos dos variables dinámicas, y en segundo lugar, que éstas tengan movimientos contrapuestos. De la inestabilidad resultante aparecerá un nuevo orden. Por ejemplo, el proceso mediante el cual a partir de un indiferenciado estado fetal se crean los órganos de nuestros cuerpos —un ojo es un objeto claramente diferenciado de una uña—, o el patrón de rayas que se dibuja en la piel de los tigres o las jirafas. La peculiaridad es que estos patrones y modos de crecimiento son independientes de la geometría del experimento, es decir, son independientes de lo grande o pequeño que sea un humano, o de que nos fijemos en un tigre o una jirafa concretos. Ello hace pensar que se trata de un comportamiento universal. Alan Turing (1952), en los últimos años de su vida, a fin de explicar todo ello, enunció el modelo de reacción- difusión. El modelo de reacción-difusión puede explicar también violentos e imprevisibles movimientos financieros, tal como han publicado recientemente I. Mastromatteo, B. Tóth, y J. P. Bouchaud en Physical Review Letters. El sistema viene dado en este caso por dos variables dinámicas (oferta y demanda) sujetas a dos movimientos contrapuestos (vender lo más caro posible, comprar lo más barato posible). La oferta y la demanda son tomadas aquí como dos partículas físicas que entrasen en colisión. Si sus valores son coincidentes, el sistema permanece estable; en caso de que los valores difirieran más allá de un rango no muy grande, el mercado entra en estado crítico, se convierte en un sistema no lineal, de caóticas consecuencias, por ello difícilmente previsibles. Charles Wright en alguno de sus poemas afirma que las tumbas no tienen rincones soleados. Hemos encontrado uno que ciega. (Realismo complejo, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Cuando un náufrago consigue atrapar un pez, lo primero que come son los ojos porque el 99,99 % de su contenido es agua potable. Piensa esos millones de ojos como manantiales de agua dulce que, suspendidos, se desplazan en el interior del mar. (Zoofilia 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. La boca es el órgano principal de las conquistas. La historia de las civilizaciones equivale al modo en que vamos masticando el mundo. Maleza, minerales, carne, no hay reino que no sometamos constante y diariamente al test de las mandíbulas. (Fósiles blandos, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Toda obra, para ser creíble, ha de llevar dentro una refutación de sí misma. Pero también ocurre con el agua, el aire, la arena, las piedras, etcétera. (Manantial, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Por otra parte, la casa de campo, de estar viva lo está por la continua agresividad de lo que tiene afuera: incesantemente es comida por los elementos, se diría que la propia tierra la devora. El árbol es devorado por la naturaleza, y no importa, todo él regresa de algún modo a una red de causas y efectos que lo restituye: un árbol es un objeto en cierto modo elástico, recupera su forma original, no aumenta la entropía del Universo. Pero la casa de campo, primero será pulida, luego lijada, más tarde bombardeada y finalmente derruida por el viento, el sol y la lluvia, y jamás volverá a ser casa, e incrementa así el desorden del Universo. En suma: la carne es una fábrica de carne, la madera es una fábrica de madera, pero la casa de campo es una fábrica de entropía. Algo no menos cierto: también el perfume de las flores en realidad es el proceso de putrefacción de sus pétalos. (Fósiles blandos, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. El alcantarillado, como sistema que conecta todas y cada una de las viviendas de una ciudad, es una estructura antes que nada moral. (Fósiles blandos, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Igual que en las tazas mal lavadas, en el fondo del mar yace un dulzor que no sabemos de dónde llega, y una hipotermia en las cosas que las iguala a las capas más altas de la atmósfera. Pero la superficie de la Tierra, con sus cumbres y sus valles, sus desiertos y sus céspedes, sus fallas y cizallamientos —con sus arrugas en suma—, es la legítima neurosis del Planeta. (Realismo complejo, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En los textos literarios, los trastornos más comunes tienen que ver con la mente y con el aparato digestivo. Los de la mente se fundan y simultáneamente alcanzan su cénit con el Quijote, pero en tono de chanza; siglos más tarde, y con dramático prestigio, se consolidan en el romanticismo. Los digestivos vienen originados en épocas más antiguas, en la cuales digerir bien o mal los alimentos constituía una frontera real entre la vida y la muerte. Así, es posible decir que el cerebro y las tripas son los 2 polos de la literatura universal. Y están dentro de ti. (Cuando la vida y sus automatismos te obligan a elegir entre dos cosas aparentemente iguales, 4) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. El lenguaje de la ciencia es tremendamente preciso en cuanto a los sustantivos pero espectacularmente metafórico en cuanto a los verbos. ¿Cómo es posible que un gas sufra una expansión? ¿Cómo es posible que una partícula sienta una fuerza? ¿O que un gen se exprese? (Para la fundación de un nuevo marxismo, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Todo el iridio que conocemos (usado tanto en la fabricación de motores de avión como, por ejemplo, en la terapia de ciertos tumores) es de origen extraterrestre, posiblemente del meteorito que impactó para formar lo que hoy es el Golfo de México. En justa correspondencia, producto de ese impacto escombros terrestres salieron despedidos, superaron la velocidad de escape de la Tierra y fueron a dar a la Luna. (Grandes migraciones, 5) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. La más vasta manifestación del realismo resulta de extrapolar estadísticas hacia el futuro. La más ingenua manifestación de nostalgia, de extrapolar esas mismas estadísticas hacia el pasado. Las parejas se separan. No lo saben, pero cada uno se lleva una parte. (Manantial, 4) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En el siglo XVII, Rembrandt, como arranque del camino que le llevaría a su célebre Lección de anatomía, pintó Buey desollado, cuerpo de res abierto y radicalmente expuesto a la luz. Muchos siglos después alguien se propone devolver la luz a su lugar de origen y abre un átomo en canal. (Fósiles blandos, 4) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Las truchas no desovan en Ofelia, sino que la devoran, pero dejan intacto el vestido. Quizá por culpa de esos tintes venidos de China. Quizá porque no esté bien cosido. Quizá porque tiene muchos peces dibujados, acaso truchas como ellas. (Limbo) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En física nuclear existe el llamado modelo de capas. Desarrollado en torno a 1950 por Eugene P. Wigner. Hoy en desuso, fue utilizado para explicar el comportamiento de los neutrones y protones en el interior del núcleo atómico. Sospecho que fue inspirado por Leonardo da Vinci, quien asó un buey en cuyo estómago previamente había introducido una ternera, y dentro del estómago de esa ternera una oveja, y dentro del estómago de la oveja un pollo, y dentro del estómago del pollo un huevo de pollo, y todo así, como por capas. (Para la fundación de un nuevo marxismo, 1) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. He releído libretas en las que anotaba cosas, y ya no las entiendo. No volveré a estar entre esos sonidos. Busco la macha de clorofila en otra parte. El cuerpo ha cerrado puertas, se alejan las canciones que inventabas para mí. Un mago extrae conejos de la boca, no sobreviven más allá del mediodía. (Mascota, 3) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. El homo erectus es el único animal que cazó sobre dos patas. Pero la postura erguida y el cerebro de gran tamaño suponían una pesada carga para su corazón en comparación con los cazadores cuadrúpedos, cuyos rabos, corazones, cerebros y dientes se encuentran en una línea prácticamente horizontal. La verticalidad como método de diferenciación del resto de las especies es aún la manera más elemental de afirmación humana. (Astronáutica —cohetes) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Hay tanta gente ahí afuera mendigando un retuit, un like. Real consolidación del capitalismo. (Fósiles blandos, 5) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Un individuo, con los ojos cerrados, camina por su propia casa y sabe perfectamente dónde están todas las cosas. El mismo individuo, en oscuridad total y en esa misma casa, camina con los ojos abiertos y tropieza con todo. (Cuando la vida y sus automatismos te obligan a elegir entre dos cosas aparentemente iguales, 5) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Hay quien cree que la energía realmente existe, que se puede tocar como se toca un objeto, pero lo único que vemos son sus manifestaciones, a las cuales convenimos llamar trabajo. Es el trabajo lo único que se puede medir, pesar, registrar, ponderar. Podría narrarse la Historia de Occidente únicamente con arreglo al siguiente criterio: el modo en que hemos ido transformado esa entelequia o magia llamada energía en cosas concretas: objetos, herramientas, ciudades, lenguaje, hasta alcanzar el más pequeño detalle doméstico. Es ese paso de la fantasmal energía al trabajo concreto lo que nos define. El movimiento inverso resulta chamánico, religioso o antiilustrado: ir de lo doméstico a la energía, es decir, diluir lo palpable, el trabajo, en una nube energética. ¿No oímos acaso a menudo: «esta casa tiene buenas energías», o «esa persona me carga de energía negativa»? (dicho sea de paso, la energía, por definición, nunca es negativa). En resumen: el pensamiento poético se ve devaluado en pensamiento mágico cuando el sujeto cree realmente lo que el poema le está contando, cuando no distingue entre metáfora y realidad —o dicho de otro modo, entre energía y trabajo—. Agradecemos por ello a Karl Marx que en sus textos nunca hablara de energía, sólo de trabajo. (Para la fundación de un nuevo marxismo, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. Llegado este punto, la pregunta pertinente es la contraria, ¿puede una tormenta en el Golfo de México provocar el batir de alas de una mariposa de Bombay? (Sistema nervioso, 2) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. En un lugar de Bangladesh hay un desguace de trasatlánticos, petroleros, cargueros, verdaderas ciudades flotantes ahora en tierra. Los trabajadores, todos ellos varones, despiezan a mano esos gigantes, de modo que cada trozo debe tener un tamaño tal que pueda ser transportado por un solo hombre. Un barco puede llegar a trocearse hasta en 1 millón de estas partes. A fin de que el buque no se caiga, el desguace se inicia por la proa y la popa al mismo tiempo, para ir avanzando hacia el punto central donde se ubica el centro de gravedad —es un tanteo, ese centro de gravedad en todo momento se desconoce—. En ese proceso el barco adquiere muchos aspectos, algunos verdaderamente agradables, otros francamente monstruosos, en función de sus formas y colores. A la última pieza —no más grande que la palma de una mano—, los trabajadores acostumbran a llamarla alma. (Duelo) Veo un bosque y algo más vivo dentro. CRÉDITOS Y AGRADECIMIENTOS El esqueleto de Ya nadie se llamará como yo —acaso mi poemario más narrativo y quizá el más explícitamente biográfico— fue escrito en el verano de 2012 entre León y Palma de Mallorca, y terminado en 2015. Algunos de sus poemas y fragmentos los he usado en el vídeo-diario Agosto-Mecanismos, disponible en mi blog El Hombre Que Salió de La Tarta, también en sesiones de spoken word con Afterpop Fernández y Fernández, y en la invitación a participar en el disco The Drums of Twilight, del grupo Vacabou. El amigo que me escribió «Esta tarde, estábamos en los postres, hundí la cuchara en la tarta [...]» fue Gabriel Lacomba. Gracias a Antonio Gamoneda —que imagina improbables animales amarillos—, por su apoyo, desde los inicios, a mi trabajo poético, y muy especialmente por el hermoso y lúcido frontispicio de Ya nadie se llamará como yo. Gracias a Pablo García Casado por el prólogo a toda esta edición; su palabra lateral y valiente. Gracias a Eduardo Moga por la lectura del manuscrito definitivo y sus sugerencias; por ello este libro es mucho mejor. Palma de Mallorca, septiembre de 2015 POESÍA REUNIDA (1998-2012) CRETA LATERAL TRAVELLING (1998) Certeza al mudar las sábanas = cada vez más oscura la mancha que en el lino deja mi silueta. Descomponiéndome al soplo [he visto cabellos volando al atlas de las tapias, detalles apelmazados bajo la cama, globos oculares en las eau de toilette, céspedes imantados, mi huella dactilar en la espiral de los ciclones], me apago en la luz que mi aliento cede al mediodía. Y desando estos últimos paseos en Creta como si yo me persiguiera, pero giro, y sólo cubiletes blancos ordenando el horizonte [humo en cada chimenea], olor a pelo quemado en las huellas. Y tos. Y la sísifa tarea de ir reagrupando mis pedazos. Y mi defensa es desprender sonrisas que no podrán copiar las estatuas [otra forma de orgullo saberse esclavo de la propia ruina]. Pero la elíptica declina, duras transparencias aguardan más allá del cuerpo, y un día, mientras mude la cama, temo no ver ya en la sábana mi mancha. También se dejan fumar los cigarros por el viento. [61] Entre el profuso bosque del Edén [no me refiero a la Amazonía, sino al Edén], y la mineralizada ciudad del Apocalipsis [no me refiero a Nueva York, sino a la Jerusalén Celeste], permanezco yo, decantando a través de los siglos la edénica clorofila hasta el núcleo del tiempo. Me han sobrado días para ser todos los hombres, y porque fui todos los hombres sé que el humano [me refiero a la memoria] es la esquizofrenia de la Historia. Madrid. Nubes [tarjetas de crédito infectadas] amenazan chubascos. Con primitiva gentileza gesticulan los empleados del banco. Pido mi cuenta, mi extracto [el diario contemporáneo]. Cámbieme esta suma a dracmas. Ya llueve. Por la calle las palabras van a sumirse al remolino del alcantarillado. Ha ocurrido lo que siempre soñé, una mujer salió desnuda a la ventana: papel en blanco: pezóntintero. Quiero pensar que poseía la facultad de insertarle al presente lo soñado. Quiero pensar que aún se apelmaza el humo del cigarro entre la sábana y la manta. Y la oquedad que deja el sol cuando se retira. [60] Antes de partir, Dimitri me contó: «una tarde de junio regresaba de la obra que dirigía en Kritsa, y al atravesar un altiplano en las estribaciones del Monte Karfi —supuesto lugar de nacimiento de Zeus— vi a lo lejos a unos hombres en mitad del páramo; clavaban postes de red telefónica. Cuando pasé a su lado uno de ellos desapareció bajo tierra. Frené en seco la moto. Entre todos lo sacamos ileso. Era una sima no muy profunda. Colgamos un carburo de un cable y nos asomamos. Allí yacía el esqueleto de una mujer, cubierto con collares de cristal y ámbar, y el de un hombre coronado con incrustaciones de oro. Nos alcanzó un brillo propagado tras una elipsis milenaria, y el sonido que allí encerrado se diluyó al instante en el cotidiano. Mis palpitaciones eran tan desordenadas que antes de que los tres hombres se echaran sobre las joyas me inventé que era arqueólogo estatal, consideraos desde ahora mismo arrestados por excavar en zona protegida. Tras unos instantes de duda arrancaron el Land Rover y no se preocuparon de esquivar los baches. Después, avisé al arqueólogo del museo de Herakleion. Pero no te sorprendas —hizo una pausa para tomar aliento—, con los años comprobé que Creta estaba llena de cosas así». [59] La perfección es el final de un proceso expresionista: se expande sin costuras de dentro a fuera: manzana, llama, representación teatral. A la razón, al cine, a la música digital, se les ven por detrás las puntadas del collage. Y al presente. Sol granulado en la cortina, pulse el cero para llamar al exterior, cartapacio con membrete, vaso vuelto abajo, siento nostalgia de la perfección y digo: «habitación de hotel». Pensar, lenguaje inalámbrico, la casi montura de unas gafas, nostalgia de la perfección y digo: «yo en habitación de hotel». El hilo de la tinta, nostalgia otra vez, «yo escribiendo en habitación de hotel». Y así hasta decir Mundo. No es expansión sino pegamento contra la soledad. [58] Las cajas musicales son objetos rarísimos, para que surtan efecto debemos alejarnos, reinventarlas remotas. Blandiendo la distancia llegan resonancias, ecos surgidos desde una cavidad hasta entonces desconocida, tiempo y espacio desaparecen y todo cuaja conectado en un solo acontecimiento que no llega a entenderse. Es la lógica de aquello que más nos atrae: lo hueco. La superioridad poética del tambor respecto a la piedra. [57] Camino entre la espuma cristalizada de una civilización. Nadie sabe por qué se secó 1.500 años a. C. No veo rastro de grandes templos que reflejaran la amenaza de dioses, ni vestigios de ejércitos ni esclavos, tampoco dibujos de cuerpos musculados sino de trazo aristocrático. Knossos. Si por este agujero se coló en Occidente la primera cultura volcada en los sentidos, ¿qué queda hoy de todo aquello? ¿Dónde hallar la mirilla de este palacio, neocórtex de Occidente? [alguien rastrea con la videocámara, se confunde] ¿Es el voyeur aquel atrofiado que no supo aprender de los sonidos? ¿Y qué nos contaría su opuesto, que puede escuchar lejanísimas voces? ¿Acaso que no fue Teseo quien desanduvo el hilo sino el Minotauro disfrazado de Teseo, y que por eso heredamos este mundo metastásico e inverso? Pero corresponde a las ruinas interrogar, ya que son el argumento del tiempo. Llevé el oído al suelo, escuché un bisbiseo de hombres y mujeres. Ensimismados como la luz bajo la lupa, decían que el tiempo cuando es Tiempo nunca escoge para viajar la línea recta, pero tampoco la curva, se anuda sobre cualquier objeto [una taza, un pulmón, una idea, un pigmento] y ahí permanece. [56] Dicen que cuando aún estamos en el cristal de la placenta vemos toda muestra vida pasar en fragmentos desordenados y rotos, acúmulo que olvidamos en el instante de nacer. Después, sin saberlo, vivimos reordenándolo. Es ése el caos de secuencias que volvemos a ver momentos antes de la muerte, y entonces sentimos el inevitable vértigo del retorno al vientre. [55] El sol cae tan picado que no hay sombras. Me detengo a reposar junto al Templo de Las Dobles Hachas. Un turista pasa. Se parece a mi abuelo. Por las noches se quedaba dormido frente a la radio; después, sin despedirse, lo veíamos fundirse en negro camino de su habitación. Entre suspiros, sus palabras entrecortadas resonaban en el pasillo. A todos nos hacía mucha gracia aquel vagar suyo entre lo indescifrable. Una noche lo vimos alejarse para siempre. Jamás supimos qué decía ni a qué exactamente invocaba. [54] He leído que existe un laberinto que invierte la lógica de los laberintos: la vida. El único en el que es muy difícil entrar pero muy fácil salir. Así asumido, no queda más remedio que invertirlo todo y reconocer que al final, allí donde siempre en recompensa le aguardaba al héroe el conocimiento absoluto, se halla la fragilidad absoluta, la duda suscitada por una caja musical a punto de cerrarse. Y esto sólo los ancianos lo saben. El resto nos contentamos con anticipos que abren boca al trago final. Pido que me suban la cena, separo un pequeño arco de cortina y pienso «nacemos emparedados como un fósil en veta, poco a poco horadamos las paredes, ampliamos el cerco en torno nuestro, restamos peso a la vida para al final habitar el centro de una polifónica cavidad resonante». [53] Más allá de la perfección: la nada. Inventando laberintos vivió Creta su laberinto, y alcanzó un hueco de máximo diámetro cívico y estético 1.500 años a. C. Como a mi abuelo, sólo le quedaba desaparecer en la poética creada por sus propios ecos. Y cerró la caja. Lo que vino luego, la conquista helénica, veneciana, nazi, otomana, no es más que el collage con que juega la nada a ser nada. Pero de vez en cuando a alguien se le ocurre romper un pequeño bronquio mientras coloca un poste telefónico, y escucha el eco del refinamiento que jalonó aquellas vidas. Correrá entonces con los sonidos deslizándose entre sus manos a un ilusorio Museo Histórico, donde inexistentes expertos los catalogarán con el único fin de que no menos espectrales turistas sacien allí su melancolía de otro tiempo menos virtual, más sensitivo y lujoso. Tras esa visión, ya no podrán dar un solo paso sin pensar en esta cuenta atrás. [52] La luz, filtrada por el azul cobalto de la radiografía, barniza mi cara. Paciente de cuarenta y tres años, tabaquismo, sin antecedentes familiares. Enfisema pulmonar con disnea tras moderados esfuerzos. En agosto de este año inicia cuadro con edema en extremidades y dolor. Nódulo espiculado en LSD. No inclusive en Protocolo de QT adyuvante + Radioterapia. Apago el negatoscopio y me siento. La enfermera recoge la historia y se despide. Al otro lado de la mesa, un esquema busca en mi atención muscular sus palabras: que no se enteren mi mujer y mis hijos, a veces me quedo en silencio, sabe, y me llega de los bronquios un silbido seco, como si se desinflaran, pero el corazón ni lo oigo, entonces algo me rodea y me oprime todo el cuerpo, es el silencio, ¿sabe?, es el silencio que ya veo venir, usted qué opina, una noche soñé que buscando los latidos me abría el pecho, y sabe qué había: nada, un hueco perfecto en lugar de corazón, usted qué opina, la palabra cáncer ni citarla. Rasco con el pulgar la propaganda del bolígrafo, me recoloco el medallón testicular, pero quién le habrá dicho a este pobre infeliz que yo puedo ayudarle. [51] El recuerdo más nítido que conservo de aquella ciudad no puede ser dibujado, ni musicalmente interpretado, esculpido o narrado sin degradación o pérdida, por eso es también el más borroso: el alfilereo de la lluvia sobre la claraboya de mi habitación. Santiago de Compostela, la ciudad más bella del mundo amurallada por la más fea, se diluye. Hay otro. El primer día, deshaciendo las maletas en la pensión, sintonizo la radio, y una canción «de alguna manera tendré que olvidarte. Por mucho que quiera no es fácil, ya sabes». [50] En estas casas tabiques invisibles, espesores destinados a revelarte que no estás ni en el salón ni en la terraza sobre el mar [en ambos a un tiempo], donde la rebanada captada entre dos parpadeos se aletarga. ¿Son las cosas una suma finita de parpadeos? En estas casas, el cuerpo = mar de un archipiélago de días. Después, hay padres que empujan a los hijos a dejarse vivir por la casa que no tuvieron, y por fin se vuelven tabiques invisibles en ella. A esto le llamamos «cuando un antepasado habitaciona el recuerdo», pero aún me resultan hechos fragmentados, parpadeos muy cercanos en el tiempo como para alcanzar la categoría de recuerdo. Me inquieta pensar que algún día será por lejanía por lo que dejarán de ser recuerdo. Me inquieta porque no es posible pensar [vivir] este mar sin una casa, y su destino es ser olvidada. [49] Mojo y muerdo. Desayuno café, tostadas, mantequilla. El calendario, asido al mismo gancho que un trapo matamoscas, fosiliza la actualidad. Parece que los días se echan sobre los hombros un desagradable manto de quietud que les obliga a avanzar a saltos. Algo de preso y celda poseen aquí los calendarios, que induce a ir aspándolos. Otros prefieren ver en esas equis una vida adquirida en categoría de enigma. Mojo y muerdo. Un pope entre los paisanos. Sobre el pecho, una cruz griega, apenas visible bajo el largo pubis que le cae del mentón. Traga vasitos de ouzo, cepas de cuarenta grados, se arma un jolgorio. Brindan por cualquier cosa, se dan golpes en la espalda mientras ríen las caries [repaso las mías con la punta de la lengua]. Pasa un macromandil calle arriba, los hombres se ponen golosos. Mojo y muerdo. A la sombra del emparrado, la plazuela incandescente y sus postrimerías de arbusto y polvo parecen aún más blancas, territorio al que degenera el carbón al rojo vivo si lo dejas. Y taberna azul, y Egeo azul, es el color con que pintan aquí los marcos de las puertas y ventanas para que no entren moscas. Blanco y azul se llevan bien [vistazo al cielo]. Mojo y muerdo. En el cuenco, mantequilla derretida, islas sobre el café, y en cada una mi reflejo: móvil archipiélago. Ojos al encuentro, pestañas doradas, el flequillo una liana sin frente, rostro sin eje, la átona sensación de verse antes de tiempo fragmentado. Al fin todo encaja, me reconozco, sumerjo la tostada, el hallazgo se rompe. Revuelvo y me bebo. El pope desaparece calle arriba hacia la basílica, se agarra los faldones y dibuja eses. La cara de Dios también está sin eje. [48] Acodado en la erosión de mis piernas, expuesto el azote del traje que ondea como esas segundas pieles de las que siempre se habla en determinados círculos, sé que dibujo una expresión de delincuente o parásito, de Frankenstein para las madres que peinan con agua a los niños, de lanzador [olímpico] de heces. Pero no importa, estoy solo [otro palo seco asomado al talco de la arena], llevo siglos aquí sin dejar de estar solo de la manera en que lo está la luz del mediodía, sin sombras que le cuelguen, esas segundas pieles de las que siempre se habla en determinados círculos cuando me refieren como aquella sombra inverosímil que habitó un continuo mediodía. [47] I–. De repente al rayo de luz le acosa la nostalgia [es Oscuridad, pero aún no sabe deletrearla], extraviado en la duda se anuda sobre sí y nace un cuerpo. II–. Con la herramienta de los ojos cubica la realidad; belleza, fealdad, invisibilidad en lo neutro. Los otros sentidos vendrán más tarde, con el matiz de los días. III–. Alcanza un placer agridulce cuando descubre la superioridad de lo silenciado sobre lo nombrado [en la hipófisis trabaja aquel que redactó infinitos versos y después sumándole certezas los redujo a una sola palabra nunca revelada]. IV–. Y pasa el tiempo y cosas sólo aprensibles en un cruce de sueños tensan el nudo; tan sólo dejan entre los hilos el espacio justo para una soledad al límite de la asfixia. Entonces, entre el beso y la bala buscará los significados de una palabra [es Vida; no sabe deletrearla]. V–. Pronto [más de lo esperado] las hebras sucumben al tensado, el cuerpo halla en torno a sí la propia sombra, primero la cree ceniza de un incendio llamado Presente, después la llamará Historia o algo así. VI–. Tarde [siempre más de lo esperado] el nudo se deshace, un humano muere, y un rayo de luz sacia aquella sed de Oscuridad en la sombra que ya lo acompaña. Ya es Tiempo. [46] Desayuna, se ajusta el nudo de la corbata, le da un beso a su mujer y arranca el coche para penetrar en esa marea de ruedas que sube todas las mañanas en la ciudad como postiza continuación de la del puerto. Va repasando los casos. Paciente de sesenta años, glioblastoma multiforme. Paciente de cincuenta y tantos años, neoplasia en mama derecha. Esta noche han atrasado el reloj, y no lo supo. Advertido el equívoco, va de regreso. Utilizará esta hora que no existe para comprar la prensa, darle un segundo beso, quizá otro café, ojear el último número del British Journal of Oncology, sumarse más tarde al océano de automóviles. Envolvía a las alamedas la bruma rala que acompaña al amanecer cuando, al llegar a la plaza de España, lo vio a lo lejos y poco a poco detuvo el coche. Entre la niebla, un anciano tiraba de un polipasto y cambiaba el cartel de la fachada de los cines ABC. Un par de minutos. Cuando el viejo desapareció, sobre el volante rompió a llorar. [45] Deambulo ahora y siempre sobre el orden del pasado desordenándolo, recordando fechas señaladas para no recordarlas, quiero decir, reinterpretarlas, porque cuajan en gotas las horas [como leyes, o como las últimas palabras que te dijo aquella antenista antes de morir allí arriba crucificada y que inútilmente insistes en borrar]. Existe otra variante menos selectiva, menos cirujana: apilar por capas el pasado y saltar insistentemente [o golpearlas con un martillo pilón] hasta fundirlas en un solo bloque macizo como de plomo, donde todas las caras que viste al menos una vez convivan en la de ese hombre que acaba de pasar y presumiblemente va a una cita nocturna. Junto a la plaza Kazantzakis alguien lo abraza, y no sabe que cuando pasen los años se me aparecerá súbitamente abriendo un tajo exacto en el bloque de memoria, porque desde ahora mismo su cara será todas las caras y resultará imborrable ese acopio de gestos sin atributos ni forma: las líneas que atraviesan limpiamente el tiempo como el cuchillo con que ella rebanaba el pan del desayuno antes de salir de casa para decirme aquel último día mientras recogía la mesa, «¡ah!, se me olvidaba, hoy he de instalar tres parabólicas, llegaré tarde». [44] En invierno, a la playa se acerca la gente y busca conchas o piedras singulares que tira antes de irse. En verano [a esa misma gente] la trae la marea y quedan varados en la arena como peces muertos de colores. Subí al atardecer a la colina que empuja al pueblo hacia la costa. Hipnotizado, miré cómo iban apareciendo luces en las casas. No era la noche, era un complot. [43] «El tiempo del reloj se mueve linealmente y a intervalos idénticos.» Falso. Postulo que igual que hay cuerpos más densos que otros existen instantes de tiempo más densos que otros. Postulo Densidad de Tiempo como aquella concentración de Nada que, aunque inasible, se resuelve en poesía. Postulo Densidad de Tiempo como una cifra incuantificable. Pero no es ni cero ni infinito. [Manifiesto Contra Relojeros, hallado en los barracones de las Minas de Arena de Rethymno. Anónimo.] [42] Nada es hasta que su línea no se cruza con otra. La Historia son equis: la luz y la materia, el enemigo y la bala, el texto y la mirada. [Atención, arquitectos. Dormitorio: habitáculo donde intersecta la equis del matrimonio.] Y antes del encuentro parecen tontas las trayectorias, lineales como epílogos, idénticas en sus cáscaras de soledad, y son de otro las pisadas que ahora oigo porque quien oye su eco oye su monstruo, roto a piezas en las molduras de estos portales que no sé por qué parecen venecianos [hay un señor en manga sisa, ensimismado en la ventana que rompió para ver mejor el asfalto]. El mercado público a estas horas = nocturna esterilidad = mujer desovulada y de leche seca. Giro y bordeo. La vi tras los cristales sucios y biselados de una tienda de informática, silueta opalescente entre el parpadeo de los monitores, el pelo atado en trenza, una talla sinuosa en el quicio de la puerta cuando di tres toques, giro y bordeo los pezones con la lengua, nueces, polos, espirales, maduros caracoles. Grita una frase de tejido impenetrable en sigmas, thetas y omegas = cruce de lo que hasta entonces era Nada y ahora Mundo [muerte incluida] = ajuste en el círculo cuadrado = espejo que devuelve otra imagen: ¿es otro el de ahí, o es el cristal que se fatiga? ¿Por qué los espejos y ventanas son cuadrados? ¿Si sólo los círculos se expanden por qué hay pintores que pintan cada vez cuadros más grandes? ¿No saben, acaso, que la omnisciencia del ojo radica en su contorno redondo? Tras haber conjugado el no al incesto, parten tontas otra vez las trayectorias hacia la divergencia de su equis, mi monstruo me sigue hasta el puerto, ante las olas se disipa, cruzo entonces los dedos, otra equis. [41] Recién vivido el infinitamente pequeño infinito del hallazgo, permaneció resonando el jadeo que vendría —el eco recuerda a la vez que anticipa—, y reposamos en ese esqueleto de mar que es la arena o reloj roto. En silencio acudías allí donde el exiguo parpadeo le cede su información a los astros, acaricié tu pecho toda la noche sin conseguir descifrarlo. Hasta que una roca empezó a destacar a lo lejos bajo la luz de su faro y nos separamos [miré atrás para confundirte con la línea rota de la empalizada]. No podría precisar cómo pudimos colarnos en el argot de aquella noche, y ésta en el día que prologó a los otros días que son también todas y aquella noche, pero me ha llegado por el impecable lenguaje del eco que aunque le somos prescindibles al mundo el pezón es un instante que lo resume [al mundo]. [40] Boca arriba, agarro la arena con los puños y la dejo caer muy despacio. Tic- tac. Tic-tac. A contraluz, dos niñas en la playa se arrojan arena. Juegan juntas las siluetas, aspadas, separadas, revolcadas; sobre la cuerda del horizonte recuperan el fiel de la balanza. La luz las modela, o a la inversa. Aún no estaban tiznados sus pubis de sílabas muertas. Ocupando y sustrayendo el aire, quietas o corriendo, flotan sobre las horas sobadas que les esperan. Muy quieta bajo el sol, a mi derecha, medita una mujer su melanoma maligno. La Reina del Agua, pechos de cariátide que dan ganas de morder para hacer gajos de los labios y dejar allí todos los dientes. Se incorpora en escuadra sobre las palmas de las manos. Camina en extrema rigidez hacia la orilla, robótica, sortea chapapotes. Le gustaría cortar el hilo que la une a todos los ojos, desea movimiento pero no puede [el movimiento también se desaprende]. Debe de oler a trapo limpiacristales, a estropajo seco, polvo en suspenso; qué bella si te quedaras quieta. Consulto el reloj, casi hay que ir tirando, nos espera una cena bajo un emparrado. Reserva de luz para esta noche. En el puño se masturba un manojo de arena. [39] Resulta absurdo pensar que la muerte se halla más cerca de un anciano que de un niño. La muerte es equidistante respecto a cualquier punto, su velocidad es infinita. Un hombre permanece sentado ante la ventana de la habitación que le muestra la calle, mira el reloj, las cinco en punto, alza la vista y se muere a las cinco y un segundo, un segundo que dio cabida al infinito: todo el polvo levantado en ese intervalo por el giro de la Tierra, y el no levantado [lo no ocurrido también ocurrió, pero como ausencia]. Deduzco que existe la muerte porque existe en cada instante un universo inconmensurable que la iguala en cifra. En este sentido [en infinitud] la muerte se parece al nacimiento. Por eso el hombre que yacía muerto frente a la ventana resucita, pero permanecerá para siempre con los ojos cerrados porque ahora sabe que todas las cosas imaginables se hallan a su alcance, equidistantes, encerradas en un segundo, y tal abundancia le paraliza. [38] Compostela, vísperas de examen, espero el bus. En la otra acera, LOCAL EN REFORMA, PRÓXIMA APERTURA, un albañil trabaja, el cigarro incrustado en sus labios [a veces me pregunto qué habrá sido de él]. Cerró la puerta por dentro, cogió la brocha y comenzó a pintar de blanco el cristal del escaparate. Primero el lado superior, laterales y base, hasta conformar un marco. Continuó así, en sucesivos cuadrados concéntricos. Se acercaba al transistor, apoyado en una escalera de mandíbula, y cambiaba la casete que yo no oía pero imaginaba, o perplejo en los surcos que dejan las hebras del pincel movía el cigarro de una comisura a otra. Hasta que sólo quedó un rectángulo del tamaño de un antifaz, nuestras miradas se encontraron, y selló de un brochazo. Me subí al bus, abrí el libro por el tema 17 [a veces me pregunto qué habrá sido de él]. [37] Esta misma noche, con un vocabulario de incomprensibles signos y pitidos, mi PC dijo basta, y en ese mal trance electrónico he perdido todos los textos allí emboscados desde hace seis años. Quizá no debí traerlo, tuve que haber pensado que para los viajes no se hicieron estas máquinas. Pulsé el timbre. ¿Poulos? Sí. Soy un amigo de Dimitri. ¡Ah, sí, ya me avisó, pasa! Sólo estaré unos días, después seguiré ruta por la isla. Como quieras, estás en tu casa. Él pinta durante casi todo el día, sólo nos vemos en las cenas. Bajo una pérgola comemos ensalada y pescado, y reímos cuando a alguno se le derrama el yogurt, o si los niños llegan del embarcadero haciendo monerías con los peces y las cañas. Durante las mañanas duermo y por las tardes observo con extrañeza los pinos del acantilado; crecen inclinados, como si ya supieran que en alguna etimología viento viene de tiempo. Suelo darme un baño antes de la puesta de sol, y a veces paseo por la playa con Janet, la mujer de Poulos. Me cuenta cómo le va con sus nuevas prensas para la uva y yo la escucho. También alguna tarde hemos encendido una fogata en la arena. Por las noches intento mezclar el alfabeto, y no sé si escribo o hago que escribo, porque se me pasan muy rápido, casi un parpadeo. Al amanecer, antes de acostarme, me detengo unos instantes ante la ventana orientada al sureste y miro cómo despunta la luz con [por decir algo] cotidiana resignación. Mucho más allá, Egipto. Un mar azul y verde cubre el mármol de las ruinas de Alejandría. Pero este amanecer he mirado por la ventana con especial melancolía. Lo del ordenador ya no tiene remedio. Desde hace seis años he atesorado ahí textos, ficciones, guijarros, modos con los que vamos surtiendo el camino por si un día queremos regresar a casa. Y yo ya no puedo. Todo ha volado, se puede decir que hace seis años nada dio comienzo para venir a morir ayer en el receptáculo de lo vacío. Mi vida, ahora, anudada a lo real, ganará en peso como lo gana el péndulo tras cada bandazo. Y entonces divisé Alejandría. Una biblioteca se quemó allí hace dos mil años. El torrente de páginas que abordan el accidente no ha cesado. Cientos de relatos, teorías y refutaciones cada vez más osadas lamentan la sabiduría disuelta [sustancioso plancton] en el Mediterráneo. Aquella biblioteca también tuvo sus particulares seis años de nada resueltos en virtualidad. Qué mejor desgracia podría haberle ocurrido a mi disco duro, me digo. [36] En el salón de la casa paterna, 12.48 pm. «No insistas, no pretendas crecer cambiando, es imposible. No des la mano a los vecinos imaginando que sus líneas cambiarán las de tu mano, no des un salto a la derecha en la autopista ni busques un norte lateral, no creas que tras años de convivencia los rostros de los cónyuges van encajando hasta hacerse uno, tampoco tras pisar sientas que a cambio el suelo ya es otro, ni creas que encabezar el reparto en los sueños de otro significa más que barrer el teatro en los tuyos, porque en toda su vida [esto es seguro] una persona sólo podrá abarcar una idea», en el salón de la casa paterna, 12.48 pm. Cuarenta y ocho años después. [35] Sentado en las sillas de PVC del Yanis-Café. Por favor, tráigame otro ouzo. Las vetas del licor se anudan en el fondo del vaso. A pocos metros, en el cruce de las avenidas, dos motos han chocado. De inmediato una cáscara de cuerpos salidos de las calles afluentes, perdigones que regresan al origen del disparo. Parece que están graves. Todo lo que se fuga, allá en el fondo se da de bruces contra un horizonte perpendicular. La fuga sólo es por aquello que le sale al encuentro, lejano accidente que salpica y baña los ojos. El Renacimiento no inventó la fuga en perspectiva, fue ésta quien lo halló para fundar una Historia en tres dimensiones. Pienso ahora en la fuga de los epitafios, sintagmas sin dialéctica, avanzan lineales, aerodinámicos, afilan sus dientes en el mármol sin conseguir traspasarlo. Llega la ambulancia, la camilla rompe la cáscara. ¿Otro ouzo, señor? Sí, gracias. Me subo las gafas. Pierdo de vista la sirena aunque en mis oídos es un barco de arrastre, la pisada de Armstrong en la Luna, una pelota que aún rueda. Desde entonces las avenidas no son las mismas. [34] Una vez soné [soñar: truco operado por la virtualidad para ascender a realidad] que de camino a la cocina me encontraba en el suelo una cuerda vidriosa y en apariencia endeble a la que no veía fin, la seguía por un intervalo de tiempo que no podría precisar aunque sí adjetivar: tedioso, inmenso, simplicísimo, denso, irreductible, tramposo, sublime, genésico [pero esto es tanto como decir nada porque las palabras dan cuerda a otros relojes]. Y así se me repitió durante años. Sé que esta noche el sueño se ha acabado; hallé mi ombligo al final de la cuerda. Ahora pienso [es sólo una conjetura, que nadie se moleste] que debería haber caminado en dirección contraria. [33] Las olas baten pero no salpican los zapatos, que sobresalen medio palmo de la barandilla. Examino mi reflejo, turbio allí abajo. El mar = pureza mal multiplicada, arrastra en la operación a otras criaturas que no son mar. En realidad, el mar contiene todo menos mar, siempre rebosante y siempre dispuesto a acoger un átomo más [los pulmones se inflan de mundo si la respiración se entiende como la primera y más urgente cláusula de vida]. Examino mi reflejo, turbio allí abajo, como si yo fuera ése, arenado y fundido a los cantos del fondo. Me inquietan esos pueblos que, esqueletizados, descansan bajo los pantanos, nunca detengo el coche, acelero, veo correr mi reflejo. Hubo un tiempo [ya lo había olvidado] en que traté a los espejos como a dioses, después descreí porque podían contenerlo todo menos a ellos mismos [debería haber empezado por esto]. Recuerdo el cuadro, colgado en alguna pared de la pensión de estudiantes, de una mujer sin mirada, reflejada en un espejo mientras se bajaba las bragas, los pechos colgando, el arco de la espalda, la rosa de sus nalgas, como apoyada en esta barandilla. [32] Antes de consumir los días que me restan [tras los muchos restados en pensiones y habitaciones de hotel], sé ya que mi idea de la felicidad no es en absoluto original: una isla, una casa contemporánea, una pérgola, un pozo, y una silla mirando al sureste por definición, el mar. Algunas noches, la mujer de Poulo y yo bajamos a nadar acercándonos más y más allí donde los pubis se confunden con una especie de algas. Pero justo cuando ella está a punto de enseñarme los alrededores, tonto el último oye cada uno sin saber que el otro también lo oye, y regresamos. Me retraso para ver cómo suben y cierran la puerta aquellos alrededores, el finísimo hilo de luz que se le escapa entre las nalgas. Un segundo de casa. [31] En lo profundo de la taberna fuman y ríen trajes diplomáticos. En lo profundo de la taberna se bebe frappé con pajita en ele. En lo profundo de la taberna nacen y mueren moscas en botellas. En lo profundo de la taberna pájaros liban y vampiros beben. En lo profundo de la taberna mil vatios de cama y clic de pera. En lo profundo de la taberna tronco de parra vieja la más vieja. En lo profundo de la taberna mil dracmas y pico por la púber. En lo profundo de la taberna hay una puerta toc-toc quién es. En lo profundo de la taberna los niños miran por un agujero así. En lo profundo de la taberna la cólera de los hombres, sigue a ese hijoputa, por ahí va, hacia la ensenada. Oculto en una vasija recién descargada contengo la respiración, miro hacia arriba, el círculo del cielo, cuento sesenta y una estrellas. Los pasos se detienen. Merodean. Meto la cabeza entre las rodillas, a ver si del cielo baja ya el brazo de la enfermera. [30] Aquel hombre de ojos oscuros y uñas rapaces me agredió en el mercado de Chania; creyó que le había robado su anillo de oro falso [fue el mono marroquí, yo lo vi]. Y maldecía, sí, pero en el fondo me quería: lo silenciaba. Después, provisto de una vara de olivo atizó repetidas veces al mono mientras gritaba en cretense el equivalente a ¡chucho! ¡chucho!, con esa básica mentalidad que trata a todas las bestias por igual. Yo no sabía que hablar es una batalla contra las palabras en busca de algo que jamás se halla [bendito Wittgenstein]. [29] Ha escogido usted gasolina súper. Humanacosa, apéndice de un estómago que de fósiles empachado le dicta bajo sus pies la historia de mis necesidades [es envidia: los fósiles carecen de historia y necesidades]. Ha escogido usted gasolina súper. De aquí al shopping center, apenas unos siglos de metros. De aquí a la costa, apenas unos metros de siglos. Llegan del mar [me han contado], traídos por los hilos de un viento continental, papeles rotos, velas náufragas, bolsas de plástico, pájaros erráticos, se estrellan y permanecen incrustados en la celosía metálica que circunvala la isla [yo mismo aún no sé cómo he entrado], multiplicados o divididos a capricho de una aritmética local [yo mismo a veces soy dos, tres, infinitos, otras nada]. Ahí llega uno. Tiembla la celosía y dispara un arpegio que dará vueltas y vueltas a la isla hasta escindirse en música y ruido; su fin revalidar los arquetipos del bien y del mal. Y eructa sus dictados la humanacosa, ha echado usted gasolina súper, buen viaje. Mientras me alejo, un pájaro incrustado aún aletea. Por efecto menguante del retrovisor, la estación de servicio = agujero negro(1) [28] Los mechones de pelo al batir en la baldosa lanzaban un grito pero no se los oía. En efecto, ayer fui al peluquero [definición: el que antes de clavarle el cuchillo al que duerme, ve un lápiz, deja el arma en la mesilla, y se pone a dibujar]. En efecto, ayer fui al peluquero. El rescoldo de pelos, uñas, y todo cuanto vamos dejando atrás constituye el límite borroso de nuestros cuerpos. En cuántas fotografías tomadas por un turista estaré detenido. Hoy me tiene en la pared de su casa, y yo no lo sé y él no lo sabe. Llevamos a nuestras espaldas ese Frankenstein de nosotros mismos hilvanado con los recortes de lo prescrito. Crece y crece hasta que en la vejez se alza sobre la nuca, rebasa nuestra cabeza, como una ola nos cubre y finalmente nos adelanta. Es ése el día en que lo creado supera al creador y morimos a expensas de la ilógica. [27] La carretera, retorcida, gana altura. Oí su llamada desde el pie de la montaña, perfume incienso = souvenir fundacional = Monasterio Gouverneto. Los nazis pudieron con todo menos con la capilla. Unas hojas de periódico cubren la pequeña mesa en cuyo extremo, como el ojo desplazado de otra divinidad, una cestita espera la voluntad [apenas mil dracmas]. Frescos de Apóstoles y Testigos [deben de ser del XIV] nervados por fisuras que estallan la pared y los vuelven abstractos, aún más de lo que eran cuando se pintaron, tan inverosímiles, tan planos, tan lejos de la escena representada, tan extraídos de su narración que parece que te miren precisamente a ti, aguardándote durante seis siglos para señalarte [tiempo elástico, el aire se aplasta en torno nuestro]. Atornillado al espesor de esa penumbra ya noto el apostólico dedo. Allí la cúpula que remata el tambor, y en el centro el Pantocrátor Señor, Cristo Señor, paciente de cuarenta y tres años, tabaquismo, sin antecedentes familiares. Enfisema pulmonar con disnea tras moderados esfuerzos. En agosto de este año inicia cuadro con edema en extremidades y dolor. Nódulo espiculado en LSD. No inclusive en Protocolo de QT adyuvante + Radioterapia. Reprimo una lágrima. La enfermera es novata; no consigue cortar el cordón umbilical. [26] Playa Elounda, inmediaciones de Agios Nikolaos, noche de agosto, sentado en el porche, la gabardina repele la niebla que desde la costa sube en busca del calor de los cuerpos para disiparse, bocaneo, humo y cigarrillo dibujan una punta de flecha, la silueta móvil del jardín, el vibrar de la maleza descoloca las sombras, como si se agitara un cubilete, otro trago y el licor, atontado, recupera su espesor en la botella, nubes metálicas, un techo de caña, dentro de casa, desnuda, una mujer duerme, es muy bella, pezones oscuros de almendra, el haz lunar ilumina su cuerpo, otro trago, bocaneo, yace boca abajo, simplificada, neolíticos trazos, los labios, cerrojos del irreductible secreto cuando dice te quiero, sonríen, y sodomizada por la nada, como en la playa o en las películas, abraza el colchón, la tierra, el sueño, bocaneo, bebo de un golpe el último trago, me levanto, el mimbre cruje como una popa podrida y seca, anudo la gabardina a la cintura, empujo la puerta, a tientas descubro el cuerpo, no debiste ser tan bella, la primera será al corazón, el brazo cae con fuerza, de súbito se despierta, abre los ojos, sudor, qué difícil respirar, se palpa la espalda, repasa el cuerpo, el oro del cabello, los pezones de almendra, y afuera la noche, colgada en la entrada hay una gabardina, se la anuda, sale al porche, sentada en el mimbre enciende un Lucky, sin filtro, un viento cálido, una botella, un vaso en los labios, dos piernas que detestan la herida que las une y se cierran, no debí ser tan bella, piensa, y entonces, Marilyn aplasta la colilla con la suavidad de quien tiene todo el tiempo por delante, se levanta, y dejando atrás el humo que discurre vertical como si hubiera abandonado allí la médula, empuja la puerta y entra en casa, me encuentra, la primera será al corazón, cae su brazo con fuerza, abro los ojos, silencio, afuera el porche, es verano, desde la pared, en un póster, Marilyn me mira, era de mi hijo, espero que no le importe, me había dicho la dueña del hostal al firmar el libro de registro, pero es que quise dejarlo todo tal como a él le gustaba. [25] Nacemos y morimos sin saber nada. Quizá, que al principio pesa más el cuerpo que la sombra hasta que en la vejez esta ecuación se invierte, o que hay muchas monedas escondidas en la tierra y con paciencia podrían contarse pero no serviría de nada [cuya simétrica sería: todas las frases en algún lugar están ya escritas y nada podemos hacer por despertarlas], que la astronave constituye una sofisticación del arado, que las pantallas de PC son vitrales de una catedral contemporánea y las heces en la nieve la primera estufa, que podemos atravesar todos los límites, conocerlo todo, rasgar sucesivos decorados, y a pesar de todo nacemos y morimos sin saber nada porque esos límites los ponemos nosotros: no es posible abrir un cofre desde dentro. [Primer decorado: una madre se acerca por detrás, junta las manos sobre el pecho del niño y le dice aléjate de las corrientes, antes de cerrar las contraventanas y darle un beso en la nuca. Después, aquel niño crece, y viaja, y no puede ver a su madre desde la ventana calle abajo en dirección al colmado: último decorado]. [24] Racionalmente hablando resulta absurdo concebir la existencia de un mundo aquí al lado cuyos habitantes no se diferencien en nada de los humanos y sin embargo no sean humanos [tanto es así que incluso esos quiméricos hombres especulan la no existencia de nuestra especie: únicamente saben de ella por lo que ha llegado a contarles el vigía, pero ya se sabe que los vigías no son fiables: de tanto mirar a un punto fijo terminan por delirar, pero de ahí su proteína, su fuerza embaucadora porque, esto también se sabe, desde siempre los vigías han sido poetas o cuentacuentos]. En ese mundo, cada día y a la misma hora el vigía se carga al hombro un gran vaso de agua fresca y abandona la ciudad para adentrase en territorios donde los placeres y las danzas van perdiendo nitidez, pero conservan intacta su estructura o arquetipo, por lo que hay que concluir que lo que pierden es porosidad, frescura [como si el espacio [o la luz] se hiciera más y más cartesiano], hasta que este vigía alcanza el límite de una extensión impenetrable y cuadrada, que supone infinita porque en ella todo se oscurece y nada ve. Entonces [cada día, y más o menos a la misma hora] oye decir en varios idiomas: señoras y señores a su derecha un fragmento del gran Fresco de la Procesión, período Neopalacial, mil quinientos años antes de nuestra era, en este fragmento, único conservado, pueden ver ustedes a un joven con la vestimenta característica de la época, porta un gran vaso cónico destinado a contener agua como ofrenda, se estima que en el fresco completo había unos trescientos cincuenta personajes que caminaban en dos filas al encuentro de una figura central. Y corre a contarles a sus conciudadanos que más allá de la tierra estéril hay un mundo lógicamente absurdo, y en torno a ese mundo inventa para ellos una historia siempre distinta porque no ha entendido ninguno de aquellos idiomas y éstos se le figuran otro territorio complicado e infinito que hay que atravesar para avistar nuevos límites que traerán nuevas historias de otros tantos límites. Yo de todo esto deduzco que la sustancia poética habita allí donde las palabras no llegan a entenderse, pero no puedo revelárselo, equivaldría a despertarlo a la racionalidad, y eso le destruiría. [23] I–. Luz de un tragaluz, limosna que el muro le concede a la claridad tras amputarla, y entonces tengo la sensación de que la celda flota. Monasterio. Luz de tragaluz, materia que no aporta peso, lo resta. II–. Dimitri, de pequeño, experimentó una extática visión, talismán que aún lo acompaña; Dimitri es un iluminado. Dormía en su habitación una siesta de invierno, y el ama de cría, torpe y obesa, rondaba por la casa repasando el polvo. La habitación de Dimitri y la del ama de cría se hallaban opuestas en los extremos de un larguísimo pasillo, la una al Oeste, la otra al Este, y las puertas de ambas remataban en su extremo superior con un pequeño cristal. Le despertó un arrastrar de pasos, acercó una silla a la puerta y se encaramó. Era ella, de espaldas, dirigiéndose a la habitación del fondo al tiempo que se bajaba la faja y las bragas para liberar la deformidad de las piernas y las nalgas. El sol, rasante a esas horas, entraba por la ventana de la habitación opuesta y, tras atravesar el cristal superior de la puerta, bañaba el cuerpo de ella para colarse entre el hueco desparramado de la entrepierna. Entonces le cegó una estrella púrpura de cinco puntas, hermosísima, magnética, parpadeante en la penumbra del ano de aquella mujer. III.– La geometrodinámica cuántica postula la existencia de un espacio- tiempo formado en su totalidad por agujeros gusano, un laberinto que nos envuelve en perforaciones de carcoma matemática cuyo fin es conectar todos los mundos posibles, esponja liviana como las heces, que también flotan. Los indios, en general, opinan que la piedra pómez son heces cristalizadas de un dios comedor de luz tan viejo que ya no puede vernos [ni nosotros a él], de ahí la existencia de un espectáculo aún más sobrecogedor que la lava incandescente: el silencio abisal de la lava fría y seca, excremento de una divinidad que ya nos ha abandonado dejando a su paso un espacio-tiempo inoperante, petrificado. Mineral de luz. [22] La conocí en una de aquellas cenas aristocráticas de los amigos de Dimitri. Yo había sido contratado en calidad de escritor [poner la palabra exacta en la frase inacabada de una dama o, si el anfitrión lo requería, traer a colación a Rimbaud o Sade], y ella, en condición de nómada. Danesa, pelirroja, como remota; de profesión arqueóloga. La encontraron aquella misma tarde en el puerto de Chania. Venía con un perro, Tuno, y no tuvieron que regatear demasiado para que entrara en el coche. Reía por todo lo que no entendía, desafiaba a aquellas figuras de retablo y vestía raro. El rostro, pecoso y trasparente como la filigrana de un billete, fue objeto de alguna observación; ella dijo que cada peca es un pecado, un sueño gozoso que te agujerea el cuerpo para restarle peso, «llega incluso a flotar en caso de tenerlo todo cubierto». Gustó. No cobramos lo pactado porque comimos y bebimos más de la cuenta, pero caminamos juntos hasta mi apartamento que, al borde de la escollera, parecía a punto de suicidarse, comentó mientras se recogía el pelo. Encendimos el fuego, me enseñó a hacer el té turco y a mirar, como los nómadas, un punto fijo con la felicidad de quien toma por hogar una idea. No paró de hablarme de yacimientos y viajes, Naxos, Patmos, Capadocia, templos sumergidos, bustos sin pupila ahora despensas de peces, y yo por no perder su paso acudía con ansia a la memoria pero sólo hallaba citas. Le hacía gracia mi ansia erudita, señalaba una constelación para mostrar después otra igual en su cuerpo que, cosido a pecas, parecía un cielo o, también pensé, un lienzo sin resolver. Ya amaneciendo salimos desnudos al acantilado. Nos abrazamos. Contra el mar, un astro indeterminado. Contuvimos la respiración, y como si de un huevo duro se tratara la luna mudó de piel y apareció el sol. El perro, a nuestros pies, siempre enredando. Señaló con el índice, me contó que cuando hizo escala en Creta iba en busca de la ciudad de Troya. Le pedí que me llevara con ella. Se negó, pero prometió regresar en mi busca si la encontraba. Cuando en la despedida nos besamos, vi el reflejo de esa ciudad amurallada en sus pupilas. Ahora en sueños se me aparecen aquellas pupilas. Dentro, una ciudad que sólo ella habita. Camina entre capiteles recién levantados, los ecos son tan exactos que hasta cuando duerme la acompañan, y los templos invierten su ley para invocarla. Pero ella me invoca a mí. Cautiva en su hallazgo, levanta la vista ante las murallas, ya ni siquiera grita, se lleva las manos a la cara y llora ante cualquier señal o augurio de mi presencia. Tuno, siempre a su lado, la mira, mueve la cola, y no entiende. Al final, sube al acantilado, intenta reconocer el horizonte pero éste nada le devuelve, y justo antes de tirarse, es Tuno quien lo hace. A contraluz regresa a la ciudad en busca de la hospitalidad del eco. Entonces me despierto y tengo la certeza de que hay una peca más en mi cuerpo [en el suyo una menos]. [21] Siempre que muerdo una manzana [no lo puedo evitar] pienso que aún falta por demostrar que la Tierra sea redonda. Ahora han descubierto [dijo Creta TV] que se parece más a una patata. Eva tenía razón. [20] [Tirado en la cama tras Creta TV] Cuando la Tierra era una hoja de pergamino arrojada a la seguridad del vacío, los humanos sentían en cada paso, en cada verbo, en cada arruga, en cada parpadeo y nacimiento, la cariciosa presión de la pluma que los escribía. Después adivinamos [estas cosas se adivinan] que era redonda. Y como nada de lo que alguna vez ha sido puede dejar de existir, tuvimos que ponernos a escribir. Se estrella el cuerpo cuando nace y un latigazo de aire lo despierta. [19] [ya durmiendo tras tirado en la cama tras Creta TV] Un caminante daba vueltas a la Tierra pero pensaba que era plana porque las daba en espiral. Un día, llegado a un cruce, la fatiga lo sentó y oyó una llamada lejana, al instante familiar. Cuando acudió reconoció con asombro que allí ya había estado. Era su memoria quien, a gritos, fundaba la esfera; deseaba nacer. Desde entonces, esta historia se ha repetido en innumerables culturas y no menos estrellas, en los infinitos clones que genera cada paso, en el primer humano que fue sustantivado. Yo mismo, por ejemplo, que soy memoria. [18] La noche asusta por lo mismo que resulta mágica: identifica. Lo divisible pierde su cualidad y todo aparece conectado por una Babel que emborrona la mirada. Y lo sabemos. Pero a veces trato de imaginar el espanto que sobrecogió a quienes presenciaron por primera vez la muerte de un humano. Hasta entonces habían sido inmortales: piedras, hierba, animales, dioses, pero no humanos. El tiempo, cristalizado, aguardaba su hora y una noche inacabable mezclaba muerte y vida en la cabeza de aquellas piedras, hierbas, animales o dioses. [17] Sería septiembre, Madrid y de mañana, un hombre llegó al jardín del hospital [todos los ingresados lo vimos desde las ventanas], se detuvo junto al membrillero. Anudó finísimos hilos a cada rama, a cada hoja, a cada uno de los frutos, y en el otro extremo pinceles que, bajo el árbol, apenas rozaban un lienzo. Después se fue. En estos meses [todos lo hemos visto], el viento ha movido las ramas, la savia ha nutrido al peso, el sol ha secado frutos y hojas, todo ha traspasado el umbral de la medida, el cubículo del tiempo. Hoy regresó. En torno a las hebras de cada pincel, como flores sin especie, inexpresables asuntos salpicaban el lienzo: curvas, aspas, horizontes, vertizontes, ortografía que repele el lenguaje del centro. El hombre medita, deja caer los lentes sobre el pecho, recoge los aparejos y desaparece porque sabe que jamás conseguirá pintar aquel sol del membrillo [todos los ingresados lo vimos]. [16] I–. Qué fácil es pasear aquí pisando capiteles rotos, narices de mármol, vasijas espolvoreadas de lo deshechas. Qué fácil es tratar aquí a todo como a piedras. El aire las come incluso. Pelo una naranja a la sombra de un acebuche, y la monda se hace un muelle entre mis pies. II–. Qué ocurriría si el sueño de alguien que muere soñando no supiera dónde ir y penetrara en una piedra, condenándola tarde o temprano a la vida [ningún sueño persiste más allá de su irracionalidad]. De qué forma se reconocería esa piedra en los siglos cuando abriera los ojos y no viera en su piel los dígitos de los pueblos, qué decepción al comprobar que tras un violento instante inicial el tiempo la había olvidado entre los trastos de un Edén mineralizado, y que ni la luz la ha echado en falta. Con qué ganas cerraría de nuevo los ojos para abrazar la eternidad, único habitáculo de aquel que no se sueña. III–. Tengo la sospecha de que todo responde a un cósmico plan del cual soy fundador y simultáneamente víctima [si girara con suficiente rapidez podría cogerles moviendo el decorado], de que he sido conducido hasta aquí para, una vez muerto y expoliados mis sueños, dar vida a estas piedras. Pero como no me muero [y aún tardaré], el plan ha sido abortado, técnicamente hablando, reconducido, y se ha dispuesto que me desprenda de un anticipo de sueño para que este acúmulo de piedras vaya sabiendo de él por embrionarias alusiones. El sonido esponjoso, casi irreal, producido por una monda de naranja cuando bate contra el suelo. [15] Mi idea de la felicidad no es en absoluto original. Una isla, una casa contemporánea, una pérgola, un pozo, y una silla mirando al sureste por definición, el mar. Algunas tardes miro el horizonte y me abismo en él hasta al fin tocarlo; sus letras, hacheoerreizetaoenetee, repetidas hacheoerreizetaoenetee veces [como corresponde a tan vasto confín], aunque irreconocibles caben completamente en mis manos. Otras veces [en el mismo lugar y el mismo número de veces] cierro los ojos y veo dentro una línea que incita a ser tocada, extiendo el brazo, el horizonte está dentro. Mi idea de la felicidad no es en absoluto original. Una isla, una casa contemporánea, una pérgola, un pozo y una silla mirando al sureste por definición, el mar [pero todo hacia dentro]. [14] Para un occidental recordar a una prostituta es muy fácil. Anatomía vagamente humana en la oscuridad del soportal, caído el arco de la melena, caído el arco de los labios, caído el arco de los pechos. El arco del soportal, anatomía vagamente solidaria. ¿Tienes fuego? A la luz del mechero la vi coja de la pierna izquierda, levemente manca del brazo izquierdo, devastada prolongación de la llama [especie de ceniza]. Pero no era tan fácil. El delgado trazo de su beso, como a tiralíneas, delató un alma japonesa. [13] Iba sin mapa, y en un pueblo me vi atrapado en un entierro. No entendí el rito, ni quise; la muerte no me interesa [aunque sé que se ritualiza la muerte para hablar en profundidad de la vida]. Recordé las pocas veces que enterré a un ser querido: la neutra expectación que te paraliza. Wittgenstein le grita a Turing en un aula de Cambridge: ¡la contradicción no te conduce a ninguna solución equivocada porque no te deja caminar, la contradicción te paraliza! Iba sin mapa, una brisa de elementales acordes, los papeles de helados regatean entre las piernas del cortejo. [12] Antigüedades. La tienda pesa sobre la acera en un bloque de puro silencio, y desequilibra otro plato de balanza cuyas pesas son confusas voces. Casi al fondo, veo el rostro de un anciano, pospuesto al revuelto de cachivaches que no obstante guardan un orden caleidoscópico. Golpea una Olivetti con dos dedos [de gallo], se alza sobre las letras L y A, hace el pino, le caen los objetos de los bolsillos, mueve las piernas en círculo, el caracol vive ensimismado en la espiral, el número en la cifra, lentamente regresa a la posición de sentado. Carraspea. Golpea la Olivetti. En catarata, como a Platón, caen sobre sus ojos las cejas. Carraspea [malformación en el silencio]. Por los intersticios de la tinta divisa un paisaje que ha sobrevivido a todos los paisajes. Bruselas, Madrid, Herakleion, Turín, qué radio tan vieja, ¿está en venta? Sí. Carraspea. Stalingrado, Nueva Ámsterdam, qué habrá sido de quienes vivieron en un tiempo que corre en un lugar que ya no existe. Pongo veinte mil dracmas sobre la mesa, ni los mira. Detiene el tecleo, enciende la radio, voces cruzadas, oigo el rechinar de una balanza. [11] Aquí está el corral [seccionado entre los ramales del peral] estrellado con polen de lúpulo primaveral, que es lo mismo que ver a Dios o a la transparencia. Tallos trepadores cicatrizan el adobe de la fachada, fisurado por el sol. Un peldaño de pizarra, veteado en cuarzo, donde me aguardaba el golpe tonto que inspiró mi primer verso. La mecedora, cuerda de la siesta, y mi padre roncando bajo el manzano con un Scientific American que languidece entre sus manos [manzana recién caída] abierto por una página con Paul Dirac. La sombra de un pájaro que ya se ha ido y no veo. El quicio asimétrico de las antiguas cuadras sella un olor a boñiga, leche, pelo esotérico de aún no sabía qué triángulos y me induce a manosearlo [como si lo actualizara]. También retuvo la fotografía un zapato de charol que irrumpe por la derecha, es mi madre regresando del colmado que era todo menos eso. Y tras la pátina delatora de los visillos veo los ojos de un niño que observaba el corral, la luz del lúpulo, a su padre a un palmo de Newton, y un espejo en los zapatos de charol que cada junio violentaban al trigo porque la naturaleza no admite copias, decían. Cierro el álbum, me aquieto escuchando el goteo del gotero, primer pabellón, segunda planta, habitación ciento siete, la ventana decapita los tejados de Madrid, en el patio habrá un huerto con un membrillero. Nos han dicho que un hombre vendrá a pintarlo, y yo ya sé que no podrá porque no se puede pintar el humo [o una ola]. [10] Aquí todo quiere colarse en el alma como una piedra se cuela en el agua, dejando la piel intacta, y vivir allí otra perspectiva: la ausencia de perspectiva. Quien encuentra un agujero se escapa, pero una vez afuera se extravía. Un señor toma café, lee el periódico, mira de soslayo a una mujer que pasa, a dos hombres que a la vuelta de la compra charlan en la acera y de sus brazos cuelgan bolsas cortadedos. Le interesa más el arquetipo definido por esas figuras que las propias figuras, por eso creo que también todo cuanto lee lo traslada a un orbe abstracto; podemos decir, grosso modo, que habita la silueta de las cosas. A las dos de la tarde pliega el periódico, introduce las gafas en la funda, se acerca a la caja registradora, cuánto se debe, extrae unas monedas del bolsillo, las extiende ante la corbata del camarero, desliza unas cuantas hacia delante, echa cuentas, retrae hacia sí dos o tres, adelanta otras, vuelve a retraer algunas de aquéllas, echa cuentas, otra vez las desliza, atrasa más de una, ahora tres adelante, dos atrás, cinco al mismo tiempo adelante, las mismas atrás, cuando me fui varias personas le rodeaban y los hombres en la acera aún cambiaban la compra de una mano a otra con ilusorio afán de desgravar peso. [«Hay dos célebres laberintos en los que a menudo la razón se extravía: el primero es el origen del mal. El segundo es la discusión de si existen la continuidad y los indivisibles, y ahí entra en juego el infinito», Leibnitz.] [9] «Si en cada centímetro cuadrado epidérmico aún reconocemos vestigios de pez, de agua, de alga, de electrones, de dinosaurios o de monos, somos fósiles del pez, del agua, de las algas, de las partículas cargadas, de los dinosaurios y los monos. Si en nuestras leyes y ordenanzas hay vestigios alejandrinos, presocráticos, dionisíacos y romanos, somos fósiles de Alejandría, de los presocráticos, de Dioniso y de los romanos. Si entre las líneas de este texto hay vestigios de cuanto noche a noche he ido soñando, soy el fósil de ese hombre que, ubicuo e inmodelable, lleva mi nombre en el sueño», me digo detenido ante un escaparate, el niño que toca un acordeón desafinado por la lluvia pide limosna, el pelo empapado, fregona del cielo. Quién es ese resucitado, le susurra un maniquí a otro. Sólo la muerte nos actualiza. [8] La primera vez que sentí dificultades al respirar fue en el Museo Van Gogh, Ámsterdam, Los Girasoles, el rectángulo que te sobrepasa. Colgaban vivos, lóbulos y bronquios de un pulmón ocre amarillo, hurtaban el aire que me correspondía [al nacer se nos asigna un cupo]. Desde niño tuve la fotografía de ese cuadro en el salón de mi casa. Ahora, en la radiografía, dibujo a rotulador las regiones dañadas, les pinto girasoles. [7] Se le olvida a la vejez la infusión del presente en el tiempo, por eso esta noche he regresado a las dependencias de la casa paterna, ámbito de una silueta puzleada tras el retículo del ventanal que ahora veo. [Id pensando ya en una brasa que penetra en el agua, o algo así.] Buscaba abrazar al asesino de mi infancia. Lo hallé anciano y parasitado a juguetes que en un principio no reconocí. Debió tomarme por un maleducado [no hice más que toser y toser], pero él, ojos en blanco, habló toda la noche de cometas rotas, de padre y madre, de novias compartidas en la edad de los días prototipo, de veraneos de pesca y costa, de los ojos de los peces que la evolución también había ido distanciando, de estos monásticos años escuchando el eco más y más cercano de mis pasos [violácea monotonía], y ya al alba, de que yo también fui su asesino, de que los dos estamos muertos, y que somos la misma persona [veis]. [6] Encendí el televisor, en el CD Johann Sebastian y observé la radiografía. Vacas pastan los pulmones, pistoleros corren a lo largo de la pleura, ecodetergentes blanquean un bronquio, un político detalla su programa en la tráquea, dos motos chocan en el cruce esofacal, niños juegan en la playa antes de ser arrastrados por una flema, un locutor mira con extrañeza el Lóbulo Superior Derecho y da una noticia acerca, después, aquilatados trazos de una ciudad en ruinas lo ocupan todo, a juzgar por el jersey cuello cisne de la niña el frío es intenso, barre las losas de las calzadas, da saltitos mediterráneos, se ajusta la diadema, después ponen un fresco, es un toro, vector de fuerza horizontal, dice el locutor, y un hombre lo agarra por los cuernos en tanto otro saltimbanqui hace el pino sobre su lomo, los acróbatas invierten el campo gravitatorio, imagino que por eso el locutor dice que allí Occidente dio una pirueta, aún está en el aire, ahora unas escaleras bajan a los aposentos reales, vuelve a salir la niña, tuerce la boca y empuña la escoba como una lanza en posición de firmes, el locutor [otra vez babea sobre el micro en el Lóbulo Superior Derecho] no sé qué dice. Tras tres días de intensa fijeza, cesa Johann Sebastian, despego la radiografía de la pantalla del televisor. Sin saber que mañana iré a reservar el billete, sé que mañana iré a reservar el billete. [5] Donde la calle dibuja una ese hay una pequeña plaza sin forma ni silueta y un restaurante [es condición de la comida [y los sueños] no llegar a demarcar qué la rodea]. ¿Aquí? Vale. Las casas se alzan extraplomadas sobre la pérgola que, llena de flores, cubre nuestras cabezas y no deja pasar la luz de las estrellas. El folclórico acordeón, llegado de un lejano soportal, francamente incomoda. Charlamos de simbología, de si Londres o París, de si la musaka con o sin orégano, de lo que, en fin, hablan los recién encontrados. Sobre los platos, diminutas flores blancas y amarillas van cayendo. Las muerde junto con el pepino y el queso, o flotan sobre el tinto. Otras se prenden al pelo [mojado aún de la playa]. La saqué por la mañana de una vitrina del museo y la llevé a su medio. Reina del Agua, Palacio de Festos, 1.500 a. C. ponía la placa, hojeaba un Marie Claire sin ton ni son, como por rutina [me confesaría más tarde que le resultaba divertido ver cuán horteras son las damas contemporáneas]. Ya no hay cristal, ya no hay ámbar, repetía, me enterrarán en un hueco y me descubrirán unos hombres cuando claven postes de red telefónica, devaluado laberinto, y a mi lado, coronado en oro, mi hombre, paciente de cuarenta y tres años, tabaquismo, sin antecedentes familiares. Enfisema pulmonar con disnea tras moderados esfuerzos. En agosto de este año inicia cuadro con edema en extremidades y dolor. Nódulo espiculado en LSD. No inclusive en Protocolo de QT adyuvante + Radioterapia. Por cada poro desprende una luz intensa, no come flores sino estrellas, quedan tres o cuatro allí arriba. Voy a dividirme en su rostro cuando el vigilante me grita ¡no la toque! Con la mano oculta en el bolsillo se recoloca el medallón testicular, tira al cesto el Marie Claire y murmura vaya mierda. [4] La noche tirita, se retrasa el mar, el azar conduce las ramas de los árboles, Poulos expulsa el humo con un soplido seco, el glup al verter la botella, la transparencia en las bragas de Janet, un murciélago dibuja sobre el tejado su teorema. El quid de la cuestión, me dice, es retraerse a tiempo de las propias huellas, alejarse, oírlas latir desde lejos. Yo dejé atrás un idioma y un país que sale naranja en los mapas, lo arrugué con una mano y ahora anda por ahí rodando, sin hacer ruido golpea los cristales, como los golpea la sombra. El pubis de Janet. [3] Veo dos niños con las cañas en alto y en posición de firmes, y a Poulos y Janet acariciándoles el pelo. Detrás, la parra acaricia los marcos azules de las ventanas, detrás, el páramo acaricia el horizonte, y el horizonte al continente, y el continente al polo, y así hasta dar una vuelta completa para llegar al visor, tiempo que aprovecho para apretar el disparador automático y correr hacia ellos. ¿En qué lápida del tiempo hallar aquella escena, si ya fue sustraída? Entre el visor y esos cinco cuerpos, un prado seco donde se apelmazaba [como el agua rancia de una esponja] lo que vendría, esta visión, mi antetiempo. Un treintañero de flequillo lacio, traje tostado sin corbata, gafas de pasta, que me mira con expresión de molestarle el sol. No me reconozco. Cierro el álbum, me quedo escuchando el goteo del gotero, primer pabellón, segunda planta, habitación ciento siete, la ventana decapita los tejados de Madrid, y en el patio habrá unas ruinas y un laberíntico palacio. Nos han dicho que un muchacho vendrá a vencer al monstruo, y yo ya sé que no podrá, yo ya sé que quien saldrá del laberinto será el monstruo disfrazado de muchacho, porque no se puede vencer lo que es igual a uno mismo. Por eso tampoco uno puede curarse a sí mismo. [2] Yo siempre regreso a los pezones: islas dóciles: perpleja espiral: origen del disparo: sobados ojos: primerísimos átomos: destino de la lengua: diana doble en la que cae miope el arquero: donde los círculos gravitan en más círculos: donde el Origen esconde su metro patrón: donde todo catálogo deviene ridículo: crepúsculo de lo decible: donde manda el Punto 7 [en una página en blanco dos puntos anudan silencios]: donde yo siempre vuelvo: a las islas dóciles: única ortografía: los pezones: grito tu nombre: el eco: [1] Dicen que cuando aún estamos en el cristal de la placenta vemos toda muestra vida pasar en fragmentos desordenados y rotos, acúmulo que olvidamos en el instante de nacer. Camino entre la espuma cristalizada de una civilización, seca desde hace tres mil quinientos años. Primer destino viajero del feto. Quién pudiera sacar ya un ojo y contar sesenta y una estrellas en el cielo. Se acerca noviembre, los turistas van desapareciendo, el vigilante, que a falta de leña solía pasar el invierno quemando mapas y postales, este año se las escribe antes a sí mismo porque le han dicho que usadas queman mejor. Desciendo las escaleras que conducen a los aposentos reales, siento la compresión del aire. Enciendo el mechero. En la pintura un laberinto, lo ilumina un hilo de seda, y un joven que de nada se entera, paciente de cuarenta y tres años, tabaquismo, sin antecedentes familiares. Enfisema pulmonar con disnea tras moderados esfuerzos. En agosto de este año inicia cuadro con edema en extremidades y dolor. Nódulo espiculado en LSD. No inclusive en Protocolo de QT adyuvante + Radioterapia. Reprimo una lágrima. Clac. La enfermera me corta el cordón umbilical. A partir de ahí no recuerdo nada. [0] YO SIEMPRE REGRESO A LOS PEZONES Y AL PUNTO 7 DEL TRACTATUS (1999-2000) PRÓLOGO Un hombre ha sido abandonado por una mujer. Recluido en un hotel de una isla mediterránea, ese hombre recuerda los avatares de su amor. Su discurso, pleno de minucia y extrañeza, despliega un abanico de fotografías verbales, que se engarzan en las páginas como cuentas en el hilo de la memoria. Pero estas instantáneas doloridas, lejos de configurar un epitafio, sostienen un diálogo fluido y fracturado, como el objeto del que tratan. El poeta reconstruye escenas de la convivencia rota y del mundo que ha sobrevivido a esa ruptura —o, mejor, tizna con ellas las páginas— mediante una larga conversación con un «tú» que es la amada, pero también él mismo. El libro es, pues, en primer lugar, un libro sobre el amor: sobre su crepitar y sus rescoldos, sobre su elevación y su caída. Y también es un libro sobre el recuerdo, es decir, sobre los hechos que han constituido el yo, pero asimismo sobre los mecanismos gracias a los cuales el recuerdo capta, selecciona y moldea los hechos que constituyen el yo: «El oído es el órgano que tengo más desarrollado, después de la memoria», dice el protagonista del libro. Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus es aún más cosas: la conversación que el sujeto hablante mantiene con el fantasma de la amada y consigo mismo es también una conversación existencial, que alcanza incluso una dimensión metafísica. El yo, sometido al mundo por el peso insoportable de la soledad, pero victorioso del mundo por la plenitud del amor, se repliega en el verbo —en la articulación de lo informe o irracional— para interrogarse sobre el ser. El extraño desdoblamiento del tú —o, visto desde el ángulo inverso, la extraña confluencia de dos seres en un solo pronombre— revela el conflicto de la identidad (¿somos uno, algo, conclusos y narrables, o sólo aquello que los demás determinan que seamos, apéndices de otras fugacidades?) y, en esa pugna —que es una de las pugnas capitales de nuestro tiempo—, el rasgo principal del libro: la tensión. El protagonista, asfixiado por el dolor, pugna por una impasibilidad que lo libere del dolor. Decanta entonces el tono que preside Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus, el de un hombre derrotado, pero escéptico y sin zozobra, que aspira a devenir invulnerable. «Ni celebro ni lamento», leemos al principio del relato, como el nec spe nec metu de los estoicos. Su actitud recuerda a la del herido en la batalla que, apoyado contra una tapia, y fumando, observa la belleza del atardecer y traza arabescos en la arena con su propia sangre. El libro se cimenta en una sucesión de afirmaciones y negaciones obligadas a convivir en los límites inapelables de la página: la afirmación es lo escrito, y la negación, el espacio vacío entre lo escrito. Como el teclado de un piano, lo negro de la palabra y lo blanco del silencio se disponen ante nuestros dedos —y ante nuestros ojos— para que interpretemos la música dodecafónica del libro. El poeta descree de un discurso único. Por eso hilvana otro, en el que las voces son diversas, como espejos que multiplican interminablemente las imágenes, y el diálogo rompe la linealidad de la dicción, y los fragmentos se suceden como partes de un organismo que nunca podrá ser recompuesto, y hasta la sintaxis se eriza, exhibe sus púas, para interpelar o confundir —dudar, siempre necesario— y para que nada resulte insípidamente dulce. A un yo quebrado responden unos pronombres quebrados, un lenguaje quebrado: una escena de September; corchetes, como acotaciones dramáticas; y corchetes dentro de corchetes. Y a un yo que se pregunta cuál es la sustancia del amor sigue un yo que se pregunta cuál es la sustancia de las palabras con las que nombramos el amor. Sin embargo, el fragmentarismo no es una mera concesión a la conciencia devastada de nuestro tiempo, ni un adánico ejercicio de rebeldía, y menos aún de desorden. A las teselas del mosaico que es Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus —que dibuja un gran fresco de desposesión y, a la vez, de aprehensión del mundo— las unen no sólo aquel timbre meditabundo y agónico del hombre que rumia su derrota, sino también ciertos hilos narrativos que las ensartan, como la repetición en muchos pasajes, suavemente mántrica, de algunos elementos que aparecen en el primero: el viento, por ejemplo, «arrastra hojas, polvo de octubre, papeles a la panza de los coches». Lo continuo y lo interrumpido, el jirón y el todo, debaten a lo largo del libro, como otro flanco de la constante batalla por definir al ser. A Agustín Fernández Mallo, por otra parte, le gustan las paradojas, el hervor unitivo de la contradicción, quizá porque ninguna otra figura retórica conduce más derechamente a lo que reclama Olga Orozco en Mutaciones de la realidad: «Trataba de ser otros, de borrar las junturas de las separaciones / —sí, un solo tejido donde estuviera inscrito todo lo existente». En Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus leemos, por ejemplo, «te busco y te encuentro. No te busco y también te encuentro»; y, a continuación, esta enumeración empedrada de oxímoros: «Pájaros sin cielo: lluvia sin cielo: planetas sin cielo». Sin embargo, como un esqueleto envuelto por el músculo de la contradicción, el volumen entero se revela animado por una búsqueda afanosa de correspondencias y simetrías: vigas para sostener lo absurdo, o diques frente al desmoronamiento. Y aquí, al amparo de esta armazón analógica, descubrimos proposiciones de una clarividencia casi intolerable, formuladas con el espíritu marcial del poeta monstruoso que fue Ludwig Wittgenstein, pero integradas —y hasta deformadas— en el relato lírico por algún elemento antifigurativo: «Dos hombres que meaban comentaron que para un tal Cioran el hombre es el camino más corto entre la vida y la muerte. Era optimista el individuo. El hombre es el camino más corto entre la muerte y la muerte, me dijo el monigote W. C.». El elemento antifigurativo es, claro, este garabato daliniano que multiplica las voces y la conciencia, y que simboliza la soledad, y acaso el delirio, del protagonista. Pero también encontramos la evocación de antiguas rutinas con la amada —coágulos de tiempo contemplados como ruinas humeantes— y la descripción de las rutinas actuales, los asideros a los que un hombre abandonado se sujeta para que no se lo lleve la corriente del vacío: recurrencias todas que acaban conformando una red para una vida que se desploma. En Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus advertimos una constante tensión entre los teoremas de la ciencia y las perturbaciones del espíritu. En realidad, no hay oposición, sino una forma sutil de fraternidad: la belleza de las leyes físicas es la misma que irradian los hallazgos poéticos; la elegancia con la que se resuelve un enigma o una conjetura es idéntica a la que se desprende de una metáfora feliz; y los pezones del título de Fernández Mallo se mezclan sin desvergüenza con el axioma final del Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, que sintetiza la poesía hirsuta y calcinada de Wittgenstein, aunque él no la creyese ni remotamente poesía, sino la solución empírica a todos los conflictos del pensamiento humano. Esa tensión tiene su origen en una circunstancia biográfica: Agustín Fernández Mallo es físico, como Ernesto Sabato o Rafael Courtoisie. Y esa tensión, tan visible en el libro, y tan insólita en la tradición literaria española, se erige en uno de sus rasgos más singulares. Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus hibrida narración, poesía y, lo que es mucho menos frecuente, ensayo. No es casual que una de las primeras citas que incluye corresponda a María Zambrano, alquimista del verso y la razón: «Toda belleza tiende a la esfericidad». Y tampoco que los dos sustantivos avecindados en el sintagma pertenezcan a los órdenes de la estética y la geometría: la belleza —al menos la belleza contemporánea, caótica y convulsa—, estimulada por la incertidumbre moral; y la esfera, una entidad absoluta y perfecta. Fernández Mallo conjuga, en un nuevo ejercicio de tensión, ambos planos: la sensibilidad y el pensamiento, aunque probablemente sería más preciso decir la sensibilidad y la matemática: «Nuestra historia fue una ecuación. Un acto de fe», afirma. Estimulado por el dictum de Wittgenstein, al que alude en el título, y según el cual «lo que siquiera puede ser dicho, puede ser dicho claramente; y de lo que no se puede hablar, hay que callar», el poeta se lanza a una aguda reflexión metalingüística, que nos permite intuir que los límites de su experiencia — de su sufrimiento— son los límites de su lenguaje. En efecto, Fernández Mallo viaja en las palabras, desciende a su grupa hasta el fondo de las cosas y percibe su transparente crueldad, su textura de logaritmo y dentellada, para descubrir, al final de su inmóvil cabalgada, que las palabras no nos eximen de lo real, porque ellas mismas son la realidad: «A pesar de haber recorrido todas las palabras que nombran todas las cosas [acuérdate], ese camino no llevaba a lugar alguno salvo de nuevo a la propia sombra». No obstante, esas palabras fallidas, espectrales, continúan seduciéndolo. Sus metáforas son de una exactitud desbordante, aunque también sean conscientes de su condición de metáforas, como exige la posmodernidad: «Yo no tengo la culpa de que esta metáfora ya se haya inventado ni de que esté vieja y gastada, no, yo no tengo la culpa: sentada al borde de la cama, el violín de tu espalda, y la cintura, donde las márgenes estrangulan el río de las nalgas». Otras veces, los fragmentos se adensan, diamantinos, hasta hacerse casi haikús: «Todas las cosas alcanzan y pierden el paraíso una vez al día: tu camisón a los pies de la cama». Las palabras pelean, escrutan, topografían e incluso, revelada ya su insuficiencia, brotan de la nada, de una nada hecha de ímpetu significante y musical, como revelan los neologismos, vagamente dadaístas, «bisbeo» o «dárdalos». Pero, junto a ellas, o a su alrededor, la razón teje una malla de leyes que aspiran a reducir el desconcierto del corazón, la levedad de lo mortal. El autor formaliza causas y efectos, despeja hipótesis, extrae conclusiones y hasta consigna fórmulas matemáticas. No obstante, sus afirmaciones, que pretenden hacer inteligibles los fenómenos del mundo, nunca rompen el telo poético, sino que se diluyen en él, subrayándolo. Lo desconocido sigue presente en el lenguaje y en la conciencia hablante: «Te retirabas a tu cuarto a buscar tu noche, aunque no supieras qué significaba exactamente retirarse al cuarto a buscar la noche». Lo desconocido, tan lírico, sigue nutriendo al ser, al núcleo irreductible de tener vida, y de perderla: «Yo le repetía que las palabras se esfuerzan en amarrar todo este tiempo que se va sin haber sabido aún qué es el tiempo». Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus concluye con un largo e ininterrumpido fragmento del monigote W. C., que guarda una sorpresa final: una sorpresa que relativiza —o acaso subvierte— su significado. No nos ha de sorprender esta última pirueta, porque todo en el libro persigue la paradoja, la refutación de lo afirmado —para que de esa antítesis surja una nueva síntesis, una hipótesis relativizadora y revitalizadora—, el inestable equilibrio de una concordia oppositorum, a la postre imposible. En este monólogo confluyen muchos de los elementos que han construido el relato, y su amalgama genera un torrente, próximo al flujo de conciencia, que cancela el ritmo anterior, basado en la fragmentación, y nos arrastra a una turbamulta de sonidos y de sentidos. Así se plasma, definitivamente, esa tensión entre lo unido y lo desunido, entre lo íntegro y lo quebrado, que caracteriza a este libro admirable. EDUARDO MOGA Sant Cugat del Vallés, 5 de noviembre de 2000 y 12 de febrero de 2012 El viento arrastra hojas, polvo de octubre, papeles a la panza de los coches, agita la flota y ya no queda nadie salvo yo en la ventana del Hotel Port Maó. Llegará un día en el que la luz vuelva a ser la piel del mundo, me digo, bajo pretexto de primavera. Entretanto, no me asustan ni el viento ni tu éxodo, ni esa caída fantasmática y grotesca que se apodera de los trajes cuando se quedan para siempre en el armario. Únicamente me asusta pasar el otoño sin una mujer. Nadie nos ha enseñado a besar, y es lo único que hasta el final buscamos. Salgo a que mi soledad complete la ciudad desierta, ni recuerdo el bullicio, su intención era esto, abrirme un hueco [la rosa no recuerda que ayer fue rosa, por eso se abre cada amanecer con mudada belleza]. Los muertos no mueren en ellos, me digo, sino en nosotros, ellos ya flotan para siempre en la orilla, ciegos de todo, con el traje reventado cabecean contra las rocas, contra la suma de lo perdido; y no hay más. También nosotros besamos siempre la piel invisible de lo que vemos; y tampoco hay más. Los hoteles son lugares de burbuja, inflados de un no-mundo, asépticos, gasa y bisturí, por eso se escogen para convenciones y reuniones neutrales, por eso los crápulas de traje tostado llegan solos, dan unas monedas al botones e instalan allí su teatro de operaciones. He llamado para que me suban champán y una copa de cuello alto. Tu talle aristocrático fundiéndose en blanco al fondo de la calle vacía [como una de aquellas de Chirico pero con mar], la maleta que te compré en el mercadillo de Ciutadella, bien atada, un marinero se abotona el plástico amarillo hasta la nuez y no te pierde ojo; estáis solos: yo, detrás del cristal, ni celebro ni lamento. Creí ver que el viento pegaba un papel de helado a tus tobillos; te costó desprenderlo [de esto ya no estoy seguro]. Si, como dice María Zambrano, «toda belleza tiende a la esfericidad», esta casa ya no contiene esferas, hasta la imagen de tu recuerdo va aristándose, hasta la mía cuando me miro en los espejos [que por los pasos saben muy bien qué peripecia ha conducido hasta allí a quien se les aproxima]. ¿Por qué no me dijiste que sus pulmones se estaban desinflando? ¿Por qué no me dijiste que en otro mapa estabas inflando otra casa? Me hubiera gustado vivirla una noche contigo, viciarle el aire hasta lo irrespirable, derrotar sus tabiques, ensuciar sus colchones, prepararte el desayuno mientras te desperezaras, vestirnos de blanco y mirarnos en el espejo de la entrada para reconocernos esféricamente exactos antes de salir y pincharla [tras cerrar, eso sí, la puerta con especial cuidado]. Enseñarte lo inútil de la huida; enseñarte que una sola casa agota todos los mapas. De todo, poco va quedando. El cine matinal donde tus amigos dormían la mona, lo agridulce de tu aliento inflamando el cuarto, Poe y tú: «hace muchos años en un reino junto al mar habitó una señorita cuyo nombre era Annabel-Lee, y crecía aquella flor sin pensar en nada más que en amar y en ser amada por mí», poco va quedando de todo, el tiempo traza su orilla en la playa, y allí una maleta abierta será, perdón, es, piedra de salitre, sumió ya todo el agua, y en la destilería todo es cristal dentro del cristal, y tragos no tragados y besos no besados, miro al cielo hasta que se junta con el último mar, un tímpano azul, sordo en lo que a mí respecta, poco va quedando de todo, inservible avioneta en el hangar, los senderos impracticables, cuando no tachados de la rutina, como descubrir el espacio sin huella del que se parte, la moneda de todavía idénticas caras lanzada al aire, vengo de hacer astillas mi escritorio, mis papeles, una fogata en la arena [ya lo decía] de todo, poco va quedando. Hubo unos días [menos cercanos de lo que quisiera] en los que los turistas se asaban en la playa mientras tú y yo nos reíamos de ellos metidos en la sombra del bar [éramos una sombra dentro de otra sombra]. Pedíamos gin con limón; casi siempre. Las sombras, en cierto modo, son como los hoteles, cuanta más luz hay más allá de su linde, más aplica su ley la penumbra de dentro. Después la gente se retiraba y el dueño del bar nos ponía tu música preferida. Por ahí deben de andar aún las huellas de tu baile; plancton del Mediterráneo. En algún lugar nos aguardan pacientes los símbolos, me digo. Tras la cena, cuando los cafés y el gin, antes de que sintieras mi mano bajo tu falda, alguien, creo que fue el expiloto alemán [o quizá tú], sacó un tema oscuro, muy muy oscuro. Al llegar a la puerta W. C. el monigote negro, muy muy negro, atornillado al fondo blanco, me anunció su estado: muerto. Por ejemplo, una escena común: 8 am. Leer el periódico con aire distante en la terraza del hotel, el sol aún no calienta pero la luz ya molesta [la visión siempre antecede al calor del contacto, por ejemplo, entre los cuerpos]. Hago que leo el periódico en la terraza del hotel. Pasan los sujetos habituales. Elevarme las gafas y encender un cigarrillo; rito sin objeto. Nadie sabe que arriba, en la habitación, duermes; el pelo esparcido, desnuda y sobada, me pregunto, por las manos de aquel joven danés prematuramente envejecido [mala vida, digamos]. Sé que bailasteis hasta las tantas mientras yo me iba arrinconando en el extremo más decadente de mi escritorio, sé que en sus ojos de hígado destrozado, en su estómago incipiente, en su flequillo graso, en esa mezcla de cerdo y gallo cuando se sienta en la barra y se le observa de perfil, en esa mezcla de esplendor y derrota, de pasado irreconstruible cuando se lleva el vaso a los labios, viste toda nuestra historia desde entonces. Cierro el periódico; pasan los sujetos habituales y me los imagino vestidos de boda [tengo esa manía]. Arriba, te despiertas. El destino de la memoria [ese órgano poroso] no es olvido; es la infidelidad. Colados en el recuerdo de otro, somos otro. Ensimismados en un objeto no sabemos que es otro quien se nos ha colado en forma de objeto. Y cuando en busca de un viejo amor desandamos el trayecto [exactamente el mismo], encontramos otra cosa [pero no nos damos cuenta], y como sólo puede existir aquello que volverá a repetirse [es ley], a veces dudo de si realmente hemos caminado ese camino [por deducción: algún camino, todos los caminos]. Y si un perro se muere lo que lloramos es haber conocido la verdad que aún no nos ha llegado. Y las manzanas nunca caen de la misma forma [tampoco los párpados; por eso soñamos]. Y si todo esto no es cierto, o no existe el hombre, o no existe el poema, o ningún hombre ha escrito jamás un poema. Pero no te escribía para esto [que también], sino para decirte que ayer encontré una carta tuya en la que me decías: «acabo de llegar y ya sé que me vestirás con tus besos». Un día, en alguna infidelidad de la memoria, habrá sido verdad. Yo no tengo la culpa de que esta metáfora ya se haya inventado ni de que esté vieja y gastada, no, yo no tengo la culpa: sentada al borde de la cama, el violín de tu espalda, y la cintura, donde las márgenes estrangulan el río de las nalgas. Amortajo los días, pretendo conocer la silueta de la soledad, a qué piel se adhieren ahora mis gestos. Enciendo la luz de mi escritorio [para más señas, y por si alguien se anima, Hotel Port Maó, habitación n.° 7] cuando las noches se cierran sin pomo, y me siento; yo sólo me siento. Alguien podrá verme más allá de la ventana, paliar su soledad, al menos, ya que la mía yo no puedo. Amortajo los días, por lo de la soledad, ya lo he dicho, y cuando creo haberle ceñido el último cabo se desparrama de nuevo por las dependencias del hotel. Creo que jamás llegaré a conocerla, a conocerme, deudor de sus gestos, desde siempre existo pero nada soy. [Ahora lo sé], carece de silueta el lado náufrago del tiempo. Te despertabas y te sentabas, desnuda al borde de la cama. Un beso en la espalda. Eramos tan iguales que no lo sentías. No sé qué perversión posmoderna me permite, al llegar al hotel, poner un disco de Tom Waits y hojear una biografía en blanco y negro de Balenciaga antes de iniciar estas líneas que todo lo igualan. Debería estar prohibido. Hay una foto. Hay alguien idéntico a mí a pesar de ser yo [y asumo la locura que es decir esto]. Hay una mujer que no reconozco [también asumo esta locura]. Hay este momento, construyéndose en la sombra, que diluye ahora la foto entre mis manos y la deja como sin bordes. Ya no hay foto, hay un paisaje, mínimo, excéntrico, lunar, y un trozo de mar que lo delimita, y dos malnutridos aproximándose enfermos de poesía [hombre y mujer, para más señas]. No querían ver [aún no podían], que esa dolencia se diagnostica cuando los poemas degeneran en vasos comunicantes de tiempo, pero eso sólo se sabe más tarde, cuando éstos han reducido la vida a un instante, y no te queda más remedio que temer la llegada del otoño sin una mujer, y mirar por la ventana, crear un sucedáneo. [A veces asumo que, realmente, ahí afuera nadie espera.] Antes de irte para no volver [si lo que quieres es asegurarte], has de hacer siempre una prueba. Mete el equipaje en la maleta, vete al puerto más cercano y tírala. Sabrás de tu futuro por su capacidad para hundirse o flotar, me dijo el monigote W. C. Muchas veces me he preguntado qué paisaje o quién le espera al atleta tras batir la última marca batible por todos los atletas. Quizá Dios para decirle «y sin embargo no te mueves», o quizá yo para contarle mientras mirásemos por la ventana que tocar la meta equivale a volver al principio, que cuando una mujer se va y ves fundirse en blanco su maleta y su talle aristocrático, siempre irrumpe un espontáneo en la escena [el barrido relojero del faro, el pitido del panadero, el botones con su sí, señor, o el latir de la respiración] que susurra: «y sin embargo te quedas». Y retenerlo en la mirada hasta que tus ojos se reduzcan a agua. O mejor, a cenizas. Desde hoy considérame muerto, te digo, no sacudas más el tiempo, no hallarías siquiera huesos: polvo de huesos. Mejor convócate, convoca a los objetos, dárdalos de aquel otro tiempo que me ocultaste [el tuyo]. O mejor, sube las escaleras de piedra que barrimos cuando la casa aún era nuestra, y siéntate en el mimbre a contradecir, a olvidar el recuerdo. Verás tu perfil a lo lejos florear o arrugarse como la piel de un árbol [en general]. Vendrá una teja a decirte [cuando caiga y estalle a tu lado], que a veces con cerrar los ojos no basta. Desde hoy considérame muerto, te digo, pero ya no me oyes, cierra los ojos, te deseo una feliz noche. Y de repente, la certeza de que has muerto. El destino de las sombras es fundirse, expiar la división que disfrutaron en vida. Abracémonos para poder soportar tanta belleza, esa que ya llega, ¿no la ves?, decías. —Dígame, a qué rama de la física se dedica, ¿a hacer bombas? —Hay algo más terrorífico que volar el planeta. —No me diga, ¿hay algo más terrorífico que la destrucción del mundo? —Sí, el saber que da igual lo que se haga, que todo es casual, que todo surge porque sí, de la nada, y luego se desvanece para siempre; me refiero al universo. Todo el espacio y todo el tiempo no son más que una convulsión temporal. Y me pagan para demostrarlo. —¿Piensa así realmente cuando mira al cielo en una noche como ésta y ve todos esos millones de estrellas? ¿Que nada de eso importa? —A mí me parece tan bonito como a usted, y me sugiere cierta verdad profunda que siempre se nos escapa, pero luego mi punto de vista profesional me domina con una visión menos ilusionada y más penetrante, y lo veo como realmente es: fortuito, moralmente neutro, e increíblemente violento. —¿Sabe? No deberíamos tener esta conversación; esta noche tengo que dormir solo. —Por eso yo me aferro a Diane, es cariñosa, vital, me abraza mientras duermo, y no tengo que soñar con fotones y quarks. Era ésta la escena que más te gustaba de September. Cuando en la fiesta el escritor mediocre y danés para colmo se me acercó y me preguntó lo mismo, respondí lo mismo. Sólo tuve que cambiar Diane por tu nombre. También yo agitaba un vaso de gin entre las manos, también él daba vueltas entre sus dedos al taco del billar. También éramos ya un film, una apariencia. Vengo a despedirme, te dije pensando lo contrario, vengo a despedirme te dije después de aporrear tu puerta, después de ver tu ojo ocupar la esfera de la mirilla sin parpadear, vengo a despedirme, te dije sin despegar la mirada de tu bata abierta, vengo a despedirme, te dije, en no recuerdo bien qué circunstancias [por dignidad, inventémoslas]. Metiste todo en la maleta [el collar de falsas perlas, el bañador con arena, los tallos de hinojo, un libro amanerado de Anaïs Nin: legítimas perlas de tu ritual adolescente], y partiste sin despedirte. Te vi alejarte, fundirte en blanco con el fondo de la calle mientras un marinero viejo, de esos que han visto esta comedia en todos los puertos, no te quitaba ojo. Soplaba el viento, es cierto. Pero despedirse, me decías, qué significa despedirse cuando el recuerdo ha saturado el pasado y no le queda más remedio que desbordarse en el presente para salpicar con su espuma los días que vendrán [todos]. Podemos despedirnos de las personas, pero no de las cosas, te decía yo, por ejemplo, de una maleta, de una muñeca, de unos labios, o de ese barco lastrado que es a veces el tiempo. Te fundías en blanco y como en algunos cuadros de Chirico acudía estático el viento. Me pareció que entrabas en un lugar de luces ya gastadas con el pie izquierdo. Esta tarde callejera sólo puede terminar en una disoluta plenitud [o lo que es lo mismo, en un mirar ambos en silencio al mar]. Nos lo dice la ráfaga de aire sobre tu pelo al doblar la esquina meada y sonreír, nos lo dicen el olor, el sabor, el tacto, y el sonido de la luz cuyo resplandor se nos niega pues ciegos han de ser quienes se aman [es ley], nos lo dice el violonchelo desafinado del músico ambulante muchas calles más allá, nos lo dice la arritmia de las farolas, y las venas de mis brazos, y las líneas de tus pies. Esta tarde callejera sólo puede terminar en una concentrada plenitud [o lo que es lo mismo, en un beso de tornillo]. Nos lo dice tu índice sobre el impúdico telón de escaparates [y aquel tercer acto congelado en los maniquíes Adolfo Domínguez], nos lo dicen los pájaros que vuelan sobre las plazas en círculos como buscando el teorema de un centro que jamás hallan, nos lo dice la piel, que se resiste a admitir su inexistencia más allá de la silueta, nos lo dicen tus robóticos pechos bajo el vestido de vuelo, nos lo dice el bisbeo de la ciudad que vamos dejando atrás mientras delante no hay nada [el vislumbre de un bulímico paraíso], y tus vértebras, blancas y negras de un piano al que estaban destinados mis dedos. Ahora pido otro vaso de gin, y en tanto llega, me gustaría preguntarte si en cualquiera de esas dos posibilidades tendrías un hueco para mí, te dije. Conozco de sobra adónde conduce todo esto, y lo espero. Sintonizar con los ruidos de las tripas y la noche [lujuria sonora], la calidez de la taza, de aquellos pechos, la transcripción de un viaje insólito que hicimos al origen de Occidente para hallar el orden en lo que no existe, era obvio [conozco de sobra adónde conduce todo esto], voy todas las mañanas a las rocas como el que acude a los dominios fantasmáticos del alma, suma de almas, hago recuento de mis posesiones, comienzo por el sol y ahí me quedo, en la burbuja que me derrite [todo presente es cera] y, es cierto, conozco de sobra adónde conduce todo esto, me hace feliz saber tanto, ser joven y viejo, ver oscurecerse los días como aquella lengua entrando en mi boca, y astillarse los barcos amarrados, y oxidarse los coches, y decolorarse las revistas en los kioscos cerrados, y las cabezas de muñeca que el viento y los golpes van modelando en los papeles de los helados que por ahí quedaron, también el éxodo de las ratas, se tiran al mar porque saben que aquí ya no queda nadie, a menudo he bajado a las cloacas, voy calcándolas, ahora hay peces de colores, y loros que repiten la ciudad que no ven, la de arriba, con la misma precisión que yo te repito si cierro los ojos. Me enseñaste que el azar es una obra de arte que se decapita a sí misma a cada instante; lo acepto; pero lejana existe una certeza [cómo si no abrir los párpados, me pregunto], conozco de sobra adónde conduce todo esto, todo este chiste en absoluto fácil, al borrón de luz gastada que mojará mis ojos, como en uno de esos finales, irremediablemente amargos, de las canciones de Jacques Brel. Me detengo [expectante pero sin esperar nada], en el centro del invadeable páramo que por invadeable no tiene centro. Escucho el ruido de la soledad: estrato último del sonido; cae como una gasa sobre lo visible [en realidad no cae; siempre estuvo ahí], cuando se aproxima el otoño y ya no queda nadie. Rumor ubicuo. Origen ilocalizable. Acudo al lugar exacto de tu recuerdo: no hay accidente que se precie sin su correspondiente pillaje. Todas las cosas alcanzan y pierden el paraíso una vez al día: tu camisón a los pies de la cama. Ahora que ya no estoy entre vosotros, tengo que decir que lo más inquietante fue esa manía que tiene la gente de ir ocupando primero las mesas del perímetro en los bares, me dijo el monigote de la puerta W. C. De nuestros días más felices, aquellos en los que cada cosa era insospechada antes y evidente después de que ocurriera, quedarán las miradas tristes, el miedo, evitado, a la máscara de luz que se pondrá el tiempo, la risa tonta del gin, el decisivo silencio al despertarnos espalda contra espalda, la forma de las nubes que ya todo lo anunciaban [pensaremos], la ropa nueva que dejamos en el fondo del armario, los bigotes de merengue, el siniestro empuje de una fe. De nuestros días más tristes, los predecibles, quedarán las reconciliaciones, el café después del beso, los meandros que da la ira para decir te quiero, un mobiliario elegido a medias, el ruido al masticar sin mirarnos [después, echar a reír], la certeza de que no se puede odiar aunque se pretenda, que felices son los ciegos porque sólo ven en sueños, que en una isla más se pierden los amantes cuanto más pequeña sea. El eco, como el espejo, es esa voz que regresa invertida para recordarnos que afirmar algo equivale a fundar su contrario. Al nacer gritamos Vida, y un día nos alcanza el rebote gritando Muerte. Tápate los oídos cuando te abandone esa mujer que ahora te espera allí sentada, me dijo el monigote W. C. Al fondo del recipiente del tiempo hay una costra [siempre] de domingo, huele al óxido de los cuchillos lanzados al mar [diana sin centro], y al de la tierra. Hace tiempo que agoté el recipiente, sorbo a sorbo me ayudó a tragar tus besos, y ahora sólo queda allí abajo este continuo domingo, con su silencio mineral, sus bares cerrados, su anestesia, sólo isla, sólo hotel, sólo piedras, y sólo un hombre, que es lo mismo que decir sólo isla, sólo hotel, sólo piedras. Me siento en la escollera y supongo que el principio y fin del mundo fue y será esto, una especie de domingo. Acudo a los lugares que fueron nuestros, algo parecido a una fe o superstición me impide destruirlos, dice que con tal de mirarlos, cada día un poco, se irán desvaneciendo, mansamente, bordeando la pregunta directa, la roca desde la que te lanzabas desnuda para romper la piel del agua, de ese mar que, alguna vez lo he dicho, eras tú [diana sin centro]. Sé que el tiempo es mortal, me digo, porque lo ha inventado el hombre, que es mortal, y mientras aguardo ese destino las horas nacen peculiares, convergentes, presagiando asuntos importantes y delicados que no llegan, no, acumulan pronósticos errados, resultado de haberlo calculado todo, porque lo hermoso no se calcula, me digo [es incalculable], se pisa una sola vez y ya se gasta, aunque, eso sí, no se olvide, nunca. Mentiría si ocultara la extrañeza de aquel paisaje, torpe y romántico, como especialmente construido a tal efecto [éste]. Yo sólo observo. Tan blanca y delgada como si no comiera, tan nerviosa como en una primera cita, setenta años más o menos para este paisaje como de diva de cine mudo aguardando en la terminal al viajero. Yo sólo observo. Mentiría si dijese que ya en otras ocasiones vi abrazar con igual pasión cuando el hombre apareció [primero la maleta, después una sombra que entra con el pie izquierdo en otra sombra]. Qué es el tiempo cuando ya no nos queda sino un recipiente pesado aunque vacío, podría haberme dicho, pero no, yo sólo observaba. Acaso sólo somos aeropuertos, me digo ahora, a los que van llegando sombras, minutos, segundos: sombras. Pero esto ni en la vejez lo sabemos. Yo, sólo observo. El viento arrastra hojas, polvo de octubre, papeles a la panza de los coches, agita la flota y ya no queda nadie salvo yo en la ventana del Hotel Port Maó. Te vi irte, el vestido blanco, tu talle aristocrático fundiéndose en blanco con las casetas blancas, el sin sentido de esa neutralidad. Yo lo era todo para ti, y ni una palabra mía bastó para salvarte [resulta extraña [cuando menos curiosa] la facilidad con que a veces el infinito desciende a cero absoluto]. Sé ahora que toda nuestra historia no fue un errar y ensayar, un golpear puertas y atentos los ojos, un ir poniendo para quemar velos, un cambio de rumbos, de costumbres, una cantera consumiéndose en dirección a lenguas desconocidas, ni el continuo agridulce que vive únicamente en las palabras asediadas por otras palabras: Muerte y Vida [las únicas de veras]. Tampoco fue una de esas historias en las que cada página es tan profunda como los silencios que contiene esa página, y éstos, a su vez, todo el mar, y el mar todas las gotas de lluvia, y la lluvia todas las perlas de un país donde nunca llueve, como decía Jacques Brel, y que yo un día me decidiría ir a buscar para ti si hubieras tenido un poco más de paciencia. Tampoco fue una historia de amaneceres y crepúsculos, de carreteras sin señales ni hoteles, ni mucho menos esa forma tan normal con la que interrogan el reloj los que se aman [siempre después del beso] para predecir su longevidad. Nuestra historia fue una ecuación. Un acto de fe. Cuando te abandone esa mujer que ahora te espera sentada en la mesa de allí, accederás a un lugar inconcebible hasta entonces, como pulsar simultáneamente las teclas Enter y Escape, como yo, que por escribir groserías en la pared de los lavabos se me ha condenado a morir y a no morir aquí crucificado [atornillado le llaman ellos], me dijo el monigote W. C. Aquella noche todo fue surgiendo de forma extraña, por ejemplo, tras un rato hablando en la barra del bar del hotel [pajarita y tirantes; zapatos crema, barba sal y pimienta] le sorprendió descubrir que yo también era un físico en excedencia. No tardó en revelarme su vocación poética, qué pura es la soledad de los anuncios por palabras [la valla publicitaria es otra cosa: no hay soledad en un mundo ocupado por un solo objeto] y la de los días del calendario y la de las fotos de algunos corchos de algunas oficinas y la de las teclas de los personal computer y la de los cajones del tocador de una mujer y la de los elementos de la tabla periódica. Recintos sólo accesibles [de vez en cuando] por sus correspondientes isótopos. Habitar una isla te obliga a cumplir la peculiar simetría de coincidir exactamente con la isla. Puedes buscarte la vida entre la ingenuidad de los turistas, puedes matar las tardes lanzándote botellas con mensajes, puedes emborracharte sin pasar inadvertido y usarlo en tu beneficio, puedes cubrir la fachada de tu casa con conchas en un ataque de mal gusto [está permitido], puedes quedarte quieto junto al faro y guiar a los barcos imperdibles [ser por fin un faro sin misión], puedes, incluso, llegar a grabar un disco si el folklore local entra en decadencia, o puedes, como yo, llegar a descubrir la única certeza a la que puede acceder un humano: la luz se opone al laberinto. Esto sí que es definitivo. Una vez descubierto cumples otra simetría: eres una isla dentro de otra isla. Y esto, a mi pesar, también es definitivo. Esta noche [ahora que todos se han ido], antes de que el temporal me despertara y sintiera la electricidad en la moqueta cuando me acerqué a la ventana, he visto el Mal. Pero no era [digamos] el mal en sí, sino un tejido incorrectamente hebrado, mal trenzado, como un telón [digamos] gastado en mil funciones o [por qué no] una pupila vista al microscopio. [Digamos] que del mal nada sabemos aunque sea viejo y anterior a lo creado [anterior al saber], aunque condescienda a ser representado en las hebras más estrechas del sueño para que veamos a su través los disfraces, la tramoya, los camerinos de los dioses. Conviene ir advirtiendo de que la verdadera función aún no ha empezado. Disfruta mientras puedas de este prólogo. Había entrado en el bar, y no se acodó, puso ambas manos, tiernas y limpias, sobre la barra, pidió Veterano en vaso, tragó despacio, quiso ver el fútbol. La primera parte la pasó en silencio. La segunda, dándole trabajo al mondadientes, también en silencio. Qué desgracia esto de ser camionero en una isla, le dijo al camarero antes de pagar y arrancar el motor. El expiloto alemán, a mi derecha, hizo un comentario acerca de los motores diésel. Había un infinito numerable siempre que nos besábamos en la playa. Una lavadora entre las rocas. Una bolsa desteñida de hipermercado. Una botella de agua mineral criando algas. Un enchufe de pared transformado ya en canto rodado. El cerco móvil del petróleo. Una maroma deshilada. Etcétera. Mensajes [todos] de amor que no llegaron. Me lo encontré la noche que fuimos de pesca en el yate de Xesc, cuando bajé a la playa en tanto vosotros os dañabais. Encogido entre las rocas, lisa la frente, dejaba la caña en estricta escuadra, qué desgracia esto de ser camionero en una isla, murmuró sin apartar la vista del fiel de horizonte. Cruzado en la carretera, con las luces encendidas, aguardaba al ralentí el pequeño camión. Darse cuenta de que esos números a lápiz dejados por los carpinteros en los marcos de las puertas, en el reverso de las mesas, o en el interior de los cajones [supongo que también Dios olvidó signos por ahí tras crear el mundo], obedecen a un plan. Darse cuenta tras mucho indagar de que son fragmentos de música cósmica, quiero decir, de tu rostro, pues en él están las partituras [también las futuras]. Darse cuenta de que esto es mentira y aun así invertir toda la vida en demostrarlo; ésa es la tarea. Soy el camino más corto entre tu alma [que se queda], y tu cuerpo [que se va]. Las flores del jarrón [sólo un jarrón] se descomponen para que vea en su torno el círculo amarillo del tiempo: poema eras, en polvo te convertirás. Cuando un vaso de agua se derrame sobre la tinta [sólo tinta seca] de estas líneas, pétalos negros desplegándose sobre el papel: polvo eras, en flor te convertirás. Harto de vivir sin rutas [sólo rutas], el camionero isleño llevó el camión al faro, valoró ambas posibilidades, y fue el camión quien se fue abajo: chatarra eras, en plancton te convertirás. El viento arrastra papeles, hojas a la panza de los coches, la mujer que arrastra la maleta [sólo una maleta] desaparece fundiendo su talle aristocrático contra las casetas: plancton eras y en chatarra te convertirás. Y así podría continuar, ahora que todos se han ido y sólo quedo yo en el hotel, con sus puertas idénticas y sus timbres que no suenan. Sospecho que la muerte no quiere morir, se transforma en sus máscaras. Sólo conmigo cumplió: polvo era; en polvo me convertí. No hay peor cosa que perderlo todo. Quien pierde un poco menos que todo gana la pobreza [con su prestigio asociado], y puede apuntarse a un club de dandis retirados. Quien pierde un poco más que todo gana el vacío que hay más allá de la materia, y puede ponerse a escribir poesía [debe]. Pero quien pierde exactamente Todo gana exactamente Nada, y esa contradicción te paraliza, no lo olvides, me dijo el monigote W. C., cuando te abandone esa mujer que te espera en la mesa. Llegó la noche a la terraza sobre el mar; me recordó al llenado de los pantanos: dando previamente un rodeo que nunca se ve. De la cocina sacaste unos martinis y te sentaste a mi lado con un cruce de piernas similar al de los tallos trepadores cuando buscan algo que no encuentran [por ejemplo, la luz]. El mar; sólo mar que mirar. No sé si viste a la última esfera del sol enseñar todas las formas almacenadas en su memoria; no sé si viste nuestras cabezas dibujándose bajo la bombilla desnuda [pensaría algún marinero que nos viera] [yo las vi porque pensé en el marinero]. Después pusiste a Johann Sebastian, tu cuerpo instó a sus propias penumbras y se hizo un nudo entre los brazos de la silla en el sentido en que podemos calificar de nudo a la fusión de pétalos que es la flor cuando se cierra. Mirar el mar; un madero entregado a la carcoma. Ya entrados en hora, llegó un supuesto jazz que sólo alcanzaba a verbena desde algún lugar del pueblo; hasta que amanecimos entre todo aquel silencio. Fue esa noche cuando decidimos que lo real es real por convenio. Tras semejante descubrimiento sólo nos quedaba cerrar los ojos cuando tocara abrirlos y abrirlos cuando tocara cerrarlos: pájaros sin cielo: lluvia sin cielo: planetas sin cielo: nuestra historia desde entonces. Te busco y te encuentro. No te busco y también te encuentro. Me das tu mano, fría, la que nos da el espejo si lo tocamos, pero no exactamente, me dices unas palabras que salen de tus labios con la distorsión del eco, no las entiendo, remota pero presente, tardo en comprender, eres tú el eco. Paso ante las habitaciones, ante los salones, ante los bares cerrados, tardo en comprender, sólo donde todo es vacío, desolación o puro silencio, triunfa el eco; comprendo enseguida entre qué murallas va y viene; no respiro, no observo, no anoto, el cigarro se consume, otro día termina junto al faro, me dejo trocear por el silencio de la noche [lo exijo]. Ocurre, siempre que la memoria desenfoca las mentiras, que sólo queda una verdad. Tan cristalina que no deja nombrarse, me dijo el monigote W. C. Terminar las frases sugeridas por mis pasos en la playa [de ella son], pues todo acto se queda corto, vivió por su defecto, su posibilidad. Dar forma final al retrato en un papel sin márgenes que bien podría ser mi pupila, pues toda visión llama al infinito más allá de su campo. Cerrar bien fuerte el puño sin dejar escapar ni un gramo de aire, aquel que te presté una noche cretense, pues el amor así cedido es mensaje o trampa de la deuda. Agotar en esta tarde tan tarde todos los presagios, encomendarme a los faros que no responden, dejar de comer para digerirme a mí mismo, apagar todas las luces del hotel y proyectar algo imposible: la continuidad en el otro lado. No he caminado todo este camino contigo para al final decirte que en nuestra piel nunca se puso el sol, porque ya lo sabes, ni que no volvería a habitar ese paraíso; bien está. Pongo un disco, miro por la ventana, insisto en el timbre de la recepción vacía, ya casi no bebo gin. Podría glosar mi vida con un único día. Si me hubieras preguntado alguna vez por qué caminaba aquel camino contigo, hubiera arrancado una flor para injertarla entre tus labios, o hubiera pedido otra ronda, o la hubiera emprendido a golpes con cualquiera; te hubiera dicho, en resumen, que no lo sabía. Hoy respondería que para saber que el amor es directamente proporcional al dolor, o que el sueño es una trampa que no merece ser vivida. Te diría, en resumen, que aún no lo sé. En estos días previos, cada vez más lisos como el espejo [desierto en el que se mira el tiempo, me digo siempre que pienso en el espejo], vigilo lo que de mí dejaste en los objetos. Sé que el pan de cada día no es pan si no ha conocido el sabor de algunas palabras importantes como: soledad, amor, muerte o vida. Que dentro hay un mar, lo sé también, llega cada día más fatigado pero siempre llega, como si los golpes del dique no le afectasen, mece los mástiles, cómplice del viento y de los papeles arrastrados, y yo, que ya lo sé todo, imagino que me muevo, pero lo que se mueve es ese mar que de una manera sorda, imprecisa, te equivale. Habíamos partido juntos cara al sol de poniente, ahora el sol está detrás, y sólo mi sombra ante mí, camino hacia ella desliándome de cuanto es mío, cediéndole todo en una lenta desintegración que casi no sientes si no la piensas, porque a pesar de haber recorrido todas las palabras que nombran todas las cosas [acuérdate], ese camino no llevaba a lugar alguno salvo de nuevo a la propia sombra. Me queda el eco de tu voz, únicamente, aunque en ti no quede ya el mío, te oigo rugir, protestar, pero no te escucho, mi meta es pura sordera, la más hueca, la de mí mismo [no cabe mayor humillación para el sonido]. Se desintegra la identidad de una persona cuando repite muchas veces su nombre; no se pierde, se desintegra, me digo, o cuando repite los días y funda involuntariamente costumbres, que viene a ser lo mismo. Desde que, reunidos, y en plenas facultades físicas y mentales, los teólogos de Roma abolieron el Infierno, ha dejado de existir el Paraíso, y si existe, es un lugar solitario, aburrido y triste. El viento arrastra hojas, polvo de octubre, papeles a la panza de los coches, agita la flota y ya no queda nadie salvo yo en la ventana del Hotel Port Maó. Hay una imagen tonta y recurrente, insoportablemente bella, un viejo marinero que te mira y no entiende, tu talle aristocrático, un danés borracho, alguien que cambia todos los días las flores de tu habitación, y yo, que sólo miro. No me importa admitir que escribo con el único fin de reconstruir el infierno de tu paraíso, y volver a fundarlo, si es posible, para esta vez derrumbarlo yo solo. Una noche de mayo llegamos a la isla, ah, recién casados, dijo el paisano que nos hospedó en su buhardilla por una suma ridícula [corrió al bar a consumirla]. Para qué decirle que algo comenzaba a consumirse también en nosotros. La terraza sobre el astillero, la parra, gatos, el espejo de recluta en el que exacta te arreglaste, uvas que iban explotando en el suelo [relojes, dijiste]. Salimos a cenar, compramos chatarra a un ambulante, un ASA100, monedas al mendigo, café en la plaza, una copa; comenzaba a atravesar la frontera el turista que llevamos dentro. De regreso, encontramos al paisano dormido en el portal sobre su vómito; su turista. Mira por un momento hacia atrás, entre los sucesivos olvidos y recuerdos [si es que es posible trazar tal línea, que no], hay unos lugares infinitamente pequeños y profundos, el pozo [piensa en el abisal charco del retrete], al que va a parar el asesino del recuerdo que precedió al olvido [o viceversa]. Apiádate de esos ejecutados, gracias a ellos y sólo a ellos existe una fosa común a la que llamamos tiempo, me dijo el monigote W. C. Llegan los turistas cuando el ciclo lo exige a sobar el juguete, como si el Paraíso tuviera forma de patio de recreo. No saben esos visitantes que cualquier lugar de este mundo es una ciudad al Norte, ni que nadie ha visto el Sur aunque la poesía lo busque, ni que el cuerpo sabio sólo retrocede ante las sombras, ni que cuanto más violentamente me hacías el amor más buscabas aniquilarlo, no saben nada. Y nos envidian a los de aquí de siempre, los hombres de papel que al nacer el paraíso condena a errar en busca de la tinta que lo escriba o dibuje, creí conseguirlo, pero no termina de conocer el hombre aquello que rubrica. La escobilla del retrete siempre cae de lado. Mientras comprábamos pan y unas cuantas conservas te paraste ante el expositor, artículos de baño, se nos acercó aquella desconocida, «desconfía de las toallas», dijo, y desapareció entre los turistas. Pasamos el día imitándola. Últimamente he vuelto a verla en otros lugares, su presencia es llamativa porque aquí ya no hay nadie. Sentada o de pie, pero siempre inmóvil, ya no dice aquella frase, sólo se aprieta el jersey en torno al pecho y no parece alegre ni triste. Yo sólo la observo. Y así se apagan algunos días. Nadie sabe qué significa: en la profundidad de la luz más clara del día se encuentra la noche con sus muertos a medias, su doble labio, y sus verdades absolutas, las heces lunares que si no me equivoco vimos un junio al telescopio, la mímesis de las sombras cuando han perdido a las siluetas y éstas a los cuerpos, los residuos diurnos que barreré hacia la noche [la de mentira] para recogerlos en la de verdad [tu sexo], la sabiduría de quienes vienen ya de vuelta de todos los ciclos cantando canciones en apariencia alegres y por eso mismo tristes, la cerradura de una puerta altamente absurda: conecta la nada del feto con la de la muerte [esos dos puntos que no definen una recta], el fantasma que nace en el abrazo del hombre y la mujer para evaporarse al final sin permiso [lo buscarán una y otra vez], el origen de esos instantes en los que te pasmas mientras ves pasar la gente y piensas: «esto que ahora veo debe de ser la espuma del día», en la profundidad de la luz más clara del día se encuentra, en suma, la noche de la noche. Yo sí: Igual que cada día tiene su noche y cada noche su día, también el día tiene su propio día y la noche su propia noche, lugares en fuga que no cumplen la simétrica inversión del espejo, por ejemplo, quien proyecta o imagina genera el día del día, quien espera amor de la noche, la noche de la noche. Y yo que ya lo sé [en realidad lo sé todo], vivo en un lugar aún por definir, ese al que tú mismo te envías cuando llega el otoño sin una mujer. Provisionalmente, voy a llamarlo [no se me ocurre otra forma]: la noche de la noche de la noche de la noche, etcétera. He comentado otras veces que yo soy quien observa, que yo sólo observo. Tengo práctica. Llegué a ver lugares absolutamente abstractos, por ejemplo, un silencio, el número cero, un perfume, la complejidad de tu jardín, el límite de una ecuación y una palabra [descubrí que eran el mismo], o acontecimientos que jamás han ocurrido, como [citaré sólo uno] el amanecer en el que la ley invirtió su orden y no fue la rosa quien se abrió sino el mundo en torno suyo. Tú llegaste un día, y aquel otro que te fuiste me hiciste ver de golpe que lo que nunca podré ver son esas cosas que giran en nuestro entorno, casi siempre muy lejos, y que sin embargo se corresponden exactamente con nosotros. Por ejemplo, cuando desde la ventana veo el puerto, el viento arrastrando papeles, la flota amarrada, y no sé si es tu recuerdo o miedo a pasar el otoño sin una mujer. [Hablando de otoño, hoy he visto hojas.] Nadie sabe qué significa: mi pasado me pertenece, mi pasado ya lo he perdido: me pertenece lo que he perdido. Yo sí: trivial. Hay días que, siguiendo el esquema de mi costumbre, llamo a recepción para que me despierten a las siete, no sé si dejo la libreta abierta sobre el escritorio o es ella quien me deja abierto a mí, meto el Rolex en el cajón de la mesilla, abotono el pijama hasta el cuello, y antes de ocultarse el sol, detecto en su resplandor cierta suciedad [a veces he pensado en un trapo viejo aunque recién lavado]. Siempre se me plantea el dilema de si es la herrumbre del cuarto, la infusión desordenada de tu aliento a mi lado, o una minoración crecida en el esquema de mi costumbre [sólo las costumbres sin esquema se mantienen sanas] quien provoca ese fenómeno en el que la luz se humilla. Ya en la duermevela, voy sabiendo que se debe a la propia fatiga de mi tiempo [el tiempo en sí], primeros avisos de la deuda que contraeremos con la muerte por habernos mostrado la vida. Aprovéchate, ahora que aún no has entrado, de mi cuerpo neto y arquetípico, que sentado a la taza todo hombre es un nudo deshaciéndose. A veces completamente, me dijo el monigote W. C. El cuerpo rústico, aparatoso, concibe de un solo modo su huida del espacio y del tiempo: batiendo sus propias marcas, alimentando, en fin, esa extraña combinación de espacio y tiempo que llamamos velocidad. El cuerpo sabio concibe ese mismo sueño permaneciendo quieto y esférico como una gota de agua en ingravidez. Pero qué decir de quien, ahora que ya no queda nadie en el hotel, observa desde la ventana cómo el viento arrastra papeles a la panza de los coches y mueve los mástiles. Besaba de arriba abajo tu cuerpo y al contacto se encendían las luces que incendiaban todo espacio y todo tiempo; un día se apagaron; dejaste el escenario a oscuras y en silencio. Quedaron la prosa y mi reflejo en esta ventana, ambos con sus insoportables defectos de forma. Y si alguna vez has existido, no existe esa vez. Y si en algún lugar has existido, no existe ese lugar. Sentados en el mojón kilómetro 12 de la carretera Mahón-Cabo Cavallería, veíamos los barcos romper [técnicamente hablando, fragmentar] el horizonte en dos; tú jugabas a decir hacia dónde se dirigían; yo, de dónde venían, y me llamabas pesimista, constructor del pasado. Al final nos besábamos no sé si llevados por la pasión o solamente por el ansia de coser [técnicamente hablando, remendar] el tiempo. Ahora, las mañanas oscuras, muy muy oscuras, suelo volver allí, me siento, y regreso a pie bordeando las escolleras hasta llegar a la avenida que emboca al puerto: las casas blancas, las persianas echadas, la soledad portuaria encajada en el olor a salitre; pienso entonces en aquellos errores como en particulares casos de una ley: necesarias sombras de los aciertos, y en que en ese océano urbano yo soy el barco, pero nadie me observa; una ola más. Ya había dejado de fijarme en las cosas porque huían cuando iba a cogerlas, como si ya no reclamaran su nombre [la planitud y sus símbolos en todos lados aguardando], hasta que llegaste tú [tu noche], nudo de sábanas. Bebíamos para besar y reír sin prestar atención a todo cuanto no fuera este coágulo, esta habitación de hotel. Pensábamos en nuestra noche como en un poema a imagen y semejanza de otro que nadie había escrito. Ilusa emboscada la del don’t disturb colgando en la puerta, la de los veleros que navegaban ahí fuera ignorando el verano prácticamente agotado, levantarse tarde y, envueltos en las sábanas, ver pasar la gente por la calle, mira, ahí va la soledad, decías, y aquellos veleros [ya lo he dicho, no sé por qué lo repito] surcando un verano que ya no era de ellos, ah, sí, para añadir: de nadie. Un nudo de sábanas eras en la noche, muñeca rusa, desnudándote, capa a capa sirviéndome todas esas cosas en las que ya había dejado de fijarme porque huían cuando iba a agarrarlas. Terrible emboscada a veces la vida: ahora entiendo por qué no nos arrasó en aquel instante. Pero el puerto, qué es el puerto, me digo, acaso algo más que raciones de calamares, olor a fritanga y langosta, algo más que una botella de gin demediada entre los dedos de un incombustible lord inglés [hedía, le dejabas calentarse en la insinuación de tus bragas], algo más que tu ansia arrastrada confusamente de chiringuito en chiringuito [tampoco se sabe quién arrastra a quién cuando se vuela una cometa]. Y ahora octubre: todo cerrado, tancat, closed: sólo este instante con aspecto de mujer al final de la calle vacía, desliéndose en su propia maleta [la borra del ombligo]; un marinero, viejo y aperrado, no te quita ojo; sois dos, yo no cuento, en realidad yo nunca te quité ni quitaré ojo, pero eso es tanto como no decir nada. Te la compré el mismo día que llegamos, sin regatear, a un exhippie, y pensé, esta maleta algún día cubicará nuestras almas. Pero de otra manera. Pero el puerto, qué es el puerto, me decías a menudo; la superposición de muchos sueños, probaba yo por decir algo recordando el ir y venir de los barcos, pero nada, me respondías, no es nada, que es tanto como decir todo, te puntualizabas. Y así seguías, sin pensar que la tautología es un incesto con el que no se juega. Tú hablas mucho de únicas verdades, de conclusiones definitivas, de sentencias lapidarias [etcétera], he aquí la mía, me dijo el monigote W. C.: más vale ser punki que maricón de playa. Créeme, no hay más. Y ahora no me ordenes en desagravio: levántate y anda; sabes que no puedo. Siempre hay un momento en el que las personas dejan de comprender; no quieren ya comprender, derivan a un lugar borroso, unión de todos los caminos. La llegada es lenta, pero se manifiesta con subitaneidad; especialmente en los amantes. Los ojos toman la forma del tedio que da el haberlo visto todo y hacer como que no. Y sólo hablan los amantes. De cabeza hacia el silencio. El de los hoteles cerrados. Cuando quiero hacerlo desaparecer, me tumbo en el hall a la hora en que el sol declina, no enciendo luz alguna, le abro las ventanas y dejo que la noche lo vaya penetrando. Yo con él. Si es verdad que un cuadro no es más que una mancha interpretada, fue verdad que tus labios eran peces resucitados al masticar el pescado. Fue verdad aquel meditado movimiento de los cubiertos entre tus dedos. Fue verdad el bisbeo de la fuente. Fueron verdad tus labios en la mousse, y la copa triangular de cuello alto [pubis transparente], y la esfericidad de tus ojos, y el infinito azul de los pezones; aquella noche. Si es verdad que un cuadro no es más que una mancha interpretada, yo era el intérprete y tú la mancha. [Ahora me pregunto cómo fue posible tanta belleza.] Ahora que ya no estoy entre vosotros, tengo que decir que lo más inquietante fue el silencio de los objetos, me dijo el monigote W. C. Hay que estar confundida para barrer de un solo golpe el sueño y heridas mal cerradas; estrellas que esperaban entre el polvo [como el último rayo del día nos espera casi siempre entre las baldosas] [más de paciencia]. Aspirar el tallo de la rosa y escupirlo, vomitar de una sola arcada cuanto se ha vivido [y no vivido]. Hoy he ido a comprar el pan y el horno estaba cerrado, no regresé con las manos vacías, cogí arena en la playa, vi de nuevo a aquella loca que nos decía «desconfía de las toallas». Hay que estar confundida para caminar como si nada hacia el muro que sola levantaste en la terminal del aeropuerto, o al final de la calle, o en el principio de los sueños [ahí ya estaba todo], y al roce de su helada materia conocer el paraíso dejado atrás, y persistir. Y sin embargo así es. Hay quien cree que en cada cuerpo duermen todos los cuerpos, los que vinieron para dejarnos y los que vendrán, y que la noche es doble en cada cuerpo de los amantes, y que doble es esa pasión que concentra ahora en cada uno de sus cuerpos todas las vidas [muerte incluida]. Después se alejan. Pero la pasión es musa perezosa, prosa, desecho de inspiración, violencia contra uno mismo en beneficio de uno mismo. Al separarse, los cuerpos no saben que rompen el tallo del tiempo: uno se lleva a los que vinieron y otro a los que vendrán. Cierta especie de reloj los condena a buscarse para siempre. El viento arrastra hojas, polvo de octubre, papeles a la panza de los coches, agita la flota y ya no queda nadie salvo yo en la ventana del Hotel Port Maó. Quién conoce mejor que nosotros lo que el beso, corsé de la expansión, expresa. Quién conoce mejor que nosotros la perfección rota al caer sobre el papel una gota de tinta: corona sobre mi cabeza. Por qué no dijiste que tu absoluto silencio no se debía a aquella discreción de diosa camuflada entre mortales, por qué no dijiste que era el fruto de haber topado en el límite de los insectos y de todas las cosas que se mueven, en el límite de la arena y de todas las cosas incontables, en el límite de la luz del faro [al que íbamos], y de todas las cosas visibles, en el límite de tu piel y del tacto, en el límite de mis labios [pues siempre fueron intercambiables mis labios], con el límite del lenguaje. Por qué no dijiste, diosa entre mortales, que tú ya no eras diosa y nosotros aún más mortales. Sólo quien ha vivido en ese irreal concubinato ve irse a una mujer que funde en blanco al final de la calle su talle aristocrático, y pone una suite n.° 1 de Johann Sebastian, y pide que le suban champán y una copa de cuello alto. Después, como en una película británica, quizá se mate, pero esto nadie lo sabe. Mi hipótesis: como ya casi es otoño, puede que imite al desguace de los árboles anotándose en las desperdigadas hojas de su escritorio, y no las tirará por si en la primavera quiere rearmarse [y perdona lo exagerado de la imagen, pero es costumbre complicar las hipótesis para más tarde ir adelgazándolas. Fíjate si no en la Teoría de Occidente: el humano hizo su aparición durmiéndose con una nana de mitos, y nos hemos despertado en una habitación de hotel, a solas con un espejo cuyo reflejo tampoco sabemos si es nuestro]. Ahora que ya no estoy entre vosotros, lo más inquietante fue que si tras años de convivencia una mujer te abandona, lo último en irse son los pelos, me dijo el monigote W. C. Una vez escribí: «Mi idea de la perfección: los primeros trazos de un modisto francés, según qué bocetos de Le Corbusier, una frase de Benet cuando la última subordinada toca suelo, el silencio en los ojos de Wittgenstein, esas penumbras japonesas que quedan tras consumirse el último reflejo de cuanto brilla en occidente [brillan hacia el otro lado, tu pubis], el beso al retirarme, el movimiento exacto, en apariencia no premeditado, de ciertas mujeres al manejar los cubiertos del pescado, tu piel la noche anterior a la Creación, antes de saber, si tú o yo, cuál de los dos sería al amanecer quien mordería y quién la primera manzana». No cambiaría una palabra. Bordeo el asunto. Trazo círculos. Tropiezo con los círculos. Tampoco valen las elipses, ni esa trampa en movimiento llamada espiral. Ensayo otros accesos: la ecuación, la palabra, recuerdo a Wittgenstein: ni una sola palabra rozará su realidad sin que ambas ardan o estallen, recuerdo a Dirac: [sin comentarios]. Y me alejo. Mi sombra se alarga, interina, hasta el centro de aquellos dominios que habré visitado fantasmal, pictóricamente. [También puedo decir, si quiero: cada margen tiene su margen, pero esto, por obvio, requeriría demasiados comentarios.] Nos gustaba, cuando una mañana intuíamos el otoño, desayunar en la cama, ponernos ropa gruesa y salir en coche. Elegir un tema sobre la marcha sin saber exactamente por qué lo eliges ni por qué sobre la marcha, por ejemplo, los relojes de sol, y dar vueltas a la isla fingiendo que lo sabíamos todo acerca de los relojes de sol cuando encontrábamos uno sin tener ni idea de relojes de sol, y donde hacía mucho viento decir, huy, cuánto viento, tomar café en un bar con futbolín y regresar, ya de noche, en silencio. Es ése el silencio al que me refiero. Sentarse a observar cómo el amarre de una barca se rompe, verla reducirse a lo lejos, y no hacer nada mientras son tus dedos los que se trenzan. Ya digo, y no hacer nada, me dijo el monigote de la puerta W. C. Entro en una habitación que no fue nuestra, me tumbo en el colchón vacío. Una ráfaga de aire [no siempre] riza ligeramente el mar y borra por unos instantes mi cuerpo, reflejado en la orilla, será el mismo cuerpo cuya vaciada sombra oscurece ahora el colchón de esta habitación que no fue nuestra, también por unos instantes, me pregunto. He pisado cientos de caminos en esta isla y en todos vi lo mismo, bifurcaciones que me desdoblan y separan de mí mismo. Cuál de todos me rendirá cuentas el día que la muerte los junte. ¿Te imaginas que fueras tú, con tu pelo recogido, tu vestido blanco, tu rito adolescente, tu talle aristocrático? Qué hacer entonces. Invitarte a una copa de gin y brindar por el éxito de tu acrobática estancia. Me disuelvo; elijo otra habitación, y es lo mismo. Algunas noches nos invitaba el danés a su casa, la última del puerto, la primera de un sueño, nos decía, para enseñarnos sus espantosas esculturas en madera de olivo [no hay época espantosa sino arte espantoso para una época], bajo pretexto de una cena. Hablábamos de algunos poemas no menos malos, de la conveniencia del gin, de los amigos idos a la Península, de adónde nos llevaría el tiempo. De regreso, pensaba que hay muchos sueños en mí que no serán soñables, y me alegraba. Ahora me hago viejo, lo sé por la única forma que hay de saberlo: mis rutinas envejecen conmigo. Echo de menos esos sueños. Fumabas a oscuras viendo la tele, azul cobalto barnizando tu cuerpo, luz bastarda que en vida alumbra ya a algunos muertos. Todo se ceñía en esas horas estatuarias; la ventana abierta, el bochorno de tormenta, mi mano por detrás sobre tu pecho quieto. Quieta. Todo ha cristalizado; aguardo la llama que lo funda. Desaparecerás un día, como todos nosotros [la suma de lo vivido siempre da cero], y nadie sabrá qué habría sido de ti a mi lado; ni siquiera yo, que ya lo sé todo. Quizá el azul cobalto, desacreditado testigo, de una habitación en la que nadie enciende el televisor. La vida es breve no porque sea breve, sino porque la muerte es larga y profunda [infinita], me dijo el monigote W. C. De la primera a la quinta planta, la misma planta de pasillos nervados, la misma moqueta burdeos, polvo seco, el mismo número de puertas, de camas sin dosel, de colchones desnudos, la misma serie de cuadros, el mismo mueble bar, bebidas y marcas, el mismo televisor y programación, los mismos vatios, las mismas veinticuatro horas, la misma ventana que un día elegí para orientarme en el eco, de la primera a la quinta planta, penumbra portuaria, viento, papeles arrastrados, el mismo olor a cadáver cuando declina el día. [Alguna disidencia [sospecho de ti], me dice que los caminos más hermosos no son los pisados, ni los que faltan por pisar, sino aquellos que pudiendo haberlos transitado se dejaron a un lado: cuanto de singular aún queda en este desierto y no veo.] Blanca y azul, azul y absurda, la casa modernista, fíjate, ésta es la casa por la que tarde o temprano pasan todos los genios, me decías, y ponías un disco que no sonaba; olía. Derramabas la copa, montabas el número, yo atento [más o menos], en la butaca raída, y llegaban los genios, de provincias, hablábamos y de aquello no queda nada [ya entonces era nada], como cuando repites una palabra sin parar y por el vacío que nombra accedes a la burla; el disco que no sonaba. El mar, el puerto, sólido caos que hubiera visto, de haber querido, desde la ventana. Uno alzó la copa y gritó el genio ha muerto viva el genio, cerré los ojos y un espacio blanco se fundió en otro blanco. Pero el puerto, qué es el puerto, me preguntabas antes de que llegaran, el otoño de los barcos, decía yo, no, de los genios, corregías. Con aire distante fumabas hasta que olía a muñón. Solía, cuando te ausentabas poseída por el baile y el gin, forzar la vigilia. Contaba los ruidos de las cañerías [si tal cosa es posible], la luz de las motos al guillotinar la pared, y el barrido cansado del faro. Contaba el número de puertas que por ahí se abrían o cerraban, el runrún del ascensor, las cosas recién creadas por la penumbra, cuántas veces venía tu nombre a mis labios, y mi respiración, y mis dedos, y mi edad, hasta a mí mismo contaba y no salía 1, sino 0, 0, 0. Solía contar para a tu regreso no tener nada que contarte, como si nada hubiera pasado, ver izar la verja al panadero, al marinero esquivando el vómito, un pequeño camión arrancando a lo lejos, y tú, ya durmiendo. Llueve, hay calles, el silencio de los escaparates saquea la acera y el rostro si me detengo y miro a través. Nunca me detengo. Cómo soportar el vértigo horizontal de los pasillos, la resonancia o burla de las estanterías vacías, de los maniquíes desnudos, la imparcialidad de los espejos [copia de la de los ahogados]. Qué cara ponerte en el recuerdo al descubrir nuestros pelos arrinconados en una esquina del probador de señoras, cómo entender sin el esfuerzo de un lenguaje remoto la propaganda de las ofertas si pisara alguna por ahí olvidada, repetida en cada temporada, como yo, impecable resonancia ahora que ya no queda nadie. A veces me sorprende un hombre que va creciendo conmigo hasta reconocerme en el escaparate. Hace unos años, dos hombres que meaban comentaron que para un tal Cioran el hombre es el camino más corto entre la vida y la muerte. Era optimista el individuo. El hombre es el camino más corto entre la muerte y la muerte, me dijo el monigote W. C. Atravesando la sombra, la música, berbiquí directo a la luz, a cada cuerpo. Pedimos algo, gin, supongo, a nuestro lado hay un hombre; su cuerpo, resumen de otros cuerpos. Lee, y piensa: «la sombra de todas estas personas entre focos las esculpiré algún día en madera y a partir de entonces serán mías, y después abordaré todas las sombras de toda la isla en un momento dado de sol, y por último, mi propia sombra». Me contó que era danés, y que no, que ni pensaba ni esculpía; bebía y vivía, solamente eso. Y tú te pusiste a hablar con el cuarentón de la barra, te decía que se encontraba cabreado a veces y abatido otras, que no podía ver a sus hijos, apretar sus manos, ver crecer sus labios por prescripción judicial, que las mujeres siempre han tenido el presente en sus manos. Después me contaste que no, que aquel hombre no tenía hijos, que bebía y vivía, sólo eso. El Maestro lo dejó dicho, «los espejos y la cópula son abominables porque multiplican el número de hombres», me dije cuando esa noche renací entre tus piernas. Si pienso en el día en que te conocí oigo un disparo que agujerea la lona en el cielo, entra la lluvia de césped, el sol que infunde tibieza a nuestro mapa, las palabras esperadas en la claustrofobia de un cielo cubierto; y el aliento; entra el aliento. Después, pasan los días, lo clásico. Si pienso en el día en que empecé a desconocerte, oigo el silbido de los mapas desinflándose por un agujero [el mismo]; allá van la lluvia, el sol, el aliento, se coagula en lodo negro la noche y la lona aplasta mi cabeza primero, después el cuerpo. Carne envasada al vacío que trajiste el último día del supermercado. Las palabras se esfuerzan en amarrar todo este tiempo que se me va sin haber sabido aún qué es el tiempo en la isla cubierta noche y día por el viento [hoja arrojada al mar, la llamaba el expiloto alemán, o, cuando bebía, la noria abstracta [esto nunca lo entendí]]. Nos quedábamos hasta que cerraba el bar, charlando de cosas que hacen a los cuerpos agujeros negros de la noche, yo le repetía que las palabras se esfuerzan en amarrar todo este tiempo que se va sin haber sabido aún qué es el tiempo, y él, avezado necrófilo, me llevaba al cementerio. Saltando sobre una tumba señalaba el epitafio, éstas son las únicas palabras que se esfuerzan en amarrar todo este tiempo que se va sin haber sabido aún qué es el tiempo, gritaba mientras reía. Y dormíamos cada uno por ahí. Voy amontonando, para cuando regreses, tarros vacíos, tu especie de flor blanca, cortinas transparentes, la cubitera, dos sillas [sólo dos], tus cuadros, tu perfume, sábanas, pañuelos, relojes automáticos, cartas escritas estos años, la máquina de escribir, la maniquí que siento a mi mesa, maletas abiertas [de ida o vuelta, no se sabe], un espejo que amplifica la belleza, collares de perlas, vestidos de noche, la loción, la espuma, la cuchilla, la palangana, puñados de arena [uno por día], fotografías que nos haremos, algunas piedras del muelle, el silbato de la tetera, las ráfagas del faro, el haz de gaviotas que anunciarán tu llegada. Voy amontonando objetos para que cuando regreses halles aquí a tu doble; para que no quepas; para que no regreses. Que seas feliz. Donde quiera que estés. No te quejes, yo nací ya con las primeras copas de gin que se sirvieron, me estrené con la insoportable meada de un borracho [ni te imaginas el hedor], lo primero que oí fueron múltiples blasfemias de albañiles y pedanterías de un puñado de esnobs el día de la inauguración, la música regional me sale por las orejas, y no te cuento cuando la hija del dueño monta fiestas y pone Madonna y Michael Jackson, prefiero al hijo, viene por las mañanas, él solo, cuando el restaurante está cerrado, lee no sé qué libro y pone sin parar una canción que dice más vale ser punki que maricón de playa, es curioso, he oído que un tal Bach lo hace bastante bien, lo comentaron hace años dos hombres, un viajante de quesos que en su juventud había sido músico y un anciano belga del que con el tiempo descubrí su pasado nazi, pero no sé por qué nunca me lo ponen, la gente que entra aquí nunca habla ni de esa música que no conozco, ni de la muerte, ni de la locura, mis temas preferidos, bueno, salvo tú, permíteme que te lo diga, pero es que tú eres otra cosa, cuando tus amigos dejaron de hablarte deberías ya haberte dado cuenta, ése es precisamente siempre el primer síntoma de la locura, la deserción de los amigos, claro que, hay locuras y locuras, algunas hasta constituyen un cumplido para la inteligencia, pero la gente que entra aquí, decía, no habla de esos temas favoritos, a lo sumo, comparan los teléfonos y las riñoneras, como quien dice, hace años eran los llaveros, y antes los sombreros, en fin, son modas, o, por poco que beban, se ponen melancólicos y no paran de glosar las excelencias de su tierra, pero en general, permanecen en silencio, como quien entra a un templo, debo imponerles respeto, permanecen, decía, en silencio, relajados, mejor dicho, anestesiados por un rumor de agua parecido al que oigo cuando el viento sopla fuera y mueve los mástiles, pero, ni una cosa ni otra jamás he visto, el oído es el órgano que tengo más desarrollado, después de la memoria, claro, lo que me consuela es el momento en que la gente se va, primero todo se queda a oscuras, los ecos y olores de la chusma desaparecen hasta quedar unas impurezas, vanidad químicamente pura, como quien dice, que se volverá invisible con la luz del día, yo, para mí, siempre lo comparo con los cubitos de hielo que sirve el cabrón del dueño, cargados de una suciedad que sólo descubres cuando el hielo se diluye en el vaso, pero los clientes van tan mamados que ni se enteran, porque yo he visto muchas cosas, sabes, una vez trajeron el cadáver de un náufrago, fue cuando la tormentona, creo que el segundo día, hasta los militares amarraron la flota, y aquí mismo, en la mesa de la recepción, le hizo el forense la autopsia, cómo bebía mientras tanto, e iba dictándole a un ayudante las mordeduras de los peces, el lugar exacto y qué peces, después se sentó en una mesa, solo, pidió una tras otra botellas de treinta y tres centilitros, no podían ser de litro, repetía, de Vichy Catalán, y no paró de sonreír durante horas antes de caer dormido con la frente entre sus propias manos, recuerdo que pensé en lo extraño que resulta que otro de los síntomas de la locura sea reírse solo, y sin embargo no lo sea el llorar solo, como si las lágrimas llevaran un prestigio asociado, también estuve en una fiesta privada que dio aquí Onassis, nada del otro mundo, en una ocasión, esto te gustará, casi te cruzas con Wittgenstein, coincidisteis en la puerta giratoria, tú salías y él entraba, pero ibas muy aturdido, tu chica acababa de irse, enfadada y sola, hacia la playa, recuerdo que coincidió con el día que inauguraron el salón azul, aunque, bien pensado, en esa fecha tú aún no habías nacido, vaya, o no eras tú quien se cruzó con Wittgenstein, o no era él con quien te cruzaste cierto día en que saliste en busca de tu mujer, serás burro, permíteme que te lo diga, jamás hay que correr detrás de una mujer, invertiste los términos, he ahí el origen de tu fracaso, yo, por ejemplo, tengo desde siempre una aquí enfrente, siempre coqueteando, siempre con su traje negro, y jamás me he acercado, yo espero, no quiero precipitarme, más vale ser punki que maricón de playa, ya sabes, ahora que me acuerdo, hubo una anécdota muy curiosa, más que anécdota, misterio, no del todo resuelto, resulta que un día llegó un telegrama de un pueblo de Andorra, el nombre no lo recuerdo, diciendo que dada la fama que tenía en la Península la Banda Municipal de Mahón, les sería grato contratarla para las fiestas, eran en agosto, creo, imagínate la agitación, ellos que no habían salido de la isla, numerosas personas fueron a despedirlos al barco y antes de partir el alcalde le dio un gran abrazo al director como diciendo, dejad alto el nombre del pueblo, desembarcaron en Barcelona y de allí a Andorra capital, un día de autocar, donde les esperaba el representante artístico para meterles en otro bus dirección a la montaña, y por lo visto, en una recta así como tonta los mandaron apearse, y el representante tiró monte arriba por un camino de tierra, el del trombón y el del bombo iban un poco asfixiados, y cuentan que Tomeu, recuerdo que siempre llevaba unos zapatos de rejilla y tupé, ya comenzó a mosquearse, como quien dice, y llegados a un claro de bosque sin visibilidad, el representante los hizo parar, dijo que volvía enseguida, se fue monte abajo, y no volvieron a verle, por lo visto fue una broma, bueno yo esto no lo vi, claro, lo oí comentar, yo he visto mucho, a veces vienen los del Círculo y proyectan películas, si alquilan el salón rosa estoy de suerte pues hay una rendija en la pared tras la barra y desde aquí puedo verla, bueno, no muy bien, pero se intuye, los jóvenes ponen las de Tarantino, que no me gustan, ya ves, bastante veo yo a diario como para aguantar una sesión de borrachos y drogatas, un día oí decir al danés, no sin sorna, que tú, que presumes de tener y ver constantemente todas las películas de Bergman, habías ido a ver Notting Hill tres o cuatro veces y siempre en sesiones poco frecuentadas, como avergonzado, no me extraña, porque menudo cenáculo de víboras que eran tus amigos, lo que admito que me divertía era cuando os sentabais en la mesa del fondo y no parabais de sacar punta, como quien dice, a todo el que llegara, uno veía a un hombre de mediana edad, torpemente trajeado, comiendo en la barra un plato combinado y decía, ahí está el típico agente de seguros, y otro continuaba, está en la isla vendiendo miedo a estos pobres catetos, y otro, seguro que no se pierde ninguna cena de empresa, y otro, mirad cómo come, es típico de los que van de viaje de novios a Punta Cana, y qué me decís del teléfono en el cinturón, la versión contemporánea de aquellos llaveros que asomaban del bolsillo, como los futbolistas, y otro, y come con refresco que es como comer y masticar al mismo tiempo gominolas, y otro, menos mal que no come con cerveza, el refresco en versión nazi, y ahí alguien salía con un comentario de la fermentación de la cerveza o de Wagner, y os olvidabais, o pedías una botella de champán, otras veces los comentarios surgían y se agotaban rápidamente, puro ingenio, como quien dice, por ejemplo, pasaba un joven afectado y decía uno, por ahí va Lord Byron, entraba un embrutecido de camiseta ceñida, rubio y bigote poblado, y decía otro en susurros, ése trabaja en la cadena, qué cadena, preguntabais aproximándoos, la de Volkswagen, respondía, y no parabais de reír, o cuando, ya en otra línea, ibais a una librería por separado, uno cada semana, pongamos, para pedir un libro del que ya sabíais que no disponían, le recriminabais gentilmente esta carencia al librero y al final se lo encargabais, una vez llegado el libro y comprado, regresabais todos a la librería, también por separado, habiendo inventado antes entre todos un defecto disparatado que por supuesto no existía, por ejemplo, la desaparición de un párrafo, y montabais, ahora sí, un lío impresionante, a lo que el librero no sabía dar solución, recuerdo otra variante que consistía en ir, esta vez todos juntos, al barco que hace la regular Mahón-Pollença y decir, por favor, a Nápoles, pero a esa broma no le vi nunca la gracia, o no la entendí, vaya guasones, y guarros, sí, ya lo creo, pero fallaste, sí, permíteme que te lo diga, entre tanta tontería, te confiaste, no debiste darte tan fácilmente a la mediocridad de todos cuantos te rodearon, no debiste obsesionarte con Wittgenstein, o sí, pero en un entorno más receptivo, tú fuiste el único en esta isla que entendió al gran Ludwig, gracias a ti todo cambió en esta isla, por lo menos en el hotel, tú les hablabas y ellos aparentaban comprensión e interés, puro teatro, donde tú decías Shönberg ellos decían Strauss, donde tú decías Borges ellos decían Budismo en Diez Lecciones, donde tú decías Le Corbusier, ellos decían Gaudí, donde tú decías Wittgenstein, bueno, ellos ya no sabían qué decir, y así, créeme, sólo aparentaban, se lo oí comentar muchas veces aquellas noches en que te quedabas en tu cuarto a escribir tu obra, tu magna obra, como quien dice, mientras ellos aquí abajo, hacían comentarios respecto a tus comentarios del Tractatus de Wittgenstein entre burla y respeto, tus comentarios lúcidos, más que lúcidos, enloquecidos, visionaria locura que tú, de alguna manera, ibas ya transformando, dándole cabida en tu obra, Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus, tu gran poema, escupido, como quien dice, aquellas noches de primavera y verano en tu cuarto, Dostoievsky decía: yo tengo un proyecto, volverme loco, tú, al contrario, concebiste el proyecto de expulsar tu locura, porque, quieras o no, ya estabas loco, y el caso es que, simultáneamente a esa repulsión, ejercías un magnetismo y una influencia absolutas sobre el grupo, se notaba, aquella burla y respeto cuando no estabas eran las de los siervos por el amo cuando se van al catre y comentan las anécdotas del día, y es que, convéncete, hay personas que sólo se sienten realizadas en la esclavitud, siempre tuviste esa capacidad de hacer girar sobre ti el universo inmediato, un poder de seducción que va más allá de lo arquetípico, tu discurso de iluminado, tu penetración poética en la gran obra racionalista de Wittgenstein, racionalista en apariencia, solías recriminar con gritos a quien lo afirmara, para, acto seguido, asegurar que Wittgenstein era el gran místico contemporáneo y que dentro de varios siglos los hombres leerían a Wittgenstein de la misma forma que hoy leemos a San Juan de la Cruz, pero cómo se te ocurrió, insensato, espetar semejante reflexión ante un auditorio conformista y decadente, un auditorio que tiene como piezas insuperables del pensamiento contemporáneo a Warhol y a los Rolling Stones, y al destino del arte el arte africano, como la hija del dueño y su séquito de niñatas, un auditorio tan necio que cuando te emborrachabas no se percataban de que no te emborrachabas, sino que solamente pensabas aceleradamente, que cuando salías con un comentario incomprensible, éste sí, permíteme que te lo diga, incomprensible de verdad, no era más que un ejemplo de cómo la digresión puesta en labios inteligentes deriva siempre en una forma poética, tu gran hallazgo, sí, un auditorio que cuando llevabas a todos la contraria, siempre todos contra ti, no entendía que ese mantener posiciones absurdas en solitario es el primer paso para la mística de la que derivará, más tarde o más temprano, la poesía, por este orden, como tú muy bien sentenciabas, y no a la inversa, tampoco entendían tus paseos a solas hasta el faro, con tu chaqueta y corbata de tweed hasta en verano, qué bestia, qué idiota, pero qué bien te sienta, ni tus noches también a solas en el escritorio mirando únicamente la completa oscuridad a través de la ventana, sólo batida por el barrido del faro, el paso ocasional de una moto, o la completa claridad del papel en blanco, es cierto, dado su ramalazo romanticón tardobudista, pensaban que deseabas entonces disolverte en la naturaleza, integrarte en todas las estructuras del mundo, menudos idiotas, era justo lo contrario, una concentración, una implosión, un aislamiento de todo lo bárbaro, lo natural, lo sujeto a la ley, por eso tampoco entendían cuando tú, avanzada ya la noche el humo y el gin, dejabas caer aquello de que el único y verdadero destino del arte es su triunfo sobre la naturaleza, y se escandalizaban, ellos, tan esnobs y, quién lo diría, tan pueblerinos, decían sentir el arte pero no habían entendido nada, les gritabas antes de irte, puritanos, puritanos, y te retirabas a tu cuarto a buscar tu noche, aunque no supieras qué significaba exactamente retirarse al cuarto a buscar la noche, no, no entendían nada, sus tablas de la ley lo impedían, sí, como ves, yo sé mucho, yo llevo aquí muchos años viendo cosas, oyendo cosas, permíteme que insista, pero cómo se te ocurre darte a esa chusma, si tú seguro que morirás por exceso de inteligencia, no puede morir de otra manera quien redacta una obra como Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus, ahora ya es tarde para dar marcha atrás, pero debiste aprender esta regla, no dar margaritas a los cerdos, se la oí al hijo del dueño, el que viene aquí por las mañanas y canta más vale ser punki que maricón de playa, cómo me gusta, y lee no sé qué libro, un chaval lúcido, llegará lejos, los genios lleváis una especie de estigma que solamente los que ya no estamos entre vosotros alcanzamos a ver, yo ya vi que el peor era el danés, ése sí que se las traía, con lo feo y guarro que era, y no paraba de liarse con mujeres y, sabes, ni te imaginas lo extraño que es observar cómo un hombre le mete mano a una mujer por debajo de la mesa y el marido no se entera, bueno, esto, quieras o no, tiene su gracia, yo al principio no sabía qué era eso de meter mano, ahora ya entiendo lo que hacen algunas parejas cuando entran al lavabo, eso es lo peor, las parejitas de los cojones, con sus gemidos reprimidos, y si son adúlteras, ni te cuento, van con prisa y lo dejan todo hecho una mierda, cuando debería ser al contrario, por lo de la discreción, digo yo, tú fuiste uno de esos adúlteros, me acuerdo, me empujaste con fuerza y entraste con aquella mujer que solía esperarte sentada en la mesa de allí, el local estaba lleno y recuerdo que sonaba una música como latina, qué espanto, y venga la maraca, y venga la maraca, y el contrabajo juguetón, fue una noche en la que alguien de los de tu mesa sacó un tema oscuro, muy muy oscuro, ahora que ya todos se han ido y sólo quedamos tú y yo en el hotel puedes reconocerlo sin rubor, he de admitir que fuisteis bastante rápidos, aunque no muy limpios, venga, confiésalo antes de entrar por última vez, me dijo el monigote W. C. Y ahora el eco: ACLARACIONES Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus es el primer libro que publiqué (Edición Personal, 2001); en su momento contó con un limitadísimo número de ejemplares, sin distribución en librerías. Lo entiendo como una colección de poemas en prosa. En mayo de 1999 comencé a tomar notas, ideas sueltas que, como es habitual, no tenían una pretensión definida. Rápidamente cobraron forma. Cuando en enero de 2000 di por finalizadas aquellas notas, enseguida pensé en Pere Joan para que hiciera cuantos dibujos le sugirieran los poemas. Le gustó la idea. Yo sabía que su manera de manejar el espacio, así como su tendencia a dibujar detalles dotándolos de «órganos» y de fases casi líquidas, emparentaba muy bien con mis textos. Le pasé el libro y, un mes más tarde, en la mesa de la cocina de su casa, fue enseñándome multitud de pequeños dibujos; todos me parecían perfectos, así que eligió él [yo mientras miraba un fregadero de piedra que tenía unos cubos de latón, apoyados en vertical, que parecían la base de columnas metálicas, o relojes sin agujas. También miraba multitud de libros y objetos que se disponían en el suelo, pegados a la pared en estricto orden, como un segundo zócalo]. También, nada más terminar el libro, pensé en Eduardo Moga. Conocía bien su poemario, La luz oída [cinco años antes había sido Premio Adonáis]. Ya entonces, como ahora, me parecía excepcional. Creí que su poética y mi texto podían guardar bastantes puntos de unión. En aquel momento yo no conocía a nadie [ni nada] de la comunidad literaria, y cuando pensé en que Eduardo me hiciera un prólogo creí, creo que justificadamente, que se negaría a ello. No obstante le envié el libro. Semanas después fui a Barcelona. Quedamos en una cafetería cercana a la plaza Universidad, próxima a su trabajo. No recuerdo bien de qué hablamos, supongo que de ese mismo viaje [me llevaba en coche de Palma a La Coruña], pero sí que le pregunté qué le había parecido el libro, y si accedería a hacer un prólogo. Rotundamente, dijo sí. Los dibujos insertados entre poemas, y el prólogo, son aquellas generosas aportaciones, que agradezco por cuanto constituyeron un voto de confianza fundamental para un escritor que aún no sabía si lo era. Los meses siguientes a abril de 2001 paseé el libro por algunas ciudades. Diversas presentaciones que consistían en, además de la lectura de algunos poemas, la simultánea proyección de diapositivas analógicas, de las de carro [los cañones de proyección digital no estaban aún muy divulgados], que había hecho a multitud de programas, películas y spots de televisión. Acompañaba a esas imágenes una música, en cinta, que en los meses previos compuse mezclando samples con cosas propias en una grabadora de 4 pistas [salvo en el Círcol Maldà, Barcelona, donde me acompañó al piano Cristina Vilallonga]. Recuerdo ahora todo aquello como un aparatoso tinglado ambulante a lo «hermanos Lumière», para el que conté con la inestimable colaboración de mi hermana Cristina, quien solía ayudarme a transportar todo lo necesario, así como a llevar libros a las librerías a fin de, si había suerte, dejarlos en depósito. He recuperado un fragmento de la música que acompañaba a las presentaciones, y algunas imágenes; disponible en: http://www. youtube.com/ watch?v=vZzEEdsjYqc Mucha gente apoyó el libro, bien fuera presentándolo o con calurosas muestras de entusiasmo crítico. De todo ello tengo que agradecer a: Eduardo Moga, Pere Joan, Antonio Pastor, Tomás Graves, Miháli Dés, Cristina Vilallonga, Vicente Valero, Xisco Juan, Chema Paz Gago, Carme Riera, Ana María Moix, Antonio Gamoneda, Sergio Gaspar, Horacio Alba. Este libro está dedicado a mis padres y hermanas. Palma de Mallorca, abril de 2012 JOAN FONTAINE ODISEA [MI DECONSTRUCCIÓN] (2001-2002) Anoche soñé que regresaba a Manderley, me encontraba ante la verja pero no podía entrar porque el camino estaba cerrado, se ha calculado que la vida de una mujer no superior a 23,7 años podría cifrarse en un código de barras, entonces [como todos los que sueñan] me sentí poseída por un poder sobrenatural y atravesé como un espíritu la barrera que se alzaba ante mí. 1 Horizonte recostado, tardes de sábado, arde el sofá y lo que de materia le sobra al día. ¿Es la poesía una gangrena en la prosa que la desguaza y esparce en torno a un epicentro que no se ve? [tu Women’Secret por ahí tirado] ¿Fue la poesía la Ecuación Unificada deshecha a los 3 minutos de nacer, y ahora sólo el tibio placer de cada cifra en tus terminaciones nerviosas? Todo está escrito y lo que llamas escribir es ir quitándole palabras. Los pájaros pasaban. Desde la ventana los mirábamos. Pasaban. La Musa come ajos en vinagre [sofisticado feísmo] y comenta que el paraíso es un lugar de lo más inhóspito, el surco que abre un pájaro no lo abre nadie más, YO: ¿Porque lo inunda el mármol? MUSA: No. Porque desaparece. 1.1 Quedan las afueras de las cosas con su masa de cielo quieto y su horizonte adulterado [siéntate a esperar todo el día que la penumbra vaya disolviendo el día] la belleza desnuda en la bombilla que pende apagada, y nuestra cara ON/OFF y nuestra cara ON/OFF. 2 La soledad no tiene dimensiones. La soledad es un extrarradio moteado de irreconciliables objetos [aguarda la materia la patada que le devuelva fe en su silueta] un cuerpo se mueve entre ellos, la soledad se hace doble; por fractal aritmética se reduce a 1/2 al mismo tiempo. 2.1 El objeto se pasma en la finitud que lo constituye, el solitario en la que le rodea [Thomas Mann lo dijo, donde hay mucho espacio hay mucho tiempo] como si una fotografía fuera más rápida que la luz y por un instante cada píxel permaneciera en suspenso, hueco, la mirada en apariencia incompleta que adquieren de repente en las fotografías los muertos. 3 Me encontraba en un examen de mecánica cuántica el día que estalló la guerra del Golfo, demostrar que en el estado de más baja energía de un átomo de hidrógeno, el potencial atractivo creado entre el núcleo y el electrón disminuye exponencialmente a grandes distancias (AYUDA: el cálculo es más fácil utilizando la Ecuación de Poisson). Me puse del lado occidental. Algunos abandonaron el aula. Siguiendo a Wittgenstein, supongo, pensé en alistarme. Después, meses de lluvia y videojuego sobre Bagdad, te quedabas a dormir más noches, tu cuerpo segregaba dulce, en el desayuno hablabas de banderas, de horizontes espesos como mercurio, pero, quizá también siguiendo a Wittgenstein, todo aquello me daba igual, había otro rehén que rescatar en mí, otro petróleo por consumir, otro desierto por tomar. Ahora, más allá de esa distancia en la que las cosas giran alrededor de las cosas, únicamente este deseo de mortandad, esta mezcla de intuición y física de mentira en la que la poesía nos va diluyendo, ni siquiera huelo ya la pólvora con la que miné mis redundancias. 3.1 Todas las noches son la misma menos esa que, si a la nada por necesidad le sigue la nada, no sabes por qué llaman Fin de Año, esa que te coge en retrasos por sorpresa [a causa de la niebla Spanair informa] en aeropuertos levantados con niebla, entre razas que son niebla entre happy Christmas diferidos por la niebla entre móviles palpitando en bolsillos de niebla en el espejismo de que esta vez no viajas solo en la certeza de que al llegar sólo niebla te espera, y te entretienes en la confección de metáforas brutales, las cabezas de esta muchedumbre son las burbujas de la copa de champán en la que cada fin de año bebe Dios antes de distribuir el azar y caer borracho. 4 Tanto más perfecta es la cosa creada cuanto menos huella lleve del hombre, gracias Código de Barras por garantizar aún el silencio, ingrediente que la alquimia buscaba en los objetos. Debajo de esta piel hay otra piel, y debajo de ésa otra, y debajo otra, y otra, y así cuantas capas quieras hasta un n ∈ N → ∞ antecentro del centro que es finito. Ese centro es la máscara. [la semana tiene 8 lunes. El 8.o es la semana] 4.1 Esta playa no la reconozco. Una botella se aproxima a la orilla con el mensaje afmallo@hotmail.com, que yo mismo escribí cuando era un náufrago de pacotilla y no lanzaba botellas al mar sino a los ríos que [no lo sabía] van a dar a la mar que es el morir. Te esparces puro, sin óxido sin alas. En playas que no pisaste ahora te pisas. 5 Describe la bola el movimiento parabólico y traza en su espalda la golfista un arpegio equivalente. Se tensa el cielo y los pechos más mercurio que nunca completan la silueta del océano de césped, a contrapelo llueve. La geometría del agua no supera al golpe seco de silencio cuando jadea la atmósfera y toca suelo. Esfera contra esfera. Se apagan [expectantes y sin fondo] tus pezones, ventanas de hotel de playa en invierno [suena el claxon, tu marido espera]. Ningún caddie te elegía los palos como yo. 5.1 Deshace el nudo de las pajaritas la luz cuando amanece, cuartea el maquillaje, disuelve el humo y los happy new year en esa oquedad que queda durante unas horas tras moverse una cifra el calendario. Me sorprendo pensando que algún día seré antepasado. Te acercas subiéndote el tirante sin saber nada del confeti en blanco y negro sobre el pelo reseco, que sepas que esta noche nazco, dices, y que no podré olvidarte. Éramos todos en aquella casa maniquíes terminales de Golpes Bajos, material de infancia [donde nunca pasa nada y hay que imaginarlo]. Creación y Apocalipsis a veces coinciden. 5.1.1 El objetivo de recordar es olvidarse de uno mismo, hacer del corazón un imán gastado que deja las cosas equidistantes, girando en su sitio, no hacer nada por saber de dónde viene la franja de luz bajo las puertas, la franja de luz entre tus labios. 6 Los hechos son para el hombre las puertas por las que se escapa de los hechos, dijo Rothko, se pone el traje de los domingos, arranca el 2CV y le dice cuídate; ella, viéndolo alejarse, regresa pronto. En el retrovisor enmudece la granja. 6.1 Desvelo mi drama: me veo en todas partes porque no me acompaño. Desvelo tu drama: la palabra es un hecho y la palabra detenida un objeto. Y no tienen nada que ver [0.∞], el auténtico drama. Auden lo dijo, nadie va más allá del final de las vías o del extremo de los muelles. Te recuerdo todas las noches aunque cada noche tú me digas adiós. Adonde yo no puedo ir es más allá de tu despedida. 7 Estos fenómenos recién llegados, con su luz a ras de suelo y su argumento vacío, estaban ya en la tabla periódica que mineral me atraviesa, en la visita al recuerdo deshabitado que a menudo nos programa lo inorgánico. Hazme un Nescafé hasta la mitad de la taza, píntate un poco, hojea un libro, ve preparándote para el polvo que te echaré esta noche, en la que tuve un sueño, montabas un burdel, servías Nescafé. Era una playa del Egeo. Era verano. La vida es un libro que se borra al ir leyéndolo, y los aniversarios un invento para recordar que estamos solos. Nunca volvió a acumular tanta belleza tu cuerpo. 8 «George Steiner, el último sabio, propone el humor y el silencio como recetas para vivir», no entendimos, amor, que el futuro es un horizonte hecho de silencio, y su composición más exacta serán las fotografías la verdad es que maestros silenciosos ha habido pocos, quizá Wittgenstein y Kafka, agujero en la luz, tú engendrándote a ti misma quizá estemos viviendo en el epílogo, en el tiempo que viene después del logos, déjame extraer ese doble espejismo si tú ya eres espejismo, miércoles 27 de enero de 2001 http://www.elpais.es 9 Una batería de camiones aparcados miraba amenazante en la frontera, carreteras cortadas, las familias repiten desayuno en la gasolinera, te miro mientras afuera cae nieve sobre nieve, al cuarto café tu lectura cae sobre Malcolm Lowry, pero, para empezar, el fantasma más poderoso con el que tenía que enfrentarse era él mismo. Somos al nacer un proyecto acabado. Vivir, ir arrasando. 9.1 Y qué esperabas, no somos ni Romeo ni Julieta, cantó con buen criterio Karina, tan sólo hombres, quizá enfermos, pero es la única palabra donde nos es dado habitar. Más allá de esa frontera eres uno y aburrido, nieve sobre nieve. Llego al pubis. Enciendo la linterna. [Soy nuevo aquí]: aún no distingo el bien del mal. 10 Después de comer, en la televisión hay gente corriendo malherida [el fuego, como el retrovisor, todo lo iguala], un desastre natural arrasa una ciudad desconocida. La muchacha se aparta las vendas, dice unas palabras. Su rostro guarda el exacto equilibrio que la naturaleza negó. Cioran dijo: vivimos mientras continúen nuestras ficciones Me inclino por lo contrario, se muere por exceso de metáfora. 10.1 Un borracho cambia de canal. René Thorn, a mi derecha, juguetea con las vetas del coñac y me dice: si algo nuevo sabemos es que en el arte siempre ha regido mi Teoría de Catástrofes, en una mesa más alejada Prigogine escribe en una servilleta f1(x)+f2(x)+f3(x)+........+fn(x) ≠ F(x), y me aclara, la suma de los versos siempre es menor que el verso total. Y no puedo dejar de repetirme, ergo Homero fue el primer posmoderno, hasta que los tres nos separamos, silenciosos, racionales, sin dejar marca, como se escinden las líneas de un haikú excesivamente exacto. 11 Siempre has pensado que la realidad no existe o, por lo menos, que la tuya la vive otro. Quién creció entonces en esta ciudad, te dices esta noche en la que llegas a las tantas con la alevosía del fugitivo que regresa a devolver un dinero, a confirmar un dato, a saldar una deuda de honor, pilotando expectante un automóvil como el cetáceo suicida atraviesa entre dos cabos una línea imaginaria. Adónde regreso, si la realidad no existe, te dices, a una luz ya apagada en mi ventana donde, insomne, agotaba el último serie B de Tele 5 y después releía a Bataille, a ese edificio que ahora paso de largo donde mis ancianos padres duermen, a los corn flakes con whisky de madrugada en El Pesquero, y las frases ocurrentes copiadas a Baudelaire, a Décima Víctima, al macarra de turno, a un pasado que ya es literatura, adónde [lo dijo Zenón, la flecha está en el aire pero no se mueve la flecha] si el disco en los semáforos desde entonces está en amarillo, si los basureros continúan parando en el Delicias Café y prefieres seguir ruta, hacer noche en un hostal de descampado, confirmar que nada existe, que otra vez será, que ya entonces te decía Bataille, escribo para borrar mi nombre. 11.1 Siempre has pensado que la realidad no existe, o que la tuya la vive otro. Y de esta manera permutados, dices, cada cual se anda buscando. El enamoramiento propones como prueba irrefutable. 12 Huyendo del tedio se lanzó al pensamiento. A las horas muertas [detén tu cara en mi cara, querer amar y no poder te va desfigurando] Llueve luz como llueve agua. En ambos casos el cielo se derrite. 12.1 Clareas el recuerdo. No exactamente el recuerdo sino una especie de paradoja que une al mismo tiempo que desune [como la ecuación x=y sin solución, o el beso] Copular [definición]: sacar espacio, meter tiempo. Parece una playa, verano, y un escuálido niño en Super 8. La conciencia, carbonatada, sumergida aún en gran angular. Ahora, cuál es la más cúbica de todas las esferas. La atmósfera fue creada transparente [esto es seguro] para que el hombre que busca conociera la soledad. La Tierra fue creada redonda para que el hombre encontrara en la repetición un consuelo a esa soledad. 12.2 He concebido una receta semigenial. Ingredientes: – 1 vaso de 33 cm3 absolutamente transparente. – 33 cm3 de agua. 13 Lenguaje, una técnica que acepté confiado, me condenó a ensayar en mi carne la infinitud de la suya, y un día deberé abandonar habiendo sido no más que su alimento. 13.1 Enunció Heisenberg [∆q∆p≥h] su Principio de Indeterminación, Pauli [otro Nobel] nos lo aclaró, el mundo puede verse con el ojo q o con el ojo p, pero si abres los dos al mismo tiempo te vuelves loco. Quién de niño en un jardín no caminó alguna vez arrastrando un palo por los barrotes de la verja sin adivinar que lo que ahí ya buscaba era el consuelo de algún estribillo, esta noche mi mujer y yo jugaremos al juego de la muerte, escribió Tagore, Nocilla, qué merendilla. Mamá más, cantó más tarde Siniestro Total. 14 Vi al final vaciarse mi cuerpo [1,83 m en 64 kilos] lapicero sin grafito bromeabas las tardes de sábado y Antonio Vega iba sonando: siento escalofríos cuando veo tu cuerpo joven y que tu alma ya no está en su lugar. Una maleta sin destino es un bulto sospechoso. Un cuerpo sin figura [1,83 m para 64 kilos] el eje sobre el que rota un viajero torpe y sin sentido que ya nunca es mi invitado. 14.1 Veo tu sonrisa y pienso, toda lírica expresa una pérdida. El niño no escribe poesía, aún no ha pasado por él la dieta de la memoria, aún no ha entrado en quiebra su particular Toys us. 15 Crear es recordar lo que ya estaba creado, y un congelarse en las manos la felicidad, láminas de luz solapándose con niebla, síntesis que no supera contrarios, el bucle de aquel que se encierra y sólo mira por la ventana, como cuando la madre miraba el amanecer de las 8 de la tarde, un Simca 1200 que regresa y saluda, de madrugada a buscar de nuevo luz en la niebla, mientras ella pasa las hojas de un libro [solía ser el Quijote aunque ocasionalmente le vi El extranjero]. Todo lo que escribo está hecho 100 % de voluntad de poder y simultáneamente 100 % de miedo [hasta cuándo, si la vida no soporta superávit]. Desaparece este 30 de agosto con una única certeza: como casi nunca llueve sobre Mallorca. 16 Se escribe en defensa propia. Se deja de escribir un día cualquiera, o cuando ya no hay quien nos defienda. Zafiros de aceite es cuanto queda en la plaza de parking. 16.1 Algún sabio oriental habrá dicho: no te engañes, amigo, el tiempo es la eterna transformación de una misma sombra chinesca, y el muro eres tú. De cuanto pediste al fin nada queda y nada entiendes. Pero Heráclito, otro sabio, también dijo: no sería mejor para los hombres si ocurriera lo que desean. 17 En la totalidad de los casos humanos aquejados por la enfermedad de las vacas locas, se ha observado que las horas inmediatamente anteriores al exitus van acompañadas de una persistente erección y fuertes carcajadas. Una vez inventado el 1 no tardamos en pronunciar el 2, el 3..., y llegó la barrera del infinito [que viene a ser la del sonido]. Hubo entonces que empezar hacia atrás, –1, –2, –3... hasta la barrera del menos infinito [que viene a ser la del silencio]. Cómo olvidar aquella mañana, si los alemanes vestían de gris y tú de azul, decía Bogart en Casablanca. Perseguir algo equivale a fundar su contrario. Lo dijo Eckhart, ruego a Dios que me vacíe de Dios [peor fue cuando le dije: no imagino nada más bello, señalando la luna llena, y ella murmuró: de Bayer], Se pisan minutos y cada uno es una trampa. ¿De la felicidad? ¿De la desdicha? Intercambiables palabras como el bien y el mal en los sueños. 18 Se va y repite las palabras de Bernhard, me preparo para mí mismo, todo esto no es más que una preparación para mí mismo, a los 80 días regresa la nave al punto del que partió, ese punto es y no es la muerte; es el punto del artista [definición]: muerto resucitando o vivo que ya nos ha dejado [método]: investigación por adherencia [objetivo]: agredir la materia con huellas [amor, carácter, desengaño] que no existen como en Polaroids, irrepetibles y con más campo del previsto, veo desfilar por tus ojos a todos tus anteriores amantes cuando hacemos el amor, especialmente si los cierras después, se vuelve plano el mar y al final la caída. Mueres una vez. Sólo. Regresas una vez. Solo. 19 el que en esa gran línea que viene a ser cualquier texto no ve un vector del tipo, no te olvides de la compra, que avanza en el tiempo ni el vector que retrocede mengano de tal (1930-2001), descanse en paz, en algún lugar entre la pantalla desnuda y el ronroneo del disco duro, la fotografía de aquel desierto [tú, apoyada en el coche al fondo de la carretera, los shorts, la sonrisa, etc.] aún por revelar escribo, sólo desierto se revela. En la frase que con pulsar Supr. desaparece, tenían su equivalente el coche, los shorts, la carretera. Tú en mí, que ya he desaparecido. 19.1 Tengo sueños de cemento, quiero decir, sueño con cemento. Mineral de cerebro. Mineral de silencio. Hubo otro big bang antes del big bang. Me recuerdo en su luz que no entra. 20 A veces en la nostalgia comienza a haber suficientes razones para lanzar un grito más atrás de la nostalgia de la manera en que una antipartícula remonta lo cursi, de la manera en que una ecuación olvida al disco duro que la soluciona. 20.1 Cada mañana el mismo verso repetido, composición porcentual o por 100 g en la caja de Kellog’s. De un tiempo a esta parte existe la manía de escribir lo prosaico en columna. Lo dijo Parménides: todo está lleno de Ente, y también: el Ente está penetrado en el Ente. 20.1.1 El poema: instrumento de precisión al servicio del vacío. 21 El tiempo pasa y nos transparenta, llega sin memoria, se consume en el centro de su instante lo opuesto a la belleza no es lo feo [que a su manera es sublime] sino la exacta forma que adquiere el tiempo cuando cuaja en tu último instante y delante el mar le pasa un pincel a la orilla con una vocación que sólo Rothko y pocos más conocen. A veces siendo niños perdemos una moneda en la arena y de viejos la encontramos en otra playa limpia y como nueva. A veces la belleza espera sentada. 21.1 Yo atravesé Norteamérica, acumulé todos los tópicos porque el alma requiere del lastre de esos minerales, hippy en el desierto, antiabortista en Las Rocosas liberal en Columbia Bukowski en el Medio Oeste judío en Central Park beatnik en Frisco, paleto en Dallas buen hombre en Alabama [y el hechizo de las máquinas tragaperras]. Pero muchas veces, en el morado opalescente de las carreteras reasfaltadas [cuando la luz del mediodía las vuelve como mentira] vi los cuadros de Rothko. A menudo me pregunto estas líneas, qué son. Pascal me contesta, es bueno ver y no ver, ése es precisamente el estado de la naturaleza. 22 Decir que la belleza se derrumba en el mismo zenit de su vuelo. 22.1 Decir que en la luz vertical del mediodía hubo hielo y se materializó el primer hombre. Decir que por eso al morir todos desprendemos el mismo resplandor acobardado. Decir que a lo que más teme el alma no es a la noche, sino a la luz de la noche; su competencia. Decir que somos geometría por el cruce de dos líneas: la vertical del cuerpo con el horizonte. Decir que siempre hay un momento en el que te derramas de tu límite [el sonido te hechiza]. Decir que la primera casa no fue la cueva. Se consume el día y con él la adherencia entre la luz y la sombra hasta alcanzar en tu piel su última frontera. La luz ya está en ti. Decir que para los sufíes el alma es blanca y no es posible hallar el prisma que la descomponga en colores. Decir entonces que la forma del alma es la del cupular arco iris. Decir que cada paso fue una lazada para un nudo final cuyo nombre es mejor dar por sabido. Decir que la memoria es el jardín de una posesión donde sólo habrá instante, materia, ganado bovino, contingencia. Decir que el viento, como la vida, viene de no se sabe, nos transparenta, y sigue hacia un lugar aún más desconocido. Para qué si ya lo dijo Rilke en un solo verso, lo bello no es más que el comienzo de lo terrible. Escribir, amar, alucinógenos. Ilusorias refutaciones. 23 La vida y tú, un débil pacto entre la cifra y el número que la habita [número: ente real o complejo que es solución de una ecuación de coeficientes enteros]. La vida y tú, un pacto entre mancos. Vas dejando atrás la silueta para indagarte en la carne, para no perderla. Comienza la luz a deshojarse hasta aparecer una sombra [deduzco] su esqueleto. 23.1 Chatwin lo contó, había peleado y había perdido. Ahora él también era un vagabundo estéril. Y quién no pierde y vaga, me digo si recuerdo mi epitafio, lo que más amé, la certeza; lo que más odié, el camino que me condujo a ella. En el mismo orden de las cosas se halla el nómada que las destruirá. 24 La paradoja de la belleza es bien conocida. Se clava y dura un instante que justifica la eternidad, luego somos nosotros quienes pasamos y ella se queda desplegándose en la superficie como la crecida de un río gana la ciudad y tus tobillos sumergidos en una calle de Nápoles aquel principio de marzo te recuerdo Amanda la calle mojada. 24.1 Aprendimos a manipular las ondas de radio y rompimos definitivamente con el cable de Ariadna que nos amordazaba. Leo ahora en El País que están abriendo las calles a fin de cablearlas. Constantemente se paralizan las obras, ... se han hallado restos de un ágora griega... ... el cráneo del mono que fuimos..., ... un alcantarillado romano..., y parece que también todo regresa cuando cableas mi pelo cada mañana con tus jóvenes dedos de modelo retirada [coincidencias interesantes aquel día] 1) en el mismo periódico, la condición de modelo es la más cercana a la de los ángeles. Una mujer capaz de llegar al extremo de la pasarela —que es como un viaje al más allá— y regresar sin haber perdido la inocencia ni la sonrisa, sólo debería casarse con un ser de características similares a las suyas: pongamos un poeta místico 2) ya de noche, hojeando Dicc. Akal de Física, Modelo: representación ideal de objetos o procesos no directamente accesibles por pertenecer al mundo de lo infinitamente pequeño o de lo infinitamente grande. 25 [a][Teorema]: De la misma manera que resulta estéril añadir belleza a lo que ya es bello, lo mismo ocurre si añades fealdad a lo que de por sí es feo. Por eso yo no practico el sexo anal. Porque con la fealdad que le es propia al coito quiero violentar los rincones [todos] bellos de tu cuerpo para hacerlos aún más bellos, las ecuaciones que describen el fenómeno quedan como sigue, feo+feo = Ø [incesto] bello+bello = Ø [incesto] feo+bello = ∞ [propagación de lo bello], en el fondo no es más que un atávico ejercicio de mestizaje; un dominio de lo antisimétrico. [b][Teorema]: Lo dice Baudrillard las cosas han encontrado un medio de escapar a la dialéctica que las aburría: consiste en proliferar al infinito. El universo no es dialéctico; está condenado a los extremos, al no equilibrio: Buscaremos lo más feo que lo feo: lo monstruoso, y lo sublime: lo más bello que lo bello, por eso yo sí practico el sexo anal, porque no hay luz que no busque más luz en la que saturarse las ecuaciones que describen este fenómeno quedan como sigue, feo+feo = ∞ [lo más feo que lo feo] bello+bello = ∞ [lo más bello que lo bello] feo+bello = Ø [la dialéctica que nos aburre] en el fondo no es más que un posmoderno ejercicio de redundancias, un dominio de lo simétrico. 26 Existe un lenguaje para la vida y otro para la muerte. Discurren paralelos y nosotros discurrimos entre ellos. Un día [si de tiempo puede hablarse], algo los obliga a cruzarse. STOP. Chispa del cortocircuito, tú, vida y muerte colgando de un mismo anzuelo. [NOTA]: La señal STOP debería escribirse ... Y STOP, antes de verla siempre vamos pensando algo. 26.1 La carretera que tuve que andar solo; en esa neutralidad erigió su metáfora mineral la que pensé dos veces por temor al paraíso que la coronaba; así lo perdí por la que me lancé a buscar hasta caer la guillotina del horizonte; por la que, malherida, me persigue la luz dejando un goteo intermitente de líneas blancas; la que arrancó en la comisura de unos labios para despeñarse en la otra, falsa o real vivimos la vida, y al final ver ... Y STOP. Querrás continuar, que alguien escriba STOP Y..., oír las palabras de Laurie Anderson, has estado en esta carretera antes, puedes leer las señales, puedes encontrar tu camino. 27 [Lawrence cabalga tres días y tres noches a través del desierto antes de detenerse y ver crecer sobre el horizonte el punto que será el jinete. La escena dura 10 minutos; plano fijo] el futuro son reflejos de lo ya ocurrido [por eso al nacer no vemos nada, y en el penúltimo instante la vida] pero alcanzarlo es penetrar en una materia que no está hecha de lo que fuimos, porque en ese momento lo olvidamos. La ginebra olvida que fue y será agua. El agua mineral olvida que fue y será piedra. El beso olvida que fue y será idea. 27.1 Ha sido difícil decir adiós desde el jardín esta noche, verte virgen a mi estilo, luces de ciudad elevada en edificios, eléctrica cama de fakir, la metálica voz de la azafata life jacket so far from your seat. 28 La casa convierte en 3 las 4 [infinitas] dimensiones de los sueños. Las 3 de la casa las reduce a 2 el papel. La escritura contrae ese papel a un hilo de tinta de dimensión única. La metáfora concentra lo escrito en un punto sin dimensión y se propaga infinita sobre lo escrito: regresas a aquellas dependencias del sueño. Por la noche llegas a casa, encajas la llave en la cerradura. Se pone en marcha un mecanismo sólo a ti reservado. 28.1 Borges, en su Informe de Brodie, describe el significado del número 4 para una tribu remota y real como los sueños, este número es el mayor que abarca su aritmética. Cuentan con los dedos «uno, dos, tres, cuatro, muchos»; el infinito empieza en el pulgar. Yo sé que incluso la cosa más abstracta concebida por el hombre [pongamos los números o los sueños [al cabo, lo mismo]] está condenada a la muerte porque su creador también es mortal, y sin embargo parece que el ramo de flores empuñado por esa mujer que espera de pie en la terminal la llegada de su hombre [director adjunto, pongamos] no podría destruirlo nadie. También yo esperaba y me dije, y tú qué traes. 29 [vacuo ejercicio de estilo]: te engañas si piensas que todo llegó inesperadamente, con una carta indeseada, con una llamada que no habrías contestado de no haber llevado el móvil, con el encuentro a las tantas en un bar, con la cita a la que no acudiste y hoy acudirías. Te engañas, viajero. La soledad es un hábito adquirido. Pero cada una de esas pistas falsas detenta un trozo del secreto que te impide distinguir estos días que, idénticos, dibujan en el aire el gesto torpe y aburrido de ese gigante hipertrofiado al que llamas [te engañas viajero] viajero. 30 Juan Luis, fumando, encuadre corto, fenotipo Jack Nicholson en penumbra, sillón de orejeras ... luego, suelo viajar con este cuchillo automático que me ha salvado el pellejo en dos ocasiones, lo compré en París..., Leopoldo, fumando, buscando la cámara con esa expresión de monstruo desvalido, el psicoanálisis aplicado a mi familia me enseña que mi hermano Michi es un esquizofrénico. La esquizofrenia es una cosa preciosa. El otro es un paranoico, y la paranoia es bastante desagradable. Michi, fumando, plano general, sentado en un banco que parece condenar de inmediato al acusado, me temo que no vamos a tener descendencia, me interesa destacar esto porque somos un fin de raza nada wagneriano, somos un fin de raza astorgano, muy erosionado por el tiempo, y tampoco es nuestra culpa, llevamos tantos hectolitros de alcohol en la sangre, —tanto por parte de padre como de madre—, que ha llegado un momento en que, por lo visto, no damos más de sí... La viuda, Felicidad, robotizada contra el vidrio de la puerta, fumando, de aquel otoño recuerdo dos poemas que siempre que los leo me lo recuerdan. La Sonrisa Dormida, y otro que empieza... [un gesto de mano a la cámara], quizá lo he olvidado. 30.1 Los Panero son los Dalton en un western que no existe. 30.1.1 Bienaventurados quienes cultivan en las grietas sin fondo de los mapas. Cuando toque rendir cuentas no podrán ser llamados. 31 Por empezar con un clásico de Auserón, un día más me quedaré sentado aquí, en la penumbra de un jardín tan extraño, barremos autopistas sabiendo exactamente quiénes somos si algo nos hace sufrir, y sin saber quién vivió la felicidad que el azar nos tenía asignada, parpadeamos y batimos ante un mismo relámpago con la esperanza de que una voz nos diga te espero, guarda para mí los kilómetros que vienes quemando, y al instante el trueno nos recuerda que al fin somos no más que una tumoración florecida en la luz, un cuerpo que llegó, creyó soñar y dejó aún menos que los animales, quienes al menos dejan conductas repetidas. El tiempo empieza después. Heráclito dijo: el cosmos más bello es basura esparcida al azar, lo que no dijo es que esa sola frase pone en marcha la duda de toda una vida: Dios no tiene unidad. ¿Cómo la tendré yo?, atormentó a Pessoa. Nunca sabremos si vivimos tapando vacíos o vaciando quimeras, ni si aún seguimos siendo el niño que agarrando una muñeca ríe junto a su hermana en la fotografía, ni si el silencio abisal de las fotografías es la prueba más fiable de que la muerte quedó atrás [siendo así, ¿qué nos espera?]. Una certeza: los versos son la forma más amable del desamor aunque dilaten el dolor de la herida, y ahora a seguir adelante [gracias Andrés por la frase] con farmacia y con aguante. Perder un amor equivale a perder todos para siempre. Lyotard vino a decir: se pisa humo, y la hoguera está en tu cabeza, lo que no dijo es que eso ya todos lo sabíamos, que desde Altamira el hombre no ha cesado de inventar cosas inútiles, palabras como amor, compañía, felicidad; incluso vida. Lo dijo Woody, pero de otra manera, la vida es como un campo de concentración. Hagas lo que hagas no puedes salir de él sin morir. Por eso necesitamos pensar que donde termina el asfalto empieza la divinidad que no vemos, estrecha es el alma, confesó San Agustín, para contenerse a sí misma, y a pesar de todo nos empeñamos en ser automóviles que sin piloto ni luces se cruzan en la noche, hacia su propia luz cada cual teledirigido, hacia su propia sombra cada cual teleperdido. Nos queda aún la última gasolinera, el último desayuno en el shopping center, un último vistazo al mapa de carreteras cada vez más blanco y negro. Otro latido menos amargo en los ojos azules de la cajera antes del que será el último control de alcoholemia, te dices, nos queda. Por terminar con el mismo clásico, soy metálico en el Jardín Botánico. 32 un día comienzan a dejar silencios cuando les hablas, renuncian los padres a la tribu, no vuelves a ser niño. Escribir tumoración en el Silencio, órgano latiente de la Nada. Leer, interpretar, derivaciones metastásicas. De todo esto quedará la estatua de luz erigida a la palabra de luz que cae del cielo y te deja clavado a la mañana la última mañana, el amanecer nevado en el circuito de Monza la molécula [tú] de óxido en el monóxido de carbono el trozo de agua corriente inmóvil porque su paisaje fue más agua, quedará la función Delta de Dirac como autorretrato, por qué la nada y no algo 33 Cuando en domingo amanece y quiere llover [las agujas de la catedral y revueltos los pájaros] y sales con el abrigo Miss Sixty 3/4, luz de cruce CHANEL N.° 19, la camiseta con La Mode (82-84) estampada, peinado Replicante a por la prensa y el pan y eliges un nuevo itinerario, piensas: 1) la vulnerabilidad de un organismo es directamente proporcional a su complejidad 2) las fiestas se dan sobre todo para aquellos a los que no se invita [Étienne de Beaumont] 3) desde el 11-09-2001 la Tierra es un poco más chatarra 4) decir autorretrato es una redundancia: todo retrato es auto aunque todos conduzcan a lo mismo, cada camino es la trampa que nos tiende lo inalcanzable mientras el futuro [revueltos los pájaros] duerme. 34 551967’pastilla amor crepúsculo minipimer bala aliento soledad viaje destino proyecto hotel camino digital cigarrillo humo reloj menú memoria videojuego fotografía retablo museo lluvia coro alcantarilla chaqueta sampler factura cábala gimnasio biblioteca manifiesto cohete canesú ciprés automóvil hospital yo tu él Delta de Dirac Monte de Tindaya vosotros ellos móviles muñecas parking habitaciones vacías ¿Nacer? Una fecha, una cifra. ¿Vivir? Sus decimales. Sólo un consejo: come arroz blanco, deja dicho que antes de morir por fin te despierten, lee si puedes a Jay Gould [paleontólogo] pasamos una sola vez por este mundo. Pocas tragedias pueden ser más vastas que la atrofia de la vida [La Falsa Medida del Hombre (1981)] pocas injusticias más profundas que la de negar una oportunidad de competir, y Buster Keaton dando traspiés no hacia el precipicio, que por lo menos guarda el prestigio de lo sublime, sino hacia la nada, donde hay mucho espacio, Thomas Mann lo dijo, hay mucho tiempo, observa el arco de medio punto en la anfetamina en vez de comerla, es propio del bien atravesar los siglos sin rozamiento. Como quien se alimentase ya sólo de agua. Como quien gastara prêt à porter de aire. ¿Y que cifra es la muerte?, dices. Donde comienza el periodo. 35 La soledad está ya en la máscara que es la esencia, en la materia, en los fermiones [Fermión: partícula material sujeta al Principio de Exclusión de Pauli, según el cual no puede haber más de una de estas partículas compartiendo un mismo estado. A este fenómeno se le denomina Soledad Fermiónica] que nos constituyen. Hace años que voy concibiendo un proyecto semigenial. Cinco veces al día regreso al teclado. Mi madre cinco veces al supermercado. Por la noche encendemos la luz y somos un Hopper. 36 Hay en las cosas una tendencia al silencio, se manifiesta sobre todo cuando crece el ruido en torno a ellas, ejemplo: composición típica de un Light Refresco, valor energético ........................0,0 Kcal proteínas ....................................0,0 g hidratos de carbono .................0,0 g grasas ..........................................0,0 g, me valgo de este ejemplo para [de paso] demostrar que hay cosas que, existiendo, no existen. Quizá la menos borrosa esencia de lo sagrado. [Mientras en los muelles numeran la marea en decimales] 36.1 A la feria del brazo y dos escopetas [ni imaginamos que el experimento se llamaría al fin Toma de Datos]. Ninguno perforó la cinta azul ni la verde de la muñeca, pero la dispersión de los balines en la pared del fondo te sugirió la silueta Vivienda Unifamiliar con la que sacaste cum laude en el proyecto fin de carrera. Lo celebramos. Balines blancos. Esta vez hicieron blanco. Recordé que cuando en mis inicios investigaba en Gravedad Cuántica firmaba los trabajos con seudónimo. Hice mi tesis sobre ese autor y también saqué cum laude. Porque está en la obsesión del falsificador intentar repetirla, lo más seguro es usar cada vez una firma distinta: tránsito de modas, amores, pasiones por tu vida. O esa forma que tenemos de huir de Dios, de la búsqueda que en nosotros emprendió de su imagen y semejanza. 37 4x4x4, cubo de hormigón en la cresta de la Tierra [al borde de un acantilado, quiero decir] con una estrecha franja a la altura de los ojos. Da de comer al canario [juguete completo, juguete Comansi], desplaza la silla allí donde la sombra barre el escenario. El mundo rueda y el cubo con él. Nada se aparta del camino trazado por esa estela que proporciona buenos asideros y llamamos monotonía. El precio que se paga es ir segando días secos como sexo.com Te lo dije, el corazón sin línea de horizonte viene a ser un nido de ametralladoras. Lo más extraño fue aquel invierno en que cada noche el mar se abría. Lo menos, cuando para olvidar el mío olvidé todos los nombres. Que encuentres al fin, buscador de metales en arenas movedizas de amores de noche, tu noche de bodas perpetuum mobile. O por lo menos la bengala que al náufrago ciega y simultáneamente salva. 37.1 De ningún intento de suicidio se regresa vivo. La metáfora hace su trabajo. 38 el aristócrata ocioso que pasea por la casa y mira termómetros el adolescente que apaga el videojuego y le ejecuta Game Over a su familia con una katana el deficiente a quien le asignan la tarea de comprobar diariamente la exactitud del reloj que nunca falla el skin que terminará frecuentando la sección Automóvil de Pryca sin punkis a los que dar palizas el punki que terminará sus días en chándal y peinando hijos los fantasmas que vagan por las casas tras un fin de saga el magrebí cuyo futuro ya se ha filmado en Cowboy de medianoche los poetas que discuten si el clon es la reencarnación de Narciso los intelectuales que discuten si es su maldición que regresa los nacidos ahora y, aseguran, vivirán más de cien años las manos de la modelo decolorándose en la valla publicitaria el fanático que aleja su casa de los cables de alta tensión y después se infla a Tigretones la solterona que cambiaría ahora todos los noes por el sí de un borracho el ingenuo que lo más sólido que se trajo de la India fue su adicción al caballo el marxista que mató a Dios con la misma ansia con que ahora hojea Marie Claire el aprendiz de poeta que escribe versos a la dependienta de Chanel y otra abre las cartas la madre que ama más a sus hijos que a sus propios hijos porque la maternidad es una idea el voluntario de ONG que reparte medicinas como las misiones repartían hostias las Rebeccas de clase media que un día se vuelven locas las Pacas de barrio que aguardan el momento de usurparle el puesto de Rebecca el proletario que invierte en bolsa el broker que cuando ama continúa siendo broker. Se vive con la débil intuición de lo que podría haber sido la vida. 39 Hay cierto glamour en las centrales nucleares, corbatas pasadas de moda, interminables esquemas eléctricos en soporte papel, Macintosh en blanco y negro, y en el mapa casi plegado [carretera aún caliente] naturaleza que se recorta cuando doblas la ropa y la dejas en el galán de noche; reaccionan en cadena ambos cuerpos. 40 No dejo dicho ritual para mi muerte, que me lleve la doctrina que más alto puje, fondo y forma en ti fundidos, colchón de muelles con ya sólo muelles, agua y estructura en un latido, lo vi en un contenedor y disparé la foto que ganó tantos premios, te voy a buscar al trabajo, inútiles a la realidad [como debe ser] hervimos el brócoli y abrimos el tinto, YO: yo siempre blanco, como Benet, como Joyce. TÚ: yo siempre tinto, como yo. Por lo que pueda pasar nos besamos ahora. Me río de ti diciendo matar indies en Benicassim, tú de mí contestando amar expunkies de escaparate. Llegamos a un acuerdo, la piel que se parece más a la humana es la de la naranja. 40.1 dejo nuestra desaparición al pillaje de cualquier rito, Sunday Morning, mi Nico particular, como en «Miami Vice» al amanecer me abrazabas y abrazada te dormías, me acordé de aquellos teléfonos que con dos vasos de yogur hacíamos en el colegio. Actor de película mala, te dije al despedirme, nunca olvides que lo más importante es el amor. Lo único que nos hunde o salva [enigma: las películas malas no son malas porque sean malas]. Había un exceso de belleza en todo aquello de la manera que lo hay en la luz [que ni lo ves ni no lo ves]. Y de ti, Máquina de Soñar[me] 40.1.1 He concebido una receta semigenial. Ingredientes, – 1 globo de cumpleaños al máximo de su capacidad. – 1 planeta sin aire. 41 A veces en la noche cuaja el alba, en el alba a veces se atomiza la noche. Compongo un CD que en digital te fragmente, un texto inoperante que de tu Centro de Masas desprenda el olvido. Es mi piel tan suave, dices, que besas aire, en ese punto atractor se activó la tormenta [me pregunto qué hombre mal configurado pica el carbón que traen los Reyes Magos]. Musa indiscutible, al fin entiendes que no necesitamos quien nos admire sino quien nos ame. En la acera detenida una chica busca en cada coche que pasa una cara conocida [conozco cada átomo [Cuétara Surtido] del cristal de tu ventana] se monta al fin en un Belén que pasa; no hay cuerpo que no busque la estrella de su renacimiento. Abre en dos la anfetamina en vez de comerla, a que nunca habías visto dónde descansan en su caja de pino las sirenas. De las carreteras cortadas nada sabemos salvo que a veces se encuentran en la espuma de la risa; el tedio puede ser, Leopardi lo dijo, mucho más intenso que el dolor. Hay algo peor que huir hacia atrás. Hay algo peor que huir hacia delante. El que huye hacia adentro, hacia la química de lo que ya ha sido [me llegaron dos cartas de amor] hacia la fotocopia, única aventura ya posible. 42 Hay en todo paseo un enigma que lo supera: cada trozo de acera contiene [escoge tú cm, μ, Å, la dimensión que prefieras] cuanto podemos conocer de nosotros y del Universo [que es lo mismo] de lo que fue y lo que será [que salvo décimas también es lo mismo] Extravagante a medio metro. Regreso a casa y pienso que me gustan mucho algunas frases hechas, por ejemplo [ella duerme en la sala, él en el dormitorio, 4 pm, agosto], uno dice: qué me quieres, amor. Es un hecho científicamente probado que se muere antes por no dormir que por no comer. Es un hecho científicamente derivado que lo que no podemos es [qué me quieres, amor] vivir sin sueños. 43 Las escaleras me conducían de la catedral al paseo marítimo. 7 pm. Llovizna. En los restaurantes el batir de las tortillas. Cenan los extranjeros. Los peninsulares captan con gula de sueño insatisfecho las últimas luces en la videocámara. Escaleras, suelo, catedral, cielo, luz, mar, el mismo color de piel curtida en aquel par de chaquetas que compramos por cuatro duros a las 7 pm otro día que llovía en otra era, imagina el turista cuando regresa y se juntan en torno a nueces y cervezas y ve en el vídeo a un tipo que cruza con aspecto de aparecido. De cuantas mujeres amé sólo amé a las que pasaron alguna Navidad conmigo. 44 En el desierto [por no haber ni hay eco] sólo existe un objeto, lo que se pisa y tú sois la misma cosa, por eso nunca se llega al final de la arena, y quien llega sale otro. Kafka lo dijo, a partir de cierto punto no hay retorno posible; ése es el punto al que hay que llegar, vienes a mis sueños, desierto que cruzo cada noche. Cada noche no regreso. 44.1 Física repetida la luz. Tu cuerpo la traviesa y la hace química. Inútil química. Química de mariposa, que existe para la belleza, para nada, para desaparecer en luz de beso si la alcanza. Como desaparece el agua dentro del agua, y no regresa. Anochece. El sol, retráctil garra, esconde la luz en el mismo recipiente donde descansan tus pupilas. 45 El hipermétrope forma las imágenes más atrás de la retina. Por eso se le mezclan y solapan [como al poeta] zonas cotidianas de frontera en las que la realidad [si tal cosa existe] pone en marcha cierta violencia que llamaremos [para entendernos] Armonía. Pero un hipermétrope y simultáneamente poeta no resulta doblemente hipermétrope o doblemente poeta. Esta Armonía no es sumable, tiene truco, demostración en negativo: [prueba a sumar peras y manzanas] demostración en positivo: [tu cuerpo y el mío no se suman; son uno] ella sola lo ocupa todo [en la guardia del 31.12.01, 8 pm, entre una metástasis ósea y un carcinoma de mama], 45.1 el patio de mi casa no es particular 01.01.2002, me he levantado muy temprano, he puesto algún mail, como hoy cada año, y Sunday Morning [mi Nico particular], el café, el panetone, como hoy cada año, bufanda, guantes, abrigo, y el Alfa descapotado con Goldberg Variations, como hoy cada año, hasta la orilla del mar desde la que veo otra isla, aquí ni un alma [nada hay más solitario y salvaje que el Mediterráneo], y el silencio químico de la espuma, de las rocas, silencio químico, como hoy cada año, el más químico, el que como el amor deja resaca pero no desaparece, y como hoy cada año soy contemporáneo de otros silencios que ya fui [afortunadamente aquí no hay gen que valga], y tú [querido, me dice el buzón de voz]: mi novedad, mi Nico particular, estás muy lejos, chemical hangover, seguro, y yo, de vuelta de todo, de aquel Quimicefa, química de Reyes Magos, inocuas moléculas, aunque estés lejos y yo de vuelta de todo menos de ti, mi Sunday Morning, mi Nico particular, cuando llueve se moja como las demás. 46 Éramos muy racionales. Un juego como otro cualquiera. O miedo a la palabra. No sé, en vez de decir te quiero decíamos x, o x2, x3, x4..., según la intensidad del momento que precede al beso, xn lo reservábamos para, en el orgasmo, susurrar te quiero infinito, un montón [o algo así] Un día se te escapó √x Y fue lo mejor. Éramos 2. «... √2, Número Irracional que no posee un valor finito. Otro ejemplo de Número Irracional es π...» [de Manual Didáctico Escolar, Ed. Fonollosa, Chile, 1918] 47 De similar naturaleza, al salir del baño dejaste el anillo de brillantes y las lentillas sobre la mesa desierta Quedaban atrás dos horizontes de tu cuerpo [el vivo y el muerto]. Se adensó. Pusimos un CD de Belle & Sebastian hasta que amanece para seguir aplastados entre dos excesos, el pasado y el futuro, la noche y el cuerpo que duerme al lado. Pero vivir, me dices, ya de por sí es un exceso. Se tuercen paralelos en el fin los sueños, hacia dos objetos imposibles sobre una mesa desierta. 47.1 Lo normal es que primero te echen del espacio. Una vez exiliado, ya tú mismo te expulsas del tiempo. Lo raro es lo contrario. Se busca una mujer que esté mal configurada. Pedigrí de solitario. 48 En tu ombligo, la mirilla comunica mi ojo con tu callejero, n metros, intestino delgado, intestino grueso, camino proyectando como proyecta la raíz en invierno, hay más puertas, más ojos, más mirillas, cada uno me hace su propuesta y teoriza acerca de lo que entiende por cuerpo compartido, me sales cada noche con una nueva, y se consuma el laberinto en el apéndice sin salida [pero hay que continuar, me dices, pese a todo hay que continuar], alguien, quizá un turista ávido de anestesia y souvenirs, arrastra el índice sobre el mapa en busca del mejor itinerario y me empuja, 150 CV, juntos en el coche hacia donde el sol foguea el horizonte, Nuclear Sí de Aviador Dro en el casete, comes ciruelas verdes, me ofreces agua de Vichy, te digo que sí, y doy un trago apresurado por no decirte que pronto aparecerá un camión de frente y habrá que dar un volantazo, por no decirte que al final del intestino, como era de esperar, mierda y muerte empiezan por m. También mitocondria, me dices. Y entonces algo inexplicable pero absolutamente concreto nos salva. 49 Todos soñamos con alguna parte, y el tiempo sólo es cuestión de tiempo: tarde o temprano lo alcanzas, pero el espacio está lleno de obstáculos del todo infranqueables. La ecuación se da donde ambos se juntan. Su equivalencia más exacta aquí en tierra fueron tus besos. Lo que realmente me estoy preguntando es si la especie humana aún existe, un invento como cualquier otro para retrasar mi finitud, horizonte artificial, la muerte del punk. 49.1 Cuando estando en la cama te abrazo por detrás, llevas mi mano hacia la tuya de joven modelo retirada, y hasta que te quedas dormida la aprietas contra tu pecho, entran en juego toda una serie de cuestiones como el Origen de las Especies, la Teoría de Catástrofes aplicada a un sistema neurológico, el estado sólido del Na11, las portadas de Vogue o el Producto Interior Bruto de Dinamarca, pero sobre todo cómo la luz se va refractando al penetrar en el agua, violenta y silenciosa, oblicua, sin amargor ni memoria, insípida aunque sabiendo. Cuando toca fondo amanece. 50 020200, vuelo Palma-Ibiza 0497, y traduce el Hotel Montesol a materia lo que hasta entonces era tu sueño. Noche en la suite vestidos de fiesta. Penetrar tu cuerpo que es cristal pero no se rompe [nada hay más sólido que la luz]. Un desayuno en la mesa donde con gafas de pez y tostadas de cemento Le Corbusier sedujo a Coco Chanel. Tu perfil ensimismado en la calle a esta hora vacía, café al humo entre tus dedos de joven modelo en su punto retirada. Miras y sonríes. Nadie en la calle. Una fotografía. Ya no miras. Otra fotografía, descomposición espectral de una muestra típica de personas que frecuentan conciertos: el 50 % son futuros delincuentes, el otro 50 lo son ya sin saberlo. El 100 % no se entera de que el talento está en los decimales. El 0 % es eso, 0. [Definición] Sonido complejo: todo sonido que no es simple, me miras de nuevo, otra fotografía, años sin viajar en 50 cc, años sin comer pizza en un bar de carretera, años que no llegaba sin miedo a un faro tan lejano [y me salva el franco contorno de tus ojos], años sin hojear revistas de quiosco. Ibiza Mix, Mix de verdad, pienso. [Un detalle. Descubrimos que cada palillo había sido colocado de nuevo en el palillero una vez usado. Somos unos genios], y en el límite, cuando la forma tiende a infinito, tus dedos. 51 Te veo detenida en el semáforo de peatones. Me escondo en el lavabo. Al fondo de la taza, un engrudo de papeles y la cadena sin tirar. Apunto al centro. Mana la forma de lo que tras la última gota resulta una rosa perfecta. Palidece y palpita el amarillo. Regreso; lejana efervesces. Se sintetiza el corazón en el muñeco del semáforo sube/baja sube/baja y una última intención stop/anda stop/anda 51.1 Te propongo un proyecto [no es tanto el amor como su idea lo que nos hace felices]: carga el espacio de nada, ponle a esa nada un nombre que recuerde a un viaje, que llame al movimiento, sin jamás haberlo visto, Ingrid le escribió desde Norteamérica, señor Roberto Rossellini, si necesita usted una actriz sueca que habla muy bien el inglés, que no ha olvidado su alemán, que chapurrea el francés, y que en italiano sólo conoce «ti amo», estoy dispuesta a acudir y hacer un film con usted, refresca, le he puesto la capota al coche, el hall del hotel estrangula el paso de los grupos organizados, hubo rosas de verdad, cinco días invitado en la Mansión Rosa, martinis rebajados con agua, el escepticismo que nos hace inteligentes. Ahora el tiempo, especie de animal cuanto más malherido más tiempo. 52 Entre dos contajes consecutivos de un contador Geiger hay una fracción infinitesimal de tiempo en la que al circuito no le es posible contar nada. A esa pequeña desaparición de realidad se le llama Tiempo Muerto [τ]. Así viene descrito en cualquier texto de física atómica este fenómeno fascinado toda la noche en tus ojos porque al terminar no ha mermado ni aumentado mi conocimiento acerca del mundo bendita seas otoño en el que el verano cae de nuevo a mi cielo, mi wild puppet I love you so muñeca de cera o de algodón meditativa y simultáneamente instantánea, tu ruido es blanco, en qué estado de la materia te consumes. Luz y sombra saturas. También nosotros somos custodios de un metal pesado, lujosas gotas de mercurio amante, amantes en Tiempo Muerto. Bendito sea el reloj que desaparece [τ] [para dos nuevos estados de la materia] 53 Los hay que creen saber que el porvenir del universo sólo podrá ser una repetición de sí mismo, según la idea de que el tiempo no es más que una ilusión, dice Prigogine en El nacimiento del tiempo, 5 pm, quedamos los tres en la plaza en construcción un domingo de aquellos dilettantes [francamente, estabas preciosa], vallas amarillas la cuadriculaban, no podían con tu cuerpo, idéntico al recuerdo que conservaba. Fuiste un haz que [a mi pesar] duró 1 nanosegundo [por poner una cifra impensable para el común humano], pero me hiciste olvidar la aparente eternidad que vaciaron otras. Infinito, el tiempo para ti aún no existe [deduzco por cómo cierras los párpados, cómo inclinas las tazas, esos zapatos afilados], decapitas una rosa y, piensas, saldrá otra, desconoces aún la única verdad: no somos polvo que cuaja y funda un destino antes de volver al polvo, sino paréntesis fantasma entre carne que nunca dejó de ser carne, un flash sin flashback, una apariencia, un salto cuántico. 53.1 No dormíamos por miedo a dejar de vernos, detrás de la colina parece estar amaneciendo. En Rebecca era fuego. 54 Afila la nariz en el fiel del horizonte, el arco de los ojos toca suelo, la musa está triste, para saberlo hace falta haber estado en tu cuerpo, nuevo estado [6.o] de la materia, mercurio modelado, única estrella cuya luz nos llega antes de muerta, lo dijo Haldane, el Universo no sólo es más extraño de lo que suponemos; es más extraño de lo que podemos llegar a suponer, la musa está triste, hemos intercambiado últimas palabras, ningún objeto, había una vez [tara, tatara, tata], un circo que alegraba siempre el corazón, TVE, 1976. 54.1 [hablemos ahora del cuerpo] la muerte no cobra especial relevancia en los lugares donde fondo y forma coinciden, desierto, mineral, océano, césped perpetuo, nada por traspasar, me gusta decir su nombre y callarme para verle soltar el BIC mientras levanta la cabeza y oír dime [silencio] [punto de silencio] dime [silencio]2 [superficie de silencio] dime [silencio]3 [cubo de silencio] dime [silencio]4 [hipercubo de silencio] · · · · · · Impedimentos Sueltos: ramas, hojas sueltas o cualquier elemento de la naturaleza que no esté en crecimiento. Pueden ser retirados sin penalización [Manual de golf, Vivien Saunders]. 55 Hay una aparente paradoja en todo esto: el agua es transparente pero oscurece la ropa, hacemos cola en el fast-food [graffiti-comida], nos gusta la Nocilla, el café aguado, el aire que revuelven tus dedos y no vuelve, la vista de la calle a través del cristal manufacturado. Nos gusta lo que, existiendo, no existe, comprar camisetas blancas y zapatos caros, silbar aquella canción de Roxy fue la señal, nos gusta, sobre todo, pensar el cielo en la tierra, saber que tenemos razón para que nos traiga sin cuidado tenerla. Nos gusta comprar discos repetidos de Esplendor Geométrico, vivir una manzana más abajo de la cabeza de Newton [llovió, y no quiero secarte el pelo, árbol de Navidad de agua] nos inquieta la pregunta: por qué los aviones toman tierra y no derrapan, por qué los libros son más altos que anchos, por qué el amor [solución de una ecuación irresoluble] finge su existencia. Sabemos que el firmamento es cavidad resonante de mensajes que se perdieron, y de aquellos que nos llegan el emisor ha muerto. Sabemos la contradicción de guerra humanitaria, que gana quien derrama más sangre y después escucha [graffiti-concierto] a Bach en los escombros de un patio, yo mismo a veces creo haber defraudado tanto que me entregaría al cuerpo de cualquiera, a lo que es pura ruina y carencia y como el agua oscurece. Me muero por piratear esta noche los 50 gigabytes de tus pezones, y qué más da Punk No Dead que Opus Dei Forever si te imaginas que al final el cielo fuera sólo un anuncio de papel Albal nos tatarea Sr. Chinarro en la ranura de tu sexo. Hay una aparente paradoja en todo esto: envasado al vacío nos vendemos tiempo. 56 una Constante [δ] Cosmológica, 2 juncos reflejados en los escaparates, te digo, abrigo de Ángel, se aniquilan a pares [e– + e+ → γ + γ] el beso del píxel y el beso del sexo. Al final veremos [lo dicen los cosmólogos] las galaxias detenidas, y como en las canciones de Low hay una Antigravedad, una Energía Oscura que tiende a congelar la luz y separar las cosas mientras arde el glamour de quienes se aman. Les gusta instalarse en la zona que le sobra al día, prestarse objetos inútiles, reconocerse en las analogías. Buscamos en quien amamos señales infalsificabies, mentiras ciertas que nos salven, al hacer el amor un resplandor ilógico que anuncie un nuevo estado [6.o] de la materia, presente instantáneo, esa inmensa utopía. 57 El agujero negro es negro porque contiene toda la luz [lo dijo Wittgenstein, el negro es también una especie de blanco]. Hay en cada átomo una noche disímil: se diluye el terrón, amargo, no regresa. Llegar a ser es llegar a perderse de uno mismo [ni que decir tiene, en uno mismo]. 58 Objeto [definición]: ente material formado cuando [por causas desconocidas] en algún lugar del espacio se apelmaza el silencio. 59 Yo ya sólo escribo desde la noche y para la noche 00001digital incesto00001 coágulo de lo que fue abstracción, luce un instante sin futuro en la pantalla el cuarzo líquido, lo que hay, del incesto al nihilismo, lo que hay, yo, el camino más corto, me gustaría ponerme patético, afectado, la corbata de dandi que losé ya no me espera, como losé tampoco me esperan bombillas de colores en las pupilas de una púber, y la Orquesta Miramar al fondo, y el venenoso cuarzo líquido brillando en su sexo [¿lo llamo poesía?], cada segundo levantamos un mapa, simultáneamente lo devora su equivalencia en la Tierra, cada segundo nace una hierba, simultáneamente la seca su idea. 60 Nadie está ahí, un paisaje por entero blanco, su propia representación lo rechaza, donde acaba el ojo comienza la mirada, donde acaba la mirada, de nuevo el ojo, los cimientos, la ciudad, el corazón, dibujan la silueta en sus afueras, recordaremos la pubertad, capitanes de quince años que fuimos vientres blancos sobre talco blanco, para ser ahora dos desconocidos. Me gustaría tener talento para precisar más, levantar con lo vivido un teorema idempotente a la vida, pero [lo siento] no hay ya palabras en mi laboratorio, ni siquiera silencio, su extrarradio. Nadie está ahí. Espero mi llegada. 61 Si todo esto era absurdo, de qué valió poner flores a los vivos. Los felinos se tumban a observar el fiel del horizonte. Y no ven nada. Si el objetivo de las fotos fue recordar, su vientre era siniestro. 61.1 y ahora besemos y bebamos, como si los que se fueron ya no estuviesen con nosotros, como si del lugar en el que se hallan no quisiéramos regresar, como si permutar 1 por –1 dejara esta realidad inalterada, como si 0 por –0 fuera lo único que la alterara. 61.1.1 El arte, manifestado en su más perfecta expresión, es un producto frustrado. ¿La vida? Obra Maestra. 62 Me adentro. Me adentro en la sombra, me antecede, atleta de la nada, me adentro en un cuerpo prestado y es el mío, permíteme llegar y ser al final un saco de infusión en la luz. Después, lo aseguro, me iré para siempre. O me disuelvo. Atleta del sueño más antiguo del mundo: hambre de un redentor, sube por mí la sombra como mercurio. Como mercurio me adentro. 63 Vengo desde hace tiempo atravesando este templo tomado por algo parecido a la nada o al silencio, El claroscuro no existe. Vengo cegado por la transparencia del espacio cuando no hay quien lo gravite y se manifiesta químicamente puro [¿qué química, qué pureza?]. Mi silueta, unos pasos por delante. Arden los besos La Voluntad en el atril de la entrada. Vengo desde hace tiempo atravesando la vida [¿qué tiempo, qué vida?]. 63.1 Decir esta noche es la noche más oscura es una obviedad, pero no hay otra forma de abordar los asuntos que conciernen a la rotura del Tiempo en el cuerpo [es decir, a Dios], pirotecnia mojada, adherencia entre la belleza y la nada, 63.1.1 Bajo ciertas condiciones migratorias veo en tus ojos polos opuestos que llevan el rostro a una expresión neutra la foto mancha mis dedos de tinta y plata. Dame tu frío, química sin éxtasis. 64 Mancha verdioscura sobre un muro blanco. Capilares de humedad ascienden sin alas, descienden sin peso [la erosión es un hacker en busca de su limbo] mujeres sin bozal suben a automóviles bajo una ventana con silueta [que vierte agua en un florero] a lo lejos taxis amarillos destellan y pasan [la erosión es una anciana en busca de la piel caída]. Sé que tengo un doble creciendo en un muro de Central Park. 64.1 Naces y una fecha comprime el tiempo [neutro, isótropo] al detectar tu nombre que se pronuncia y gasta sin casi conciencia y por necesidad. Todo suma. Territorio más difícil la muerte. Sin nombre hay que conquistarla. 65 mejor junto a un río, que como símbolo no tiene precio, echarse a un lado, apagar el contacto, y asomarse a la ventanilla a ver los coches pasar, ése podría ser yo, y éste, y aquel que llega, y el que aún no ha llegado, hallar satisfacción en la vanidad de poder ser otro y elegir no serlo. Cesa el movimiento. Llega la noche y su más convincente metáfora: la noche. Y el miedo, absurda metafísica de la soledad humana. 66 Si según Guillén lo profundo es el aire, lo improfundo equivale al diamante, al bloque de semen que descargo en tu sexo para que lo talle, pero, ¿y lo aprofundo?: donde ambos coinciden, donde ambos se anulan, todo espesor en espesor cero concentrado..., fue varias horas más tarde, sentada en la bañera, cuando comenzó a pensar en él otra vez, y esta vez pensó en lo solo, en lo terriblemente solo que debía encontrarse para haber llegado a poner un anuncio así: SE BUSCA UNA MUJER Se lo imaginó llegando a casa, encontrándose las facturas del gas y del teléfono en el buzón, desnudándose, tomándose un baño, la televisión encendida. Después leería el periódico de la tarde. Luego entraría en la cocina a hacerse la cena. Allí, quieto, mirando cómo se fríe el pan, en calzoncillos. Luego cogería la comida y se la llevaría a una mesa, se la comería. Le podía ver bebiéndose su café. Luego más televisión. Y quizá un bote de cerveza antes de acostarse. Debía haber millones de hombres como él en toda América [Ch. Bukowski]. 67 Mediodía en el gimnasio y su reparto entre película porno y western de Almería. Ni una voz en los aparatos, penúltimo estadio de un cosmos en expansión. Cada cual en su orden ensimismado, se mueven desorbitados los satélites, lo dijo Hubble: la historia de la astronomía es una historia de horizontes en retirada, espejo del televisor donde Sísifo es un asmático adicto a la bicicleta estática [bastante metafísica hay en su paisaje repetido]. Tertuliano lo dejó dicho: la carne es el fundamento de la salvación, y Teresa de Ávila: no somos ángeles si no tenemos cuerpo. Y el damero de la sala de aeróbic cada vez más en desuso donde nostálgico se sienta a mirar ahora que está en paro Descartes. 67.1 Hubo tres maníacos de lo inútil en el siglo pasado, Joyce, Borges y Kafka (JBK), porque maníaco es quien cambia el curso de la Historia, e inútil porque es tal su soledad que muere sin saberlo [así me ocurrió a mí contigo] el rasgado del patinador dando vueltas y veloces vueltas sobre hielo en un estadio vacío, el zumbido orbital de esos planetas que desconocen ser la música del mundo. Hay quien afirma: sus espectaculares alquimias, (JBK), no siempre transmutaron el excremento en oro, es cierto [así me ocurrió a mí contigo] pero también dijo Godard: no es justo pedirle cuentas a quien salta así al vacío. 68 El insomne no cuenta ovejas, cuenta piedras que lanza [no contra un punto del espacio] [no contra un instante del tiempo] contra el mapa a escala de los sueños de todos los que duermen que es él mismo mis ilustres preferidos son a) Cioran en Taxi Driver b) Robert de Niro en El ocaso del pensamiento y aparte está mi madre. No te defraudará el cenicero de un insomne, colillas de marcas que le son extrañas [piensa en carreteras cortadas] donde una idea recurrente es su materia corrosiva para que no llegue a alcanzarte, durmiente, aquella verdad que te deslumbra, en el combustible de un avión que despega hay un componente espantosamente triste. 69 El idioma: cristal cuarteado. Las grietas: palabras, su misma materia. Te aproximas, escoges una, miras a través, no ves nada coinciden espejo y espejismo yo, tú, él, indivisibles visiones de las que somos átomos ciegos, así [no lo es aunque parezca una excusa], todo este tiempo a tu lado fue un poner en práctica el arte de los malos poetas, de los buenos poetas, de todos los poetas: un saqueo a tu intimidad sin ofrecer nada a cambio. 70 No detienen la noche las primeras luces del día, se prolonga fatigada en otro compartimento más visible y secreto [césped entre asfalto cuarteado, hielo en el extremo del beso, la implosión de los planetas, el silencio de los objetos]. Esto que ves no es la mañana, sino el oponente lógico a la noche que produjo la razón binaria, despertar es reducirse a fotones, parálisis y centro de esa otra partícula nocturna que es el sueño foliado en pétalos. Van cayendo. 71 Si algún día consigo ver el crepúsculo sin ojos. Si algún día el músculo supera al hueso, y la mañana al mineral de luz. Si algún día el tiempo detiene su composición y no envejezco. Si algún día vuelvo a ver en cualquier frase un haikú partido por tres. Si algún día regresa la humedad [metáfora más antigua] al silencio a secas. Si algún día el color de ojos hunde al PC en la miseria. Si algún día olvido que el diamante es carbón. Si en la vasta y vacía noche de otoño amanece [Kinko, Japón, 1860] 72 Clonad o en todas partes [aire engendra aire], doy una voz y no encuentra otro, destino, reposo, variedad en las especies: grumos desviados del grito inicial, ecos de un DJ irracional, Capri, tarde de marzo, pego la espalda contra el muro, su tibieza me suspende el sentido. Colección de adherencias = treguas entre cosas [la última es la que te mata] cuanto somos. 73 Las teorías siempre hablan del pasado; allí se hicieron. Hay ventajas en ir a la deriva [al séptimo día no descansó, vio su obra en Super 8 y añadió la nostalgia al Paraíso] Exprimir el Tiempo en busca de su zumo, y no hallar ni el movimiento ni el reposo ni el goteo del eco ni siquiera el bostezo eterno de Audrey frente a Tiffany’s desayunando resaca con diamantes hallar únicamente Tiempo. Sólo aquello que no existe coincide con sí mismo. El resto, desenfocado, entra en deuda con sus límites. Y ahora no hagas que equivalgan la muerte y la Nocilla 74 Desde una mística moderna, pides un día más y una voz igual a la tuya te dice No. Era éste el sentido de la vida, ir hacia la muerte en busca de tu propia analogía, hasta una mística posmoderna, hubiera preferido ser, antes que alma en tránsito que la muerte reducirá a química repetida, objeto repetido de supermercado, en un ready-made obtener el alma, pero en medio la mía tus dedos códigos de barras entre flashes de pasarela, 0 y 1 en un mismo estallido de huesos. 75 No se sufre en el momento. Dura un instante. No dura. Sufre quien vence al sufrimiento, el superviviente, el que ya no podrá dejar de hacerse la pregunta por qué sufrí, por qué escribo, por qué sufrí, el que escribe hacia delante y lee hacia atrás, el que sabe que el olvido todo lo iguala menos una cosa, el silencio en torno a ti tras construir su metáfora. 76 Yo desconozco la amistad: yo me consagro a un objeto, a una mujer, a una idea, a un líder. Yo desaparezco. Mientras tu corazón, piedra preciosa en vías de extinción, me llama, víscera de hipótesis que existen porque no podrán ser demostradas. 76.1 Me gusta obtener rendimiento de los objetos incoloros, inoloros, informes, inmóviles, insaboros, perfectos, que dejan los muertos, me resulta muy difícil explicar hasta qué punto exprimí la poética de su eficacia; valga un fui feliz. Ahora busco en ellos el componente que los desborda, la no-materia; valga un no soy tan feliz como un humano puede llegar a serlo [o algo así]. 77 Queda una esperanza. Decirlo tan claramente que conduzca al equívoco. Ahí voy. El poeta habla siempre desde la muerte para alumbrar el mundo de los vivos, o desde la vida, para alumbrar el mundo de los muertos. Finis terrae: un pie en la tierra, otro en el abismo. Pero ya escribir es escribir que todo está dicho y consumido en los manuales de supervivencia de otro siglo. El lenguaje, demente o aburrido, se ríe en el papel de todas sus representaciones [incluida ésta] ruina que saquea ruina: vida que habla de vida: muerte que habla de muerte: esterilidad: incesto: tautología [por mi parte, sólo me queda mostrar mi agradecimiento a los Payasos de la Tele por haber hecho posibles las tardes de domingo]. 78 Te gustaría [insólito lector que aceptaste tenderle este breve despiste a la muerte conmigo] que la vida fuese algo más que literatura, y la literatura el roto por el que mirar y aprender la doma de tinieblas en las noches insomnes. Te gustaría que Descartes jamás hubiera existido, y que la Teoría del Caos sirviera para traer la voz de quienes ha sido llevados por la Teoría del Tiempo. Te gustaría haber tenido tu noche en Bagdad robando esmeraldas, cambiarlas por aire cuando el escote del tiempo decida que ya es bastante y te sumerja. Te gustaría que las ciudades fueran tan invisibles como las contó Italo Calvino, tan extrañas como dos huevos fritos sobre fondo negro, tan hipnóticas como un Cuadrado Negro Sobre Fondo Blanco. Te gustaría a veces decir tu nombre y encontrarlo en otro, beber hasta caer en una niebla que te meta en el bolsillo el mensaje cursi de una extraña. Te gustaría que en las playas mediterráneas [las más solitarias y salvajes de la tierra] no faltara nunca la arena, ni tu cuerpo preguntándote, a quién maltratarás cuando Todo me lleve. Te gustaría jurar amor eterno a la protegida después de darle una paliza al chulo, y que resultara ser la reina destronada de un país tan despoblado y legendario como tú. Te gustaría que la nostalgia no fuese una droga, humo que el tiempo va lanzándote a los ojos mientras los poetas prenden hogueras y te dicen no esperes más, ven a probar mi narcótico. Te gustaría ser algo más que una luz demente en busca de la sombra en la que al fin reposar, y que Dios fuera algo más que una cosa hecha a imagen y semejanza de los hombres, y algo menos que ese conductor borracho jugando en tu tormenta con las olas. Te gustaría haber sido sobre todo el octavo pasajero en la utopía de los que te odiaron. Y qué esperabas [insólito lector], de qué te quejas, la melancolía es el precio que has de pagar por haber alimentado la egolatría de creerte un sístole especial en esta olla de latidos. Y qué temes, si ninguna cuenta se te va a pedir, si fuiste un argumento escrito por un aprendiz e interpretado casi siempre por alguien que no eras tú. Lates sugerido en el interior de un instante más allá del cual se acaba el tiempo; y no regresas. Lo dijo Celan ¿no lo recuerdas? una nada somos, floreciendo. Que echen humo las tarjetas. Va llegando la primavera a El Corte Inglés. 79 Escribiste y llegó tu noche, nieve de televisor, Píxel [Picture Element]: mínimo elemento de imagen que contiene toda la información visual posible, y sin embargo es una cifra, está vacío, hacia una metafísica del píxel tu cuerpo uso tópico sin espesor se acristala lo más curioso fue aprender a escribir, el viento en la calle y las galletas maría, la estafa de Lou Reed en Heroin, la de Hitchcock en Rebecca, la del Séptimo Día, el abrigo estrangulado a tu cintura, la mecánica de los pezones y otras fuerzas, nostalgia de un espacio interior; de ningún lado venían no porque de ningún lado venían sino porque a ningún lado iban, despedida y píxel, despedida y ser, despedida y cierre. 79.1 No es el precipicio lo que atrae a la piedra, sino la velocidad [que existe porque toma forma de piedra] 80 prepoema de preamor 80.1 poema de amor 80.1.1 postpoema de postamor veía un caserón desolado sin que el menor murmullo del pasado rozara sus imponentes muros, y en noches desprovistas de redundancias, caen sin obstáculo del gris al estómago aquellas canciones, «take me out tonight because I want to see people and I want to see lights», nunca podremos volver a Manderley, esto es seguro, pero algunas veces, en mis sueños, vuelvo allí, a los extraños días de mi vida que para mí empezaron en el sur de Francia. CARNE DE PÍXEL (2002) El espacio es todo él un solo espacio y el pensamiento es todo él un solo pensamiento, pero mi mente divide sus espacios en espacios de espacios y su pensamiento en pensamientos de pensamientos. ANDY WARHOL Quién hará esta música sonar, reflejo de la vanidad, cuando nadie quiera oírnos más. Falsos mitos sobre la piel y el cabello, LA COSTA BRAVA Píxel [Picture Element]: mínimo elemento de imagen que contiene toda la información visual posible. mi cara digitalizada en el parpadeo de la pantalla. A mitad de la calle un portal, 1 m2 de acera, 2 m3 de aire, escenario en el que el tiempo [emboscado en su abstracción sin masa ni peso] a fin de encarnarse saqueará el recuerdo. El tiempo a tu lado me mostró que no hay más razones para creer en la imposibilidad de la vida después de la muerte de las que hay para creerla igualmente imposible antes. Que la luz que a cada instante llega y te hace feliz y bien hecho son besos que lanzaste y en forma de verdad irrefutable [invisible] regresan [quién ve la luz]. Que la soledad del sprinter supera a la del corredor de fondo no porque llegue primero, sino porque imagina que llegará primero; pero, adónde. Sin habla, mirabas fijamente, apretabas mi mano, llorabas y llovía. Vi claro en ese instante [suma de instantes] por qué era tan bueno el verso tan malo que antes de morir recitó aquel Replicante, porque en tus ojos vi cosas que jamás ni yo ni nadie había visto, y todas se perderán [son simultáneas muerte y vida] como tus lágrimas en la lluvia. No hubo esta vez ningún pájaro blanco al vuelo para decirnos que algo muere en luz saturada para que otra cosa nazca en vacío [lo dijo Heinsenberg, lo dijo Heráclito, lo dijo Burgalat, lo dijeron tantos]. Sólo transparente opacidad. Ahora yo ya sólo aspiro a las enumeraciones. fuiste la llama de mi razón alucinada. No había espacio donde apoyar ya mis símbolos. Te amaré tanto, decías, y aprendimos la importancia del café del desayuno en tanto yo salía a robar para ti naranjas. Devoramos el mundo, esa bestia sordomuda, para hacernos menos sordos, menos mudos, siguiendo una ley por la cual buscando crear y destruir energía la encuentras en belleza transformada. Yo no sabía qué pasa cuando un péndulo se detiene porque jamás había visto uno detenido. Llorabas y llovía. Vi cosas en tus ojos que nadie había visto, me apretabas la mano buscando exprimir aquella fruta robada a mí; a nadie; transgénico zumo de lluvia en lágrimas. La verdad es a veces tan verdad que se vuelve 100 % cristalina, y así innombrable. lo más difícil de narrar siempre es el presente. Su instantaneidad no admite proyecciones, fantasías, desenfoques. Yo no sé si todo aquello existió porque no sé si existe. No sé si son ciertas tus manos [aunque sí sé que verosímiles] bajo la lluvia, y tus ojos como Polaroids [irrepetibles y mostrando más de lo previsto]. Llorabas. Llovía. Quién deja a quién si todos andamos diferidos de nosotros mismos, dejando atrás lo que entendemos para no entender lo insoportable: que cada cual es uno y además no numerable, que vendrán otras, que vendrán otros, que asusta pensar hasta qué punto todos somos intercambiables. Sé que no podré olvidar cuanto vi en tus ojos: el aire ionizado sobre nuestras cabezas, tus manos apretadas [no sé exactamente qué visión pretendían refutar]. Puede que fuera yo quien lloraba, puede que fuera en mí donde llovía. Puede que aún me estés besando, o que aquel martes [por decir un día] jamás haya existido. asusta pensar que el mundo construido por los amantes sea tan microscópico como larvado e incomunicable, pero es lo único que nos salva de otro susto de iguales dimensiones que es la muerte. La acera se hizo más verde porque otra luz apareció entre nosotros. Circunvalamos la ciudad en silencio. Llovía. Me invitaste a un Lucky, a fuego. No recuerdo si nos besamos. Te quise tanto y tan de verdad, te dije. Después, cada cual subió sus propias escaleras hacia leyes de la noche que convergen en alambres, insomnios; a mi pesar, literatura. Lo que vi en tus ojos corre el peligro de olvidarse porque ni nadie lo había visto ni nadie lo verá ya, y por destruir el silencio repetí mentalmente la cita de aquel libro de Valente que un día te dejé en el buzón de voz; hablaba de la única evidencia impalpable [de qué si no]; la noche que me dijiste de dónde vienes cuando regresé del WC y al contestar ya dormías. Soñabas un futuro necesariamente mejor. Después, ya digo, cada cual hacia sus propias escaleras: objeto de impredecible y doble dirección: microscopía que elaboran los amantes. Replicantes de un código de barras que jamás llegamos a vivir. Las galaxias crecen por procesos de fusión con otras galaxias, dice Günther Hasinger del Instituto Max Planck, Alemania. Las galaxias espirales, que muestran mucha formación estelar, se unen y dan lugar a una elíptica. Pero sus agujeros negros también se acaban fusionando, y se convierten en agujeros negros supermasivos que expulsan el gas de la recién formada galaxia elíptica. Ése parece ser el panorama. todo es superficie porque sólo existen trayectorias, porosas de sí, no vemos más que lo que hunden nuestros pies. Los alrededores: metáforas de esa soledad. Mirabas mi rostro durante horas en silencio cada noche. Todo es superficie. Hasta el amor carece de raíz: llorabas, llovía, esa agua sólo buscaba el riego que lo prendiera a la tierra, pero la tierra no existe, te digo. El agua se inventó para inocularnos la ficción de los campos de fuerzas, de la compañía, de un hilo de mensajes que vertical nos atraviesa. No así la luz, que se frena en la piel y pone en marcha el ansia del beso. Lo que vi en tus ojos jamás nadie lo vio, que fuimos la vida secreta del agua, y un juego de cuerpos para revalidar esa fuga sin cifra por la cual el ser humano es algo más que un trozo de saliva. Como todas las cosas que importan, nuestra alucinación no tuvo contemporáneos: un cristalizar sin agua, sin hilo argumental. Lo recuerdo. Hubo un día en que por primera vez vi pájaros desde tu ventana, creí que ellos también nos miraban, no lo entendí como el presagio de lo que vendría, sólo existen trayectorias y a ambos lados una luz que al fin se oxida entre dos manos apretadas en la despedida. Fuiste la llama de mi razón alucinada. El álgebra de mi transformación en animal: como ellos, a tu lado morí y no supe que había muerto [bendita seas], me volví inmortal. Divino tu cuerpo por catastrófico, radical, una línea de costa; por fractal. [en algún lugar lo tengo escrito], las artes surgieron con el único propósito de anular el peso, y de entre todas la más sublime es la pareja. Tu portal, la calle, la cuesta. Hay en esta clase de despedidas una extraña antiley acuática [llorabas, llovía] que sumerge al Principio de Arquímedes y lo invalida. Nada hay más melancólico que una lengua de lava ladera abajo, ebria de destrucción y directa a la atrofia, sin embargo. Me sujetabas muy fuerte la mano, sin habla mirabas fijamente, la goma recogía tu pelo en otro territorio menos experimental, más conocido, mapa de cuerpos planos que copulan en la noche [qué hermética paradoja, qué miedo o soledad los maneja]. Ya no hay tu rostro porque no hay centro, no hay centro porque no hay fin, no hay fin porque fin es una palabra que ahora mismo no comprendo. Pesaba sobre tu cuerpo y el mío la terrible certeza de llegar siempre tarde a nosotros mismos: por eso nos los prestamos un día [y todo cuanto eso arrastra]. Después, las flores, los hoteles, las cartas, arquitectura de domingo extasiados en edificios feos de verano y costa, como decía aquella canción de Paraíso, hasta que circunvalamos la ciudad y me invitaste a un Lucky, a fuego, una noche de martes por primera vez sin objetivo, sin rumbo, rumbo era una palabra extraña, estorbaba, como el apéndice estorba al intestino, que lo atrofia, o la solución a la incógnita, que la deslía, hasta que llegamos a tu calle, llorabas, llovía, me cogiste fuerte mi mano, descubrimos sin palabras otra certeza: que ya nunca llegaríamos tarde el uno al otro, que cualquier próximo día podría esperar a ser el último y, sin embargo, había que elegir éste para decir adiós. desconocías el Principio de Mínima Acción por el cual la luz [todo en general] busca el camino más rápido para viajar entre dos puntos. Circunvalamos la ciudad contradiciéndolo cuanto pudimos. Partíamos del fin; en realidad no nos movimos. Pasamos por delante de unas excavaciones [fibra óptica, cableado, comunicaciones Siglo21], e hice una broma acerca de aquella mujer y aquel hombre que encontraron abrazados en la excavación de Pompeya. La escena salía en Viaje a Italia: los descubrieron mientras filmaban. Ingrid Bergman también entonces se había echado a llorar. Partir de un recuerdo equivale a partir del fin, los recuerdos se construyen para el último día aunque nos engañe su gen de pasado. En realidad, no nos movimos. Me invitaste a un Lucky [frase entre tus dedos], y en esa cinética apariencia encontramos el exceso, la belleza para alcanzar lo que al llegar al fin nos convirtió en algo más que una frase para el fin, algo más que una ecografía de riñón, que un isótopo, un punto de luz que no desapareció porque nunca partió. El camino infinito de verdad más corto. en aquel hotel de Capri te vi como realmente eras: sagrada, violenta, promiscua, dulce, ingenua, en resumen A. H, frente a Tiffany’s desayunando resaca con diamantes. Pero diga lo que diga Oriente, el mal existe, se da en cierta forma de cohabitar contrarios. Nos hicimos una foto desnudos en el espejo, que por alguna ley física no salió. Exceso de perfección, capilaridad. Se anulan los símbolos, se descomponen los cuerpos, paradoja que invalida y funda el miedo. Estabas tan entera con aquellas botas de punta; tan propiamente distante en la Casa Malaparte. Hiciste muchas fotos al letrero Circunvesubiana, cinturón de ferrocarril que rodeaba al Vesubio, su rumor humeaba: bestia cansada que circunvalamos también en silencio aquel último martes en otra ciudad lejana sin centro ni criterio. Sin embargo, no se sabe aún si las fusiones de galaxias y agujeros negros son propias de una etapa concreta de la evolución del universo. Puede que fueran más abundantes en el pasado, pero la propia Vía Láctea se unirá a la de Andrómeda dentro de unos pocos miles de años. Y será un proceso desigual. llegó cada cual con su pasado [lo que equivale a decir futuro programado]. Sin que lo supieras, en cada hotel de Nápoles robaba papel higiénico, una muestra, digamos, para al regresar escanearlo y ver manar en la pantalla del PC el azar ordenado en un surtido de puntos negros sobre blanco, mapa de píxeles en los que leer una cifra, un vacío que, siendo profano, en cierto modo es sagrado, píxeles garantes de aquel silencio que la alquimia buscaba en los objetos y yo busqué en ti [tus manos de joven modelo retirada, tu lengua muda en el beso]. Al escaneo surgieron mapas, figuras, cosas, reflejos de lo que vendría y que nunca te enseñé, dos Replicantes en busca de una vida más convencional, oxígeno de mortal que no los asfixiara. A este escaneado lo llamaré pixelado n.° 1 [yo ya sólo aspiro [lo advertí] a las enumeraciones]. circunvalamos la ciudad en silencio, aunque era mayo llovía. O frío. Es difícil entender qué valor se adensa en un beso cuando es todos los besos y al mismo tiempo la única cifra, qué peso específico comprime pero revalida cierta fe [por decir algo] en tu línea de universo cuando un hombre y una mujer toman la decisión de circunvalar una ciudad en silencio. Hay algo en el silencio que llama al frío; no así al calor, que agita sin romper la barrera del sonido y amplifica las palabras, sobre todo cuando se unen los cuerpos de quienes se aman. Después te quedabas muda todas las noches durante horas mirándome. Qué clase de muerto o frío era yo ya entonces, te digo. Quiero pensar que no veías en mí este final de zapatos helados, de barcos detenidos que vimos al llegar a la línea de costa, de bobinas interminables de fibra óptica ciega aún o durmiendo. Pero tampoco veías ese big bang que [lo dicen los cosmólogos] era espuma cuántica, caos de masas solitarias cegadas por la utopía de un futuro Universo perfecto [después se desvió para dar lugar a la Tierra, al cero cósmico, al hombre y su residuo de amor]. Quiero pensar que era tu piel tan suave que yo no la sentía. Sólo eso. al llegar a casa pusiste el CD de Organ y, vestida aún de fiesta, al salir del baño dejaste la sortija de brillantes y las lentillas sobre la mesa desierta [de la cocina también desierta]. Símbolos que no puedo explicar. Me sobrepasan. Podría llamarlos pixelado n.° 2, pero aquella noche devino puramente analógica, y la más bella analogía fue la contraída entre aquellos dos objetos que abandonaste y los dos horizontes de tu cuerpo: el vivo y el muerto. Así hasta el amanecer trabajó tu sexo. huyen los pájaros de las cosas curvas, de las circunvalaciones, de los programas bien configurados. Está en las virtudes del pájaro solitario. Una heladería en el centro de Sorrento, me escribiste una frase dudosa con mi diccionario de italiano para turistas. No hay ornamento ni retórica donde manda la luz, por artificio que ésta parezca. Robé la cucharilla, un diseño antiguo nunca visto, te dije. La agitación de tu pelo en el Spider descapotable, me dije. Escribiste muchas postales con un punta de 0,5 mm y letra casi de imprenta, ornamento retórico de 2.a especie se le llama a eso en Teoría del Diseño. Bostezaba entretanto. Me llevé el papel higiénico y al escaneo surgió una línea moteada en negro, sucesión de acontecimientos idénticos, la página llena de puntos suspensivos que Breton tituló El Paseante o [lo llamaré pixelado n.° 3], tu respiración al correr tras esa forma de desaparición a la que llamamos Mundo. Hasta hace 5 años, los agujeros negros eran poco más que una construcción teórica, una hipótesis para observaciones que no se explicaban de otra manera. Pero ahora, por primera vez, vemos cómo el espacio-tiempo se curva y rota en torno a un agujero negro. la primera vez que estuvimos a solas eras una mujer detenida, pero no en el espacio, no en el tiempo, sino en otra cosa más compleja [que no complicada], en una de esas imágenes atravesadas por haces ¿de lejía? ¿de miedo?, por mujeres que has amado, por todas las ciudades que has circunvalado, por la música que se nos roba en la infancia y no vuelve, salvo como vuelve en ruido lo perdido, por el primer beso que se recuerda, por el último que olvidas, por la materia prima de la soledad, metafísica del todo absurda, por las flores que con el tiempo te llevaría al trabajo y despuntarían al calor del PC [quién lo diría, sudor de circuitería], por la definición de cuerpo a secas: conglomerado de conductos o flores según se carezca o no de amor, por el sexo que en una habitación de Italia aún nos faltaba por romper [pasada la frontera, el cabello pierde la memoria], por el mapa en tus manos de joven modelo retirada el primer día, tu abandono en el sofá, tu lengua de agua. Así detenida te fuiste haciendo agua que corrió. Yo no sé si fue lo mismo que vi en tus ojos cuando al final llorabas y llovía. circunvalamos la ciudad. Aunque ya era mayo, hacía frío y llovía. Que el mundo es un lugar horrible, escribió Sabato en El Túnel, es una verdad que no necesita demostración. Entonces, me digo, por qué persistimos en demostrarlo. Lo llamaré pixelado n.° 4. por mucho que se circunvale, la ciudad inventa límites, y llegamos al mar. Espeso, carnoso: al borde de cualquier forma. Mareo que precipita al observador [estábamos tan enteros, tan sólidos, tan para un final], mar en tu sexo que era víscera y flor en el beso. Y, sin embargo, vi uno de esos mares ascéticos, paisaje digital, sin referencias, ecografía de riñón, de hígado, antesala del feto y de la vida que imaginamos, pero no tuvimos. Fuiste toda la carne que unas manos pueden llegar a abarcar [y, sin embargo, un segundo, un rayo indefinido, un salto cuántico]. a las personas les ocurre a veces lo que a la memoria, mutan en personajes descarnados, meros vectores de ideas. Te voy a cuidar tanto, decías. Drogarse, leer novelas, follar: hábitos de mediocres, te decía. Hay algo más fuerte que la carne, el impulso suicida del aliento cuando toma aire; el impulso homicida cuando se espira. Jadeabas; no sé a cual te referías. Lo alucinante en la anfetamina no es tomarla sino observar el arco de medio punto que describe su curvatura [es condición de lo bien hecho atravesar los siglos sin rozamiento], pero esto no basta con decirlo, hay que entenderlo. A veces cuesta toda una vida, lo llamaré pixelado n.° 5. circunvalar una ciudad empapada, meditando aquel martes sin meditar nada; cara boquiabierta; pide masa. Buscan quienes se aman un final patético, la apariencia de un mal en el que consolarse, Ingrid Bergman llorando ante una mujer y un hombre que la muerte hace siglos sorprendió abrazados. Estéril muerte entre la lava; lo que hoy los hace útiles, precisos. Estabas tan bella, tan entera con tus botas de punta en aquel viaje, la mujer más exacta y occidental que jamás había visto, luz dominada entre tus manos, frases: tiralíneas en tus labios, alucinado equilibrio al especiar el pescado. Tan entera con tus botas de punta en aquel viaje, cuando aún eras sólida [pero no lava], cuando, como en las canciones de Low, era tu fuerza una antigravedad, una extravagancia inoperante, un CD mil veces regrabado. Son los primeros instrumentos capaces de detectar el tipo de radiación que emite la materia cuando cae hacia un agujero negro. Es una materia muy caliente, y emite básicamente su «último grito» en forma de rayos X. fortalecida en iones el agua de tus ojos, en nubes bajas. La Casa Malaparte, colmillo de otro horizonte, habita sólo en sus propias fotografías. También el glamour que envuelve a tus botas de punta vive dentro de tus botas de punta; y no hablo de los pies; hablo del veneno. He leído que el veneno es el veneno, pero el veneno adulterado qué es. Lo llamaré pixelado n.° 6. tú y yo nunca llegamos a discutir de estética, lo único que nos unía. Lo único porque estética y ética son lo mismo, una pose ante el mundo. Discutimos y mucho de esas otras visiones en apariencia simples, como abrazarte por detrás para besarte y ver pájaros desde tu ventana. Quisimos interpretarlos, interrogar la honestidad de la naturaleza, sin saber que tal cosa no existe, que todo es artificio. Hasta que mi mano telarañándose más abajo de tu cintura. Cerrabas los ojos [bendita seas]. Yo con tu Lucky hacía un agujero en un mapa. yo he ganado y perdido muchas horas mirando el ascenso vertical de las burbujas del agua con gas en un vaso. Una velocidad constante que, según cierto principio de relatividad, equivale a decir nula. Un ascender para hundirse en la atmósfera [que según San Juan de la Cruz equivale a decir tierra]. La mano sin óxido en la que me sumerjo. Y me la das sabiendo que no hay futuro en el fondo de los vasos, salvo para organismos simples, unicelulares, fango que queda tras la caída de un cosmos, el hueco que deja su propia trayectoria. No hay célula más simple que el beso aunque su fuerza invalide las distancias y el espacio [o la luz [que es el espacio]], aunque todo aquello se corrompa ahora en este ascenso de burbujas vertical y nulo, en esta sombra de la luz que es decir más luz, esta semblanza del silencio, este moteado cuántico en la pantalla del cual no se puede hablar y hay que callar como dijo el maestro en el Punto 7 y al que llamaré [es natural] pixelado n.° 7. No es que los actuales telescopios de rayos X vean los agujeros negros en sí. Ni siquiera la luz puede escapar a la fuerza gravitatoria de estos objetos que, por tanto, son invisibles. Lo que se observa con rayos X es la materia que está siendo atraída hacia los agujeros negros, hasta una distancia muy próxima al llamado «horizonte de sucesos» (el punto de no retorno de la materia que cae) sé que tú y yo nunca llegamos hasta el fondo, que no tocamos el fango del verdadero contacto, esa intransferible complicidad producto del espejismo llamado pareja. Nuestro espejismo se quedó en superficie, espejo, flores que nadie decapita: mueren confiadas en un paisaje que ya no las necesita y, como tú en mí y yo en ti, se descubren al poco tiempo por otras intercambiables. Lo que hay. Asusta pensarlo. Lo dijo Bataille [aunque de otra manera]: hay en toda cultura una parte maldita, un excedente intercambiable, condenado a ser dilapidado hasta el manar de su esencia, y esto es lo que precisamente nos hace irracionales, humanos, lo que fuimos, eternos objetos de supermercado [ahora recuerdo aquella estación de servicio]. [no es descabellado], se podría suponer que lo que no llegamos a vivir resultó del todo prescindible. Nadar en verano, cambiar de coche, comentar un poema de Burroughs, proyectar un hijo, pasar juntos un constipado. Pero yo me adhiero a lo que decía Brines: no desdeñes los placeres vulgares, tienes la edad justa para saber que se corresponden exactamente con la vida [o algo así]. hay una fotografía que no se borra. A mi derecha una niña muy mona con diadema. A mi izquierda un niño con camisa de cuadros hasta la nuez. Yo ante una tarta que soplar [cuento 8 velas], boquiabierto, demasiado exacto como para inducir una semblanza, circunvalando una espera, una finitud, mi esguince de luz. recordar un hecho real dentro de un sueño equivale a dotarlo aún de más realidad: dos límites lo acotan: anochece y amanece. El abrazo mientras dormías para llevar tú mi mano hacia tu pecho con tibia [no sé cómo expresarlo] ensoñación no soporta tal exceso de realidad y en mitad de la noche me despierto. También se sabe hoy que los agujeros negros iluminan el universo en mayor proporción de lo estimado. hay algo en el píxel de carnal y abstracto, cuadriculada superficie que contiene toda la información visual posible, agota su sentido, y sin embargo es una cifra, está vacío. Hay en el píxel una metafísica. Origen, piel acristalada, proteico paisaje, el viajero que llegando a Región. Más tarde cada cual fue concibiendo su sembrado de rosas cúbicas, cubículo, cubicaje [como quieras llamarlo]. Ganó tu sexo en nitidez. Fracasó en particular la carne de las rectas para llegar a lo único que son, y = ax + b; letras. El resto, arrebato de lo que no existe: ficción: pura espectroscopia. que el tiempo pasa y nos vamos descomponiendo, es algo que está muy claro. Que no sabemos qué es eso que se nos descompone, también. Que el hecho de ir hacia una muerte inmortal después de la muerte nos convierte ahora en zombis, en vivientes muertos, clarísimo. Pero que el beso sea una célula elaborada necesariamente en silencio, es un hecho que, lo admito, no comprendo. (a) He encontrado una nueva forma de felicidad que está también en el equilibrio del funambulista [en el propio equilibrio], en el instante en que suspende la visión el parpadeo, en el pájaro que aletea para permanecer quieto, o en el punto en que se cruzan dos cartas con mensajes probablemente contrarios [pero hay que continuar, te dije, hay que continuar], en el punto en el que la levedad iguala al peso: cuando no siento ni hastío ni hambre y es como si desapareciese el cuerpo, (b) A veces llegué a pensar que en algún futuro [las fotos son recién nacidos que no crecen] seríamos como Leonard Cohen y Susan en esa foto que tanto mirábamos de Leonard Cohen y Susan: incorruptibles, unicelulares, glamour químicamente puro, envidiados, elegantes: un nuevo estado [6.o] de la materia. (a ∩ b) No sé cuál de los dos estados es metáfora del otro, si la metáfora se inventó para dar vida a todo lo mal muerto y una vez resucitado aniquilarlo para siempre. En esa emboscada se resume todo este ADN postpoético. pone en marcha el amor una genética imparable, una fuerza que lo derriba todo, incluso teorías sólidamente comprobadas [no hay enemigo más fácil de vencer que el perfectamente dibujado]. Es por eso por lo que los naturalmente esclavos buscamos amos muy visibles, omnipotentes: vulnerables. Rodear aquel martes la ciudad era entrar en un nuevo estado [6.o] de la materia. Después uno subió y otro bajó [elige tú] una misma escalera: hacia los amaneceres de finales de noche que te configuran en cero para crear el vacío; hacia los amaneceres de principio de día que le estrechan la cintura al cero para despertarte infinito. Los telescopios espaciales de rayos X han demostrado, por ejemplo, que todas las galaxias tienen un agujero negro en su centro. siendo sincero, no sé qué significa la palabra lluvia, ni la palabra ojos, ni perder ni ver, y aún menos frases como vi cosas en tus ojos que ni yo ni nadie había visto, y todas se perderán como tus lágrimas en la lluvia. Sólo sé que entre tus brazos fui una estrella mundial [bendita seas], y que tu arruga en este mapa es el equilibrio de un pájaro solitario que se derrumba [como siempre la belleza] en el cénit de su vuelo [bendita seas]2. Me mirabas cada noche muchas horas en silencio, células de sonido revuelto, siento escalofríos cuando veo tu cuerpo joven y que tu alma ya no está en su lugar, nos cantaba Antonio Vega [bendita seas]n en una radio que le compramos a un chino, hasta que el eco mutó en ceniza y alguien en las ondas dijo basta. comprobar que eras más bella [hallazgo inesperado] desnuda que vestida, y tu ropa interior un horizonte de sucesos, lugar cuyo radical significado conocen muy bien los cosmólogos [ahora no me extenderé; sólo diré que ya no somos víctimas de lo que brilla incomprensible en la esquina del cronómetro, en la velocidad de la luz]. para mí siempre fue un misterio el origen de tu ropa interior, de su perfecta cabida en tu cuerpo. Inversa es la lógica de quien descubre una tierra analógica pero real como la de un espejo. Pero si te fijas, la imagen del espejo no responde exactamente a la real, el espejo posee una pátina que aunque invisible la oscurece, como si algo de materia se perdiese en el trayecto, un residuo que si lo juntaras verías lo que pierde aquel que te mira; mejor dicho, quien en tu imagen desaparece; o, aún mejor, quien en ti ya ha desaparecido. la radio, una canción de The Smiths que ya entonces era vieja, take me out tonight because I want to see people and I want to see lights, en el descapotable hacia donde el Sol foguea el horizonte [bien podría ser un cartón-piedra de Las Vegas, la Ciénaga de Manganelli, o tierra bajo tierra]. Como en Encadenados, me abrazas. Perdida en un bosque de resacas más ficticias que reales, me encontraste en un claro. Te detuviste a recordar cómo era la luz, su porqué, quién la creó [dijiste que yo]. Ya tus ojos eran brújulas orientadas verticalmente hacia arriba; pero el cielo no tiene horizonte, pensé, salvo ese gélido eco que nos llega del big bang llamado radiación de fondo. La memoria no está en la maquinaria, sino en la grasa de los relojes [te pones el sostén derecho]. Pero el tiempo no es el mal, sino una crónica obsesión padecida por las cosas que no las deja definirse. Ambos sabíamos que la longitud de una carretera en algún mapa [sólo hay que buscarlo] equivale a la combustión de un cigarro, que las películas son mentira, y el horizonte el cable tenso contra el que, ignorante, aceleras. Me besas, me abrazas, ingenua tarareas con la radio, to die by your side, such a heavenly way to die. De todas formas, el que a cada galaxia le corresponda un agujero negro ya se venía sospechando. es cierto, había mucha noche, lluvia, una mujer, etc., pero en realidad únicamente hablo de mí, porque es lo único que tengo. No tengo distancia. Sólo esta proximidad tan nula que por fortuna invalida cualquier juicio moral. Odiábamos la moral. Circunvalamos la ciudad. Ionizado y oscuro el cielo, me invitaste a un Lucky [estrella entre tus dedos]. En un radio de 2.000 km alrededor de la Tierra hay más de 2 millones de quilos de chatarra, decía el periódico: satélites, cohetes, artefactos desintegrados en su circunvalar. Fríos. Silenciosos. Amorales [otra moral]. La realidad es sus símbolos [y no hay más], y, sin embargo, no podemos estar simultáneamente a ambos lados del radio de la Tierra. sin fatiga, caminas, circunvalas la ciudad; adormecidos los detalles. Existe un punto en el que la tangente corta a la circunferencia; siempre está ahí, o quiere desaparecer [que es lo mismo]. Lo dijo Canetti, no merece la pena desear venganza, se cumplirá, se cumple automáticamente por un principio de reversibilidad que hay en las cosas. Entiéndelo. nada posee una finalidad, nada agota su fuego, porque no hay dirección donde no hay gravedad. Porque adentro todo es nada. Y adentro es afuera. Y afuera no existe. Hasta el texto se escribe a sí mismo [compón tú ahora el símil con el camino que trazas, con esa circuitería entre metafísica y física que fue tu cuerpo en mi abrazo]. Cuanto existe debió de haber resonado antes en el silencio, hasta el beso se empapa en la esponja de ese eco [cristalino, asexuado] que sin materia se propaga. Parte la palabra del silencio para, extrañamente, buscar el silencio. Lo encuentra cuando muere, cuando se fibrosan palabras como lluvia, azul o pájaro en la Lluvia, en el Azul o en el Pájaro. [no sólo en vertical] hay otra forma de ver las cosas. En ocasiones la lluvia en toda su extensión es una gasa que no cae, únicamente cubre, cuando ya no alfilerea, cuando lo que duele es tan amplio que no se alcanza a ver su curvatura, cuando ese instante es una de esas urbanizaciones reticuladas, cenicientas, crecidas en un desierto de Arizona al servicio de una carretera por la que ya nadie pasa. Pero ahora tú. Yo digo que llorabas y llovía porque lo vi en tus ojos. Pero no lo vi. Yo digo que circunvalamos la ciudad porque me pareció su curvatura inabarcable, porque se busca lo que no se tiene para destruirlo, porque al llegar al puerto vimos barcos en los que imaginé que nos íbamos, porque el aire pesaba ionizado en contrarios, porque nunca los cables de fibra óptica fueron más fibra y menos óptica, porque nunca una zanja fue más netamente zanja, más víscera, menos matemática. Pero, sobre todo, porque nunca fueron materia más equivalente la lluvia y la lava [también Ingrid Bergman se había echado a llorar cuando los encontraron]. pasa un camión, compongo un haikú: cae un hombre por la ventana, lógi- camente muere detenida y sola, no existe agua que corra, porque su paisaje siempre fue más agua. También tú te prolongas hasta donde tu mirada alcanza; nada se opone. Lo veo porque ya estoy afuera. Es hermoso contemplar cómo hasta el silencio se desentiende del silencio y hay que empezar a escribir palabras en vacío, 1 portal, 1 m2 de acera, 2 m3 de aire, narcótica matemática, sin axioma, transformar tu buhardilla en otras coordenadas [por ejemplo, Los Ángeles], poner un CD de Dominique A, imprimir una foto en la que salgan flores que crecen al calor de un PC. No pasaron tan rápido el otoño y el invierno, más bien aún giran el uno en torno al otro, ciegos, sin que nada se les oponga. [Esto me recuerda a otra cosa, pero no sé a qué.] circunvalamos la ciudad en silencio, me invitaste a un Lucky [escala real entre tus dedos], resulta fácil medir lo imposible, sólo hay que permanecer en silencio, esencia del instrumento más antiguo del mundo, que viene a ser el sueño nocturno. Pero cómo medir lo posible, te digo, experta en el arte más antiguo del mundo, aquel que dentro del perímetro de los platos de porcelana se consume a medida que se representa, enmudecer ante ese lenguaje hecho de alimentos resucitados, donde lo abstracto se organiza en el perímetro de los platos [y todos los sentidos barajabas en el centro]. Tú nunca hiciste comida muerta. una demostración de que la Tierra no es redonda es que cavando un hueco nunca llegas al otro lado; ardes antes en el centro. Tampoco todo esto posee una antípoda; se extingue el hilo de la tinta antes de alcanzar su contrario. Pero hilo, cuanto más profundo, más frío: yendo hacia el incendio de tu cuerpo, no hace más que regresar al mío. A la gangrena. Al tejido congelado que da argumento a estas horas reflectantes. nos gustaba ver películas juntos, y llorar de risa en los finales cursis, nunca en los amargos, fingir que sabíamos lo suficiente de estética y vida como para distinguir lo bueno de lo malo. Al final no fue así, tú llorabas y llovía, y era francamente malo y amargo. Aprender a gestionar la fantasía de un solo golpe. Pero el resultado más impactante que se constata es el papel clave de los agujeros negros en la construcción del universo. El escenario global que se dibuja es que las primeras estrellas que se formaron, cuando el universo era muy joven, eran muy masivas, y por eso murieron muy rápidamente. el misterio más profundo está en la materia. Compraste unas postales, sencillas, vulgares, escribiste lo que se escribe en tal espacio programado, en torno a nosotros unas mujeres venían con la compra, turistas manoseaban chatarra, llegaba el barco Nápoles-Capri cargado de cuerpos sin sexo, te saqué una foto [botas de punta, gafas, Saimaza Mezcla], te miraba. El camarero arrancó la cuenta de la caja registradora, aún debes de tenerla, verdadero poema [lo llamaré pixelado n.° 0]: el misterio más profundo está en la materia. metálicos en un jardín botánico, extraños a ese paquete de luz desleída por ambos [no venía del horizonte], cada vez más lejos de esa única tangente que es al fin arena en un colchón o epidermis vacía, así, venía diciendo, metálicos en un jardín botánico, circunvalamos una elipse de 2 centros. Sólo eso. 2 centros. CRÉDITOS Y AGRADECIMIENTOS Las partes en verso son diferentes extractos del artículo Los agujeros Negros, Constructores Del Cosmos, originalmente en prosa, editado por el diario El País el 2 de noviembre del 2005, firmado por Mónica Salomé. De las citas que encabezan el texto, la de Andy Warhol pertenece a su libro, Mi filosofía de A a B y de B a A (Tusquets Editores), y la cita de La Costa Brava pertenece a su LP Llamadas perdidas (Mushroom Pillow, 2004). El resto de las citas insertadas en el texto (poemas, novelas o canciones), son más o menos de memoria. Siento los errores que pudiera haber cometido. Supongo que, como decía el gran Michi Panero, lo que importa al final es la idea. Quiero agradecer al jurado del XXXIV Premio de Poesía Ciudad de Burgos haber visto en este libro motivos suficientes para hacerlo merecedor del premio. También a cuantos han apoyado desde el principio mis propuestas, por descabelladas que fueran. Por lo demás, la presencia de un barco varado en una estepa al dar una curva sigue siendo la peor de las pesadillas. DEDICATORIA A la cocina del 1.° A del n.° 4 de la calle Estudio General, Palma de Mallorca, lugar en el que escribí este libro. ANTIBIÓTICO (2005) Pero tus ojos proclaman que todo es superficie. La superficie es lo que hay allí y sólo puede existir lo que hay allí. JOHN ASHBERY, Autorretrato en espejo convexo la esperanza cóncava que se forma al mear sobre nieve, mapa: genoma y casete de territorio, el cuerpo: fundir pistas, alterar pistas, vemos en el alma cristal, materia pulida, pero es rugosa, en sus crestas radiaba incandescente el espectro de lo que vendría, los valles tampoco eres tú, un átomo emite un electrón y reordena el mundo [repetimos] un átomo emite un electrón y reordena el mundo, aunque hay flashes y humus allí abajo los acordes están hace tiempo repartidos, pasa un coche sin luces, se lleva por delante todo cuanto le es irreversible: su propia luz, la mujer que cruza de acera, una bolsa de basura que emite sus residuos y reordena el mundo, en el mismo centro de masas de tu edad no hay masa, luz que avanza a hachazos hasta la bombilla desnuda del dormitorio [agua, espacios blandos], toda bombilla es polvo de orina, incolora pupila, me apago, y una ninfa susurra desde el televisor, tranquilos, vengo del futuro para traeros algo mejor, y sin embargo faltan muescas en mi sistema métrico decimal, encontraste un papel con grasa del primer bistec de la Creación, latas de Fanta Free aplastadas, el envoltorio de unos Panini de Knorr que se venden a pares por si se vive a pares [contienes la risa], residuos de un espacio tomado por la sordomuda expansión de las costumbres, una tecla muy rara que tiene mi teléfono concentra todas las letras en ceniza [también las no escritas], y fresas y planetas copiados para un jersey tricotado, tira del hilo, una luna llena de quimioterapia, qué cubo de hielo en un desierto hubiera sido tu nariz operada, damos vueltas a la Tierra en espiral para pensar que todavía es plana, que el Equipo-A y Jorge Luis Borges no son la misma cosa, que el verano es el aparato cazamosquitos en su enchufe: luz roja vigila cada noche el Universo por ti, pero tarde o temprano amanece, el sol, tabulado en la persiana indica que su verso es siempre el mismo verso, y que además está vacío, suspensivos de luz, pero, ¿qué luz?, un átomo emite un fotón y oscurece el mundo, colgabas la ropa y pasó una bandada de pájaros, su intención era reordenar el horizonte, los alambres clarean folios en vez de ropa [¿alguien recuerda una terraza?] en cada vestido vacío se observa un mundo previo, la ilusión de un fémur hecho trizas, y cayó nuestro día como una isla que se hunde sin generar ruido ni olas, PROYECTO: se trata de sustituir cada una de las paredes de tu habitación por una fotografía a escala real de las paredes de esa misma habitación, matar la escala real que hay en ti, lo que se nos aparece de repente no es que antes no estuviera ahí, sino que estaba «apagado»: en alguna parte del mundo un interruptor estaba en posición OFF. Ese interruptor es a veces un simple parpadeo; en otras ocasiones, un complejo proceso que mueve montañas de árboles de plástico, verde como el cielo de escay del sofá donde nos acoplábamos, la maniquí me ofrece su cuerpo de plástico cada vez que cojo el bolígrafo de plástico que un día fue maniquí y plástico, y escribo, mi cerebro: anfiteatro de ventrílocuos dispuestos a condenarte a lunas de ácido acetilsalicílico, el 50 % de cualquier canción es silencio, aún no se entiende cómo el tiempo sepulta ciudades para igualarlas, para que tengan como único ser vivo el vector de fuerza gravitatoria, F = GMm/r2, que tira de los fósiles hacia el centro de la Tierra, esa m es la que no soporto, mi masa, efervescente de pies a cabeza, vertical sin saber que la lógica del mundo es la capacidad de los pulmones, las paredes de una caja, nada, objetos inertes del Desguace Universal, los trompetazos de Miles Davis, nostalgia de la oreja de Niki Lauda, ir a grabar el sonido de lugares que no existen [plaza San Marcos: Finisterre: Louvre: las KIO: el CERN: Pompeya: tu cavidad estomacal], como quien recoge agua en un frasco transparente, y desaparece, un anzuelo recita en su vértice el cielo de sus paladares, danza aérea de moléculas, tibia aún la carne, pasa una ambulancia, escribo delete, otra vez, delete, nunca sabremos dónde termina la sangre y comienza la lejía, un pájaro asciende en espiral sobre los tejados, dibuja un cono que recuerda al de un helado de trufa, esas que buscan perros y cerdos adiestrados, lo sé porque su pico es negro, los ojos, dos transparencias intactas, como si todo planeta tuviera su gemelo en alguna parte, o un tren, se borran ventanillas, son píxeles sin cifra, entreveo al revisor soñado tickets de acero, el cosmos de saliva que escupe el maquinista es arrastrado al furgón de cola, entra donde un niño de 7 años quiere soplar 8 velas, no escribo nada, pasa otro AVE, no escribo nada, también veo un asunto de impagos al otro lado de la vía, la erizada soledad del cepillo en un tocador de señoras, dudo si meter a Wittgenstein o a Los Planetas en un concierto de ABBA, los hechos tienen forma lógica a pesar de la cadena desoxirribonucleica que te asfixia en el instante en que atraviesas el útero de la madre, cuando todo se acabe y nadie nos recuerde pensaremos el tiempo como una fractura en el campo magnético terrestre, nadie atrae a nadie, no brilla el mapamundi en tus ojos si el Mundo lo creó Dios copiándose a sí mismo, seguro que nos vemos en cualquier fiesta, tus manos el reverso de una hoja en blanco y en su centro el signo conjunto vacío: redundancia en DIN-A4, hay dos tipos de objetos, aquellos que están condenados a perder su contenido, por ejemplo, un brik de leche, y aquellos otros en los que una pérdida de esa clase supone un accidente, por ejemplo, el disco duro de un ordenador. En los primeros sus códigos de barras tienden a estar tristes; en los segundos, depende del temperamento intrínseco al sistema, el cadáver de Kurt Cobain: lo que más extrañó a los investigadores fue hallar una Barbie en miniatura en su estómago que llevaba un vestido de Jackie Kennedy [por lo demás, desvió la investigación el hecho de que los dientes del fallecido fueran rectangulares y de leche], mi hermana nos comenta que durante mucho tiempo hubo un olor en la ciudad a carne y plástico quemados, la Cocacola que abrí ayer tiene ya un dulzor adhesivo, me asomo a la ventana que da a la calle Franklin, aún hay luz, se constata que un enchufe es más rápido que una palabra, tu intestino: Futurama, pasa una ambulancia , escribo delete, otra vez, delete, nunca sabremos dónde termina la sangre y comienza la lejía, hasta ahora sólo hemos considerado sistemas poéticos muy sencillos, como el Desplazamiento de Bernoulli o la Transformación del Panadero. El tiempo entra de forma continua. Ahora abordaremos los sistemas poéticos inestables en los que el tiempo se presenta de forma discontinua. [Es la situación de la poética cuántica]. ¿Cómo se define el caos para estos sistemas?: Hay algo en los mapas [versos] que les lleva a la desaparición de las trayectorias. Tomaremos esta propiedad como la definición misma del caos. Que es la versificación postpoética del texto: [Hasta ahora sólo hemos considerado sistemas caóticos muy sencillos, como el Desplazamiento de Bernoulli o la Transformación del Panadero. El tiempo entra de forma discontinua. Ahora abordaremos los sistemas inestables, en los que el tiempo se presenta de forma continua. Es la situación de la dinámica cuántica. ¿Cómo se define el caos para estos sistemas?: Hay algo en los mapas que les lleva a la desaparición de las trayectorias. Tomaremos esta propiedad como la definición misma del caos.] (Ilya Prigogine, Las Leyes del Caos), el Mundo se hizo hielo, de modo que pesaba menos, comienzo de nuevo: la esperanza cóncava que se forma al mear sobre nieve, desayunas, un mugido de vaca rompe el telo de nieve, la miga de croissant sobre papel de estraza multiplica por 10 su brillo en un cerco de grasa, velocidad insoportable para el ojo, también el tiempo a tu lado devoró palabras a cámara rápida, cámaras de seguridad mastican noches de oficinas, estadios de fútbol a balón parado, silbatos que no mueven nada, hay un vertedero de imágenes vacías más allá del desierto, unidas dibujarían una confusión de cuerpos sin órganos internos algún día será el mundo, no los hombres, quien padezca alzhéimer, comenzará el big bang de nuevo, tú y yo conectando uno a uno los cables de la silla eléctrica, el despertador radia impactos, el cielo no cuaja, aún es una hipótesis sin idea, respiras a mi lado sin saber nada de mis ojos en blanco y negro, te toco, recuerdo el verso de un amigo: Destilo un pedo delicado, que trenza en el aire telarañas calientes. Ya no oigo nada, salvo el apagarse del corazón y el insomnio del corazón. Caigo, y apenas me estremece la caída. Se me aparece un verso. Me levanto y a tientas lo escribo: «El silencio es un fragor interrumpido por los primeros insectos», se me aparece un verso, me levanto y a tientas escribo: «la infancia es un átomo que emite la partícula © hasta que morimos», giro el contacto del diésel y espero, hay un par de segundos en los que no vivimos pero tampoco desaparecemos, roto el hilo de los sentidos sin dar tiempo a que la luz llegue y monte de nuevo su tenderete de compra-venta de sucesos, regresas y piensas: «esto ya lo he vivido, pero es inédito», Roma, fin de año, éxtasis de Santa Teresa, burbujas de agua carbonatada ascienden verticales a velocidad constante hacia el final de un metro, que va a dar al mar, ¿y si un vagón de metro se cayese al mar?, hay una materia incorrupta en el ascenso de esas burbujas, los ojos entreabiertos de un dios, esférica luz que llega 40 años después, estrellas en stand-by, fe en el jamón de York, tus pechos expulsan leche tibia y simultáneamente conjuntos vacíos, en un puerto del Norte, te dije: «en los muelles numeran la marea en decimales», señalando una de esas reglas que pegadas a los diques se sumergen en el agua, fantástica ilusión calibrar el abismo acuático, o el vaciado de aire que un pájaro deja tras de sí, o el instante anterior a que el afecto definiese el tiempo tal como lo conoce tu reloj: su sentido es sumergirse en tus propios dígitos, borrar todos los dígitos que hay en mí, se me ocurre un poema: Madrid, 22 de mayo, sola y vectorial, Carolina de Mónaco avanza hacia la puerta de la Almudena, aquella plaza más gigante que el estado de Nevada, llovizna, no podría ser de otra manera, la dignidad por los suelos y no obstante camina, miles de cámaras apuntándole a los ojos que son 2 soles, como los de esos planetas de las películas de mala ciencia ficción, en las que siempre hay 2 soles que nunca se apagan, Carolina: la ciencia ficción de las monarquías reales, históricas y noveladas en aquella plaza más grande que el estado de Nevada, llovizna [ya lo he dicho], camina hacia la puerta del Paraíso [coincide con la de la caverna], su vestido rosa Versace [que no es lo mismo que el rosa Chanel], esencia que nadie entiende pero que se sabe destilado de todos los tonos rosas de la Tierra, porque, al final, vista muy de lejos, la Tierra es rosa porque rosas son las ruedas de los coches en las noches de invierno [y eso iguala a Carolina con los viajantes de comercio de carreteras secundarias, con el hombre mal vestido que ahora mismo coteja datos en el acelerador del partículas del CERN, también la iguala a aquel que se dejó, allá por los años 90 del siglo 20, la vida en la Ruta del Bacalao, y a los testículos de un gato, y a un decorado rosa que hay en Orlando y que resultó no ser un decorado, y a los míos, también el rosa de Carolina iguala a Carolina con mis testículos color rosa], pero el interior de las personas, sobre todo el interior de las personas, es puro rosa, no me refiero a la carne, ni a tubos gástricos ni páncreas ni a un pequeño hueco de mi corazón que nadie ha visto ni verá [así que quedará perdido en el Espacio cuando yo no sea más que una pequeña montaña de cenizas que alguien venderá para que un tercero la salte una noche de San Juan], no, no me refiero a ese rosa que hay en el interior de mi cuerpo y de todos los cuerpos, sino al interior de las personas, que no son lo mismo que los cuerpos, y Carolina, vida propia, camina sola, piensa en la mancha de grasa crecida en su nómina, en cuentas bancarias que tienen forma espiral, en lanchas motoras que explotan a 300 por hora y su deflagración ciega al sol y al big bang de turno porque el big bang es una moda, oye, ponte esta camisa, que vienen los cuadros marrones y rosas, un gin-tonic poco cargado, el Mundo aún no era chino y era verano, un marido que vomita en una suite del Ritz pasada de moda, y ella avanza hacia la puerta de una catedral, miles de cámaras apuntándole y sus ojos 2 soles de peli de mala ciencia ficción, en la que la chica muere porque los alienígenas no quieren vestidos rosa, asisto un sábado a esa escena, imaginaria si no fuera porque la tele es lo más real que existe, me he levantado temprano, no podía dormir, demasiado pescado ayer en la cena, bebo manzanilla, enciendo la tele porque paso de los deportes y me gusta bajar el volumen y pasmarme en los espasmódicos movimientos de los atletas, separados ya para siempre del sonido de sus músculos, de sus gemidos, y de pronto veo a Carolina y mi imagen, reflejada en la pantalla, superpuesta a la de esa mujer, sola en una plaza más desierta que todo el estado de Nevada, ha encontrado su compañía natural, llueve dentro del televisor, aquí hace calor, cierro los ojos, doy un sorbo a la manzanilla, oigo en la calle a una joven que regresa de la juerga de su vida, y al señor que carraspea mientras va a comprar el pan y es el rey del mundo porque tiene pan y no puede haber vida sin pan, y abro los ojos y estoy allí, Carolina, llueve en sus 2 soles y ahora en el hueco de mi corazón, avanza hacia una puerta cada vez más grande, Paraíso o Caverna, traspasará el umbral, pondrá un pie en la moqueta roja [que tiene grasa de manteca de cerdo que un monarca dejó caer hace 300 años, y polen de unas flores que una doncella pisó hace 200, y una gota de semen del Príncipe [que acaba de dejar caer porque está enamorado como nunca, y no aguanta más]], y caminará Carolina hacia su puesto, un banco en primera fila, todos la mirarán y será una cerilla que se enciende en la oscuridad para apagarse al instante, destello que lo habrá alumbrado todo, la primera gorila cuya hoguera se apagó porque una ráfaga de aire entró en la caverna, cuando abrió los ojos ya todas la catedrales estaban construidas, ya todas la películas de mala ciencia ficción estaban filmadas, ya Chanel había comercializado su colección, El rosa todos los rosas, ya todos los mamuts estaban pintados, entonces la nieve lo cubrió todo y asomaron 2 señales que indicaban una misma población en sentidos contrarios, definir un ombligo en la eternidad, una demostración de que el 69 no tiene validez universal es que sólo tiene sentido en el sistema numérico decimal, prueba a hacerlo en binario, Cosas que hacen los solitarios: 1] Llamar a teléfonos fijos mientras le gente trabaja. Escuchar el contestador. No decir nada. 2] Localizar bodas en la Agenda del Día. Sentarse atrás. 3] Comprar discos repetidos de Esplendor Geométrico. Una manía. 4] Beber sólo agua. 5] Detestar las chimeneas en general y las velas en particular. 6] Saber de memoria la Virtudes del Pájaro Solitario. No practicarlas. 7] Proyectar y posponer continuamente una exposición de fotografías. Saturadas. 8] Usar zapatos sin cordones. Esplendor en esa adherencia en desuso llamada velcro. 9] Levantarse a las 7.00 am cada 1 de enero, hacer la misma fotografía, meterla en un sobre. No enviarla. 10] Mirar catálogos de lámparas. 11] Ir quedándose flacos. 12] Darle vueltas a qué fue primero, si la rueda o el radio. Cosas que no hacen los solitarios: 1] Llamar a teléfonos fijos mientras le gente trabaja. Escuchar el contestador. No decir nada 2] Localizar bodas en la Agenda del Día. Sentarse atrás. 3] Comprar discos repetidos de Esplendor Geométrico. Una manía. 4] Beber sólo agua. 5] Detestar las chimeneas en general y las velas en particular. 6] Saber de memoria la Virtudes del Pájaro Solitario. No practicarlas. 7] Proyectar y posponer continuamente una exposición de fotografías. Saturadas. 8] Usar zapatos sin cordones. Esplendor en esa adherencia en desuso llamada velcro. 9] Levantarse a las 7.00 am cada 1 de enero, hacer la misma fotografía, meterla en un sobre. No enviarla. 10] Mirar catálogos de lámparas. 11] Ir quedándose flacos. 12] Darle vueltas a qué fue primero, si la rueda o el radio, los chopos se doblaban y mis padres decían que el árbol se ofrece al viento porque sus ramas son redes para insectos, es la raza del antibiótico, aparcacoches para aviones, mitos de un futuro próximo, tubos fluorescentes: cigarrillos en litigio con la Osa Polar que se dibuja en tus pulmones de rayos X, imagino mi intestino armado con tubos fluorescentes, «también hay un barco que no pesa en virtud de dos flechas que hacen diana en el centro de gravedad del camarote», decía el ejemplar de Scientific American que mi padre llevaba bajo el brazo, después la carretera se hizo vértice en la ermita, los faros del Simca 1200 barrían en ángulo sólido el paquete tierno que era la noche [una cerilla mi cabeza], llenamos de arándanos la blusa de mi madre para hacer un licor con el que aún me emborracho las tardes en las que no arde mi fósforo, y el tiempo, la ermita, los chopos, la revista bajo el brazo, son excusas, opio infantil que diseñas para ganar en cifras lo que malgastas en partículas de la suerte, y antes de romperse produce vetas carnosas, simulacros de lágrimas en la copa, y pongo Taxi Driver, Travis, hay 3 Travis desmagnetizados en mi VHS, el de Apocalypse now, —Saigón, mierda, aún sigo solo en Saigón, el de Paris, Texas [.........................], el de Taxi driver, —are you talking to me? —are you talking to me? ante un espejo que no responde, lo que más me apena es saber ya que antes de morir no participaré en una guerra, desconocer la ignominia del homicidio pactado, la cama pero no duermo, la estrella es un punto y todo cuerpo persigue ese punto, esto nadie lo sabe: cuanto más oscuro es el cielo más luz hay en la Tierra, el fuego precinta el aire, atrae a las fieras inversas que quieren abandonarse con la excusa de ir al Principio de los Tiempos, pero el fuego es la bolsa de semen que cuelga de ese spam que es la noche, todos los spam el Spam todos los rosas el Rosa tarde o temprano regresan la páginas numeradas, se arraciman en los árboles, A contra A pero no hay espejo, árboles de Faulkner, de Pynchon, de Foster Wallace, ¿un desecho sin memoria es un desecho?, reciclas para borrar, qué harán futuros arqueólogos sin nuestras heces de domingo, el silencio será algún día lo más barroco, un archivo.doc sin masa ni color, mueres, y el ojo centinela se encarga de reunir todo el pelo que perdiste desde el nacimiento, paquete que te supera en volumen, por eso mueres [el Mundo aún no era chino, y era verano], propongo una definición de lo que me queda de tiempo (t): el inverso de la exponencial del sumatorio del pelo perdido cuando ese pelo tiende a infinito, me animo a escribirlo: he decidido que no diré nunca más la palabra alma, siempre fracasa, el reloj destila piedras, te mueves a mi lado, entre los cuerpos gesticula una capa de afectos saturados, el despertador va radiando sus impactos, el cielo es una hipótesis no confirmada, cuaja sin pausa, te toco, me hace diana el verso de un amigo: No ha vivido del todo quien se ha perdido el celo de los gatos. He llegado a pensar, mirando el cielo intenso de esta tarde, que tampoco ha vivido quien no ha matado nunca a un semejante, quien no se ha levantado del campo de batalla empapado de sangre y ha visto un nuevo ocaso transparente tras lavarse la cara y las heridas, raíles de una misma vía, como en uno de aquellos paisajes de Chirico, caminabas sobre el rail más lejano, además de alimentos en energía metabolizamos palabras en vacío, el residuo es el poema, el eco, las líneas que dibujan un cero sobre el que dan vueltas las palabras, pero las incógnitas de una ecuación se deslizan sobre sus raíles x=y=x=y=x=y=x=y irresolubles para siempre, y sin embargo esta luz llega sin memoria, fotosíntesis que transforma lo inorgánico en orgánico: el sonido del silbato mientras en el vagón-restaurante pides un té con croissant, y tiemblas: tu infancia cada vez está más cerca, Buster Keaton invirtió sus últimos años en el desván de su casa, con ojos de pez alumbraba los 2 raíles que la evolución, en su genética imparable, también había ido separando, somos todos extraños en un tren, y los que no lo son es que duermen, en el instante previo a un accidente, tus zapatos, tus pantalones, tu reloj, tu monedero, te dejan, son ya nudos deshechos, cámara lenta al encuentro de un poste, de un árbol, tu cuerpo, otro nudo deshecho en el asfalto, pero que la noche no tenga colores es la clara demostración de que Dios existe, también me enviaste una hoja en blanco encabezada con la frase: este poema es invisible, ni su autora lo conoce y entonces el sol dijo basta, deslizar el rayador del queso por las heces, comprobar que sangran, encontrar en los coágulos la respuesta a preguntas eternas, ¿con qué soñaban los soldados que siempre se quedaban en el fondo de la caja?, ¿eran o fingían ser de plástico? todo objeto es un pájaro que nunca conseguirá volar, todo objeto lleva una criatura pre-pájaro dentro, se constata que un enchufe es más rápido que una palabra, tus labios la boca de aire acondicionado de un cerebro empapado de licor de arándanos, o gris toma de tierra: sueño con cemento devastando líneas enteras de costa, y llueve y avanza Carolina, traje rosa, la luna, foco, quirófano, un átomo emite un neutrino y deja al mundo como estaba, [repetimos] un átomo emite un neutrino y deja al mundo como estaba, lluvia de velocidad enrasada a tu cabeza, 01010101010101010101010101 existía esta línea continua entre el low tech de las columnas del Partenón y el high tech del Código de Barras. La línea de quien empezó a correr hace 21 siglos en una playa de Maratón, y se detuvo en un escaparate de la Zona Cero a mirar otra playa digital, otra arena de píxeles y cifras en el cuarzo líquido de las pantallas: había una línea continua porque supo que al fin había regresado, viaje que son salmones, de pubis en pubis, Robinson en tu propio cuerpo, atontada proteína, las ásperas fibras del silencio, la estela de un avión, paralelas, ahí vio el náufrago su vertical esperanza [piensa en dos electrones volando hacia el pasado, en los cordones tendidos de tus nuevas Adidas, en las piernas de pasarela cuando regresan, el cabello desanudándose en el cepillo de Rebecca, piensa] [acabo de mirar por la ventana, ha dejado de nevar], el amor no era líquido, sino azúcar, tú, pronombre pegajoso, pasto de hormigas, me aterra pensar que algún día todos seremos pronombres, ¿habrá pronombres en la Luna?, Roma, fin de año, dejó de silbar al mismo tiempo que una estrella iniciaba su descomposición en la tetera, un escritor trabaja hasta el amanecer, sale a la calle y en los vómitos que sortea encuentra el sentido de su obra, las piedras que en la orilla caminan hacia delante y hacia atrás, espectros de la marea, poema: instrumento óptico perfecto al servicio del vacío, enfoca el agujero que hace caleidoscópicos los cuerpos, la cinta de vídeo que encontramos en aquella papelera, antigua y perfecta como nuestro exoesqueleto, o monolito, hay en tu piel cavidades copiadas de otras cavidades, globos oculares hacia biyecciones sin flecha, rotas como enredaderas cuando llegan al final de Internet, ¿ha llegado alguien al final de Internet? es la propia tensión del lugar lo que sentiré en el interior de tu piel, bolsa hueca, espacio curvo-poético, viaja lo aún desconocido a través del tacto, las yemas de tus dedos, negativo exacto del fondo marino, mi estado inmóvil en la cama, duermes, respiro pero no duermo, un átomo emite un protón y hace del mundo su polo opuesto [esto es muy complicado, así que no lo repetiremos], alguien tose en la calle, el ingeniero que va al trabajo y no sabe cómo decirle a su esposa que su PC está lleno de cálculos de otra, piedras de riñón, productos de variadas dietas, o quizá la adolescente catapultada de after en after porque el amanecer es un músculo troceado y el carnicero no duerme, o puedo ser yo y toda la luz lastrada que fui aquel último verano, y ahora estoy convertido en estatua de sal [respiro, pero no duermo] los puntos de luz de la persiana trepan hacia su teorema, un pelo de porcelana desprende el brillo de sus últimas células en la bañera, me levanto y a tientas escribo, la luz de San Juan de la Cruz nos ha devorado, nos queda la Uralita, dos cuerpos empollan su propia trayectoria, buscábamos una frontera sólida y líquida, ideas granuladas, arena de días sin huella que voy juntando y luego integro en el espacio, el Principio era una bolsa de deporte, un chasquido con los dedos que rompió el decorado y creaste la noche porque creaste la primera estrella: la luz de tus bragas en la bolsa de deporte, y tus labios, carnosos, pero no como lo es la carne, ni tampoco como f(x): A B tú yo yo tú ni como lo es la tierra mojada tras el chaparrón, ni como es carnoso el irisado chapapote, sino carnosos como la plata precipitada desde la foto, turbia en la cubeta allí abajo, que se lleva al mismo tiempo los dólares y el misterio de la imagen, la mirada aniquila la mirada, nos borramos del retrato, qué felices son los enfermos, que no hacen nada, metafísicos, y el pelo de los muertos, 1924, antes de acometer el Everest con traje de tweed, le preguntaron a Mallory, —¿por qué los hombres escalan montañas? —porque están ahí —respondió, conduzco 33 kilómetros hasta donde hay cobertura telefónica, aguanieve, hablo con mi padre, me dice: «estoy escribiendo un libro, tengo ya 33 páginas acerca de nutrición animal, de la bondad de los productos transgénicos y los efectos del nitrógeno en las cosechas. Hoy he visto un anuncio muy poético, de esos que te gustan, una chica decía, tranquilos, vengo del futuro para traeros algo mejor, creo que era de Neutrex». Regreso, enciendo el PC y veo que yo también llevo escritas 33 páginas, hay en toda ruta una contradicción: existen líneas en tus pies y sin embargo te pierdes, el pedal de freno no responde, dijo otro amigo refiriéndose al Estanco de Pessoa, el pedal de freno no responde, somos códigos de barras, este crepúsculo el láser que maneja un dios a pie de caja, se me aparece un poema [POEMA POSTPOÉTICO n.° 0] el artículo más famoso [Einstein, 1905] de la historia de la física, comienza, es bien sabido que cuando se aplica a los cuerpos en movimiento, la electrodinámica de Maxwell conduce a asimetrías que parecen entrar en contradicción con los fenómenos observados. Tomemos, por ejemplo, la retroalimentación que debe existir la réplica exacta de aquel hombre que en una calle de Hiroshima veía el hongo nuclear bajo un paraguas, el viento cuántico que le arrancó la cara, sus 8 bolsas de Versace, el asfalto, la cama elástica [si supiéramos que lo que fue molécula en un estómago de un dinosaurio es ahora carne de nuestra garganta] si lo supiéramos, o que los árboles a los que te subiste son ya papel moneda, y la resina circuito impreso de un satélite orbitante, mayday, mayday, te recibo alto y claro, si lo supiéramos, el disparo de bala que te nace dentro, basura espacial, giran toneladas en torno a un recuerdo de densidad cero, la suma del tiempo para un insecto posee la forma de un limpiaparabrisas, si lo supiéramos, después llenamos frascos de aguardiente con arándanos, mi madre los lanzaba al cuello de la botella como si en ese swing se jugase un futuro [madre y campo de golf, hijo y agujero, el objetivo de una madre es enhebrarte a algún espacio de juego] yo aún no había leído aquella dedicatoria en aquel libro, que decía, a mi madre, que ya es nieve, mi padre miró entonces a través de la ventana, dijo algo acerca de los termómetros de mercurio, aunque la temperatura de sus manos ya se medía en digitales, el mundo tal como lo recordé, rasca y gana, no duermo, crece una selva al calor de teleseries vacías, el Mundo aún no era chino y era verano, tu caja de anticonceptivos, donde la muerte es una idea, ¿pero alguien ha llegado al final de Internet?, ¿será cada una de estas píldoras el final de Internet?, dijiste en la cama del motel, el papel pintado recordaba las vitrinas de un museo arqueológico que habíamos visto en DF, afuera, la autopista copiaba una maleta que no paraba de moverse, concibo un experimento: pon tus heces en un colador de agujeros de 1 mm, lávalas con abundante agua, quedarán objetos de colores, que limpias y metes en un frasco para no olvidar un mar con otra clase de peces, ese océano está en ti, los ojos de la maniquí lanzan a través del escaparate la exacta idea de un sexo, agota tu cabeza, y piensas: «hay una veleta detenida en cada cubito de hielo», el crimen Universal no resuelto, el mar no es lo primero, antes están las flores duras pero no heladas, el cerebro del insomne es gris, disociado en blanco y en negro, invalida el teorema A = –A de los espejos, la casa en domingo sólo era un lugar donde se adensaban las voces, conjeturas, pelis de Tarkovski giro del pintalabios, giro del giradiscos, giro de cabeza Exorcista, rotación de la Tierra, el ser humano cambia de cuerpo una vez cada 10 años [épica de moteles, extrarradios], tiempo que tardan en renovarse todas las células, se me aparece un poema, Borges y yo [1] versión plagiada: Al otro, a Borges, es a quien le ocurren las cosas. Yo, AFM, camino por esta micronación y me demoro, acaso ya mecánicamente, para mirar el arco de una cúpula hormigonada o el icono atrebolado que señala: Zona Radioactiva. De Borges tengo noticias por el correo, y veo su nombre en una terna de ilustres de algunas web, o en un diccionario de aquellos biográficos que aún conservo y que usábamos antes de vivir en este laberinto bajo tierra. Me gusta la música de Esplendor Geométrico, los mapas pixelados, la tipografía de grano grueso, el sabor del Cola-Cao y la prosa nipona del siglo II; el otro comparte esas preferencias, pero de un modo tan visionario que, aún después de muerto, lo convierten en el más ilustre personaje de aquella corriente estética que se dio en llamar apropiacionismo. Sería exagerado afirmar que nuestra relación es amistosa u hostil, sólo es: Borges vive, se deja vivir, para que yo pueda seguir tramando en él mi literatura y esa literatura me justifica. No me importa admitir que he logrado varias páginas decentes, pero esas páginas no me pueden salvar, quizá porque lo decente ya no es de nadie, ni siquiera de él, sino del lenguaje y la tradición. Por lo demás, yo estoy destinado a perderme definitivamente, y sólo algún instante de mí podrá sobrevivir en él. Poco a poco voy cediéndole todo. Le consta mi perversa costumbre de falsear y magnificar; y no le importa. Spinoza entendió que todas las cosas quieren perseverar en su ser; la piedra eternamente quiere ser piedra, un tigre un tigre, un isótopo un isótopo, yo he de quedar en Borges, no en mí [si es que alguien soy], y me reconozco más en sus libros que en el juego de mis pobres interpolaciones. Hace años traté de librarme de él y pasé de las mitologías televisadas a los juegos con el tiempo y el infinito en este intestino de cemento, pero esos juegos siempre han sido de Borges y tendré que inventar otros. Así mi vida es una fuga y todo lo pierdo y todo es del olvido, o de él. No sé cuál de los dos escribe esta página. [2] versión iconográfica o como el yo-yo que te compraron de niño, que rueda sobre sí mismo a la vez que va y viene entre tu mano y la máxima extensión de la cuerda. Bendito yo-yo, ego-ego, yo-yo. tenemos dos cuerpos, el visceral y el informático, unidos por el tacto, ojalá el cerebro tuviera la tecla escape para salir de sí mismo, cerrar la vida desde fuera, pienso amar la empaquetada longitud de los intestinos del metro, respiras, te toco y pienso: también se hundió el Titanic sin generar ruido ni olas, en tierra todos reíamos mientras la sal creaba capillas sixtinas, determinados dibujos en los paladares de los cuerpos hundidos, durante años no supimos que los muertos no se ven entre ellos, el despertador, aún estable, puzlea el tránsito a la luz de mis ojos, un camión de basura desciende al abismo de su iceberg, recuerdo el verso de un amigo, a ciento ochenta saltándome los semáforos, buscando la muerte, las naves industriales, las nubes negras en el pensamiento, el calor sobre el hombro como un pajarraco dorado, el salvaje descenso de una curva, y fue entonces, sí, de repente, cuando paré en el arcén vuelvo a tocarte, el núcleo atómico no sólo emite alguno de sus constituyentes, también emite partículas que no contiene, como por ejemplo el electrón, hay contradicción, algo me dice que pronto en mí se originará un beso, descapotamos el coche, me abrazas, el horizonte es la cuerda tensa a la altura del cuello contra la que ignorante aceleras [se me aparece una idea para una reseña, pero aún no me levanto], o el cielo, piel de tambor donde golpea la noche, y nosotros cajas negras, dentro, emitiendo todo lo que has visto, el humo del café, la frase que te hizo superhéroe antes de tiempo, el primer poema que destruyó tu lógica, los pezones de la madre, fueron endémico caucho, bálsamo, piel insonorizante para el estallido final, materia de reset somos, antivirus del que cuelgan todos los virus, espuma ya, me levanto, escribo la reseña: la estética del instante siempre ha tenido mala prensa, recaen sospechas sobre lo que dura una fracción inmedible de tiempo: aquello que no tiene ni pasado ni futuro, fogonazo de nada, carece de reputación el nihilismo, de poco sirve que el punk o la publicidad lo dignificaran, Mitsuo Miura (Japón, 1946), pintor, residente en Madrid, afirma: «nunca me ha atraído el dramatismo, quizá porque yo nunca he participado de los problemas sociales de mi entorno, me sentía ajeno. Lo que he mostrado en mi obra es mi despreocupación, mis paseos, mi nada», te duermes, cae el libro, abierto sobre el pecho en competencia con el corazón, examinamos durante largo tiempo la línea que separa San Diego de Tijuana, sobreviene la erección, adquiere grosor la frontera, en el mar los peces devoran a dentelladas la línea del Ecuador, cae a trozos el mapa, naturaleza meteora, no ha sido revelada [la fractalidad de los cuerpos en ocasiones sufre apagones, pásame el lápiz de memoria, lo necesito ya, ahora], ¿ha visto alguien el corazón de un tríptico de buzón?, giran dentro enloquecidos los vectores, comienzan a caérsele los pechos a aquella diosa que corría sin memoria por Mulholland Drive, bajo las calles de Hollywood han descubierto un cementerio de dinosaurios, atrapados en un manto de brea, espejo de ese otro fósil que es asfalto sobre sus cabezas, estrellas de la acera de Hollywood: incógnitas en el cielo de esas bestias, se me aparece un poema: pero no hay moda sin su componente imprevisible. El arquitecto Rem Koolhaas afirma haber visto desde una avioneta un gigantesco y humeante vertedero en Nigeria, «El vertedero es la forma más baja de organización espacial. Pura acumulación, es informe, su localización y perímetros son inciertos..., es fundamentalmente imprevisible», no conoce el ser humano aquello que rubrica, flotan apartamentos hinchados de programación nocturna, la pastilla de jabón imita al fósil, amanece en rosa, sólo eso, copulamos colegios vacíos, sólo eso, lo dijo Ian Curtis, las palabras no explican nada, los actos no determinan nada, sólo miro los árboles y las hojas caer, lo dijo Deborah Curtis: Decoramos la habitación triangular de la casa para que Ian compusiera sus obras maestras. Pintamos las paredes de azul cielo, al igual que la alfombra, el sofá de tres plazas y las cortinas, que también eran azules, todo amanecer tiene el aspecto cómico e inquietante de mandíbula de ventrílocuo, ropa que a veces flota en los pueblos de costa cuando el verano se acaba y tú no, definición oficial de segundo (tiempo): la duración de 9.192.631.770 períodos de la radiación correspondiente a la transición entre los niveles hiperfinos del estado fundamental del átomo de Cesio 133, veo en las Páginas Amarillas el Libro del Juicio Final al que seremos llamados, me postro ante la Jerusalén Celeste, al destino le gustan las simetrías, las variaciones, y entonces te lo juegas todo a un semáforo, y una moto dinosauria, incompleta, 50 cc, te lleva por delante, sin piloto, y ya está, te dice tu padre, has llegado al final de Internet, existe una arqueología de los textos, no es el abecedario, sino el momento en que los sonidos flotan en un punto del cerebro y sabes que la herencia del mamut no son los elefantes sino rascacielos de letras en su dominación del paisaje, hay en los versos un eco de agua, una materia arcaizante, algo parecido a todas las huellas dactilares que hay en las bolsas de basura, para entenderlo hay que imaginarlas diluidas en los sistemas de alcantarillado, o algo así, la piel, membrana porosa, deja escapar el alma por presión osmótica, no volveré a escribir la palabra alma, siempre fracasa, mi padre, ya muy delgado, hagamos la resta, eso es lo que pesa el alma, hay otra resta más radical y certera, ésa es la negatividad del alma de la que tanto hablaron Kierkeegard y Osama Bin Laden yo le hablaba de otro accidente, 14 de mayo, 1983, SEAT Ronda, M-3458-X me miro en el espejo y soy feliz, Nacional-II, y no pienso nunca en nadie más que en mí, en cada matrícula hay una noche y un acúmulo de reencarnaciones, lo más punki fue terminar tomando cervezas bajo la cruz del Valle de los Caídos, y calcetines rosa-Carolina, detenerse en la vertical del mediodía, elimina todas las sombras: son balas y las mete en ti, das vueltas a mi lado, en la cama cada cuerpo genera anticuerpos, huyen los pájaros de las cosas curvas, de los pensamientos bien configurados, sus alas destilan fotosíntesis y fuego, el asceta que lee códigos de barras en cualquier superficie de la naturaleza, nos besamos, creíste que era uno de esos piel roja que borran su rastro cuando se despiertan, pero te hice el desayuno, café con Tablas de La Ley tostadas, un pájaro se posó en la bandeja y era hardware de cuantos amantes habías devastado, y entonces tú saltaste con aquello de las palabras, que si avanzan reptando y pusiste el ejemplo de los gusanos, pensar genera oscuridad: pensar la noche es redundante: un veneno es un veneno, pero un veneno adulterado, ¿qué es?, esta idea me obsesiona: nadie duerme porque yo no duermo, 1965, en mitad de la noche Feynman recibe una llamada de Wheeler [ambos nobeles]: Wheeler: Ya sé por qué todos los electrones tienen la misma masa y la misma carga. Feynman: ¿Por qué? [instante de silencio] Wheeler: ¡Porque son todos el mismo!, y en ese teléfono tiembla el siglo 20, tampoco al nacer tu rostro anuncia tu sexo: sólo los trucos del tiempo separan la prosa del verso, el residuo del mundo reacciona creando imperfecciones en los vasos, sus huellas dactilares sólo sirven para averiguar quién codició la noche, tu montón de ropa en el suelo: volcán que amenaza una erupción sin vocación, se hunde hasta llegar al centro de la Tierra, allí la enfría, no había mejor flor que la filmada, y cayó nuestro día como una isla que se hunde sin generar ruido ni olas, la bocanada de tu aire rechaza otra idéntica mía [pasa una ambulancia, sus neumáticos buscan ser órganos internos del cuerpo que yace], lo dicen los científicos, en el estado normal de la materia son líquidos los núcleos atómicos que nos constituyen, corremos diluidos hacia el cíclope del fregadero, desde la ventana del hotel me señalaste la épica sonora, tejados de Lisboa, yo miraba el mar sin saber lo que vendría, el punto triple en el que sólido, líquido y gas se dan cita y todo deja de existir en beneficio de tu cuerpo, irrecuperable, en bloque de plomo muta el cielo, la Vía Láctea gotea su leche ácida, mercúrica, los perdigones que pintan los niños cuando quieren decimos que hoy ha llovido en el patio, copulamos hojas de sauces, sólo eso, lo dicen los científicos, eres un raro líquido en el estado normal de tu materia, cuerpo invadeable sin otra ilusión que reencarnarse, pero es mentira, panoli, no regresas, giran secos y mareados los cuerpos en torno al último rayo de luz que les congela en vida [también los planetas giran alrededor de un centro de masas que nadie ve], preguntándose por qué no eran rosas lo tejados de Lisboa, por qué el camarero del hotel dejaba sin deseos los platos, por qué un hombre miraba el Tajo por mirar mientras una mujer se subía la falda y decía, ¿volveremos a vernos?, se me aparece un poema: Instrucciones Para Hacer Un Poema [IPHUP] 1.a Parte [Teoría] teorema de descomposición temporal en factores idempotentes: la vida de cada persona podrá trocearse en los siguientes pares temporales: un momento [infinitesimal aunque infinito] en el que no se quiere seguir viviendo, y al instante otro [de idénticas dimensiones] en el que se desea más que nunca continuar. Así, la suma da cero. demostración: no importa la cantidad de tiempo que inviertas en crear un poema, importa que parezca haberse creado en un instante y solo, que solo te atraviese, que solo desparezca. 2.a Parte [Caso Práctico] 1) confeccionar la lista de la compra. 2) ir al supermercado más cercano. 3) pagar con tarjeta. 4) dejar 7 días la factura en la basura, recogerla. 5) escanearla. 6) imprimir el resultado. 7) darle un título [Poema Ascético Para Dos Personas]: lo realmente erótico es llegar a escanear la nada cuando tiene cierta posibilidad de ser algo, desiertos, lugares afectos a revelaciones, a la impermeabilidad de un santuario, Jerusalén Celeste, Las Vegas, postes de alta tensión en la nieve de Siberia, tu mirada atrás al facturar la maleta, estoy solo, dicen en la tele que si Manhattan tuviera la misma densidad de población que Alaska, sólo tendría 25 habitantes, pasa una ambulancia, escribo Delete, otra vez, Delete, si una máquina pariera, el bebé no tendría cordón umbilical, pero todo cordón umbilical termina en una lata vacía, descubrí la mía en Google Earth, pequeña, esponjosa, allí abajo, el temor a hacer fotografías, emulsionamos en papel, nunca miramos el reverso, 1945, ¡Enhorabuena, Werner, ya tienes tu Creación de Pares! [fotón e– + e+] le dijo Pauli a Werner Heinsenberg [ambos nobeles] cuando éste tuvo gemelos, y se parten de risa por teléfono, entre tú y yo se dio la contraria [e– + e+ fotón + fotón] aniquilación de pares que nos elevó a partículas idénticas de luz, pero en direcciones opuestas, vértigo en la palma de la mano, mi poesía no tiene temas, afirma Fernández Mallo mientras le copia esa frase a Ashbery, la transparencia de tu sujetador craquela la Antártida, espejo convexo: vigila los fragmentos que él mismo crea y dispersa y refleja y regresa en virus el tiempo, cada fogón de la cocina es el centro de un planeta, haces un café, estás preciosa, no enciendas la tele, veámonos reflejados en ella, desdentado horizonte de edificios, ecualizan un cielo de acero, rugen cañerías colesterolizadas, es el cuerpo, sin más, escuchándose río abajo, vinimos a esta casa bajo cero a ver si el frío soldaba relojes y pieles, jugabas con nieve, caminamos sobre la piscina helada, espejo hiperplano allí al fondo, te lanzabas, pero ese fósil de agua acumulaba manzanas, preservativos de mármol, caparazones de insectos esperando su reconversión animal, ciertas tardes oyendo I’ll be your mirror en el páramo de un LP, ya la luz venía entonces barajada entre sombras y oblicua, y bajo aquella masa helada, auditorio inverso, público interpretando a los actores, echamos Wynn’s al motor en la gasolinera de un páramo que nos gustó tanto como todos los páramos, te dije lo raro que es que todas las estaciones de servicio estén en los lugares donde más sopla el viento, donde hace más frío, donde los meteorólogos fracasan, cruce de vectores fósiles y oscuros llegados en camiones que advierten INFLAMABLE, y allí te dejé, construyendo tu libro del frío, por la temible Red Secundaria de Carreteras del Estado, al destierro de puro aburrimiento, nieve, CDs, un cigarro, el yo poético pincha una rueda y no lleva repuesto, ardor en la fotografía, se licua el tiempo [la inclino, va cayendo], el rosa salmón de la niña remonta cumpleaños, una mujer fuma y se sabe fuera de plano, el sol evita el pelo rubio del bebé: las estrellas buscan planetas, almas a 0° Kelvin, te recibo alto y claro y al fondo la muñeca, muerta como los cuerpos de la foto que nos iguala, y esa muerte [cortocircuito], infidelidad entre la carne y el tiempo, la cara de chopped que se te queda cuando te dicen: no, tu mujer no estuvo el martes cenando con la mía, y vas a la casa de una mujer y descubres que aún tiene tu foto magnetizada en la puerta de la nevera, de momento eso te salva, mi madre me advirtió, no puedes llevarte la nieve a casa, riachuelo que aún a veces gotea entre mis manos y estropea el teclado del PC, el PC, y no lleva repuesto [me he perdido, no sé lo que escribo, voy a hacer un Nescafé, en el anuncio salía un farero y yo no entendía nada], hielo en la adherencia de tus labios, sudor y espejismo, chaparrón de partículas cósmicas desencadenado por el primer rayo que entró en la atmósfera, y el mar, sin adaptarse a la vasija que lo contiene, por eso nadie ha llegado al final de Internet, bolsas de hipermercado ruedan en el fondo de una estepa medida en horas muertas, inmóvil pájaro solitario, no es fácil ver caer en vertical a una mosca, salir en la noche de un túnel para abrazar cabello negro, la esterilidad de la tarde le hace fotocopias al espasmo en cada ganglio de tus pechos [o alguien establece una locura: cuenta los besos que ha dado y después se plantea si cabrían en su propio cuerpo], con monos blancos recogen chapapote los Aviador Dro y sus obreros especializados, metí un par de cucharadas en un frasco de mermelada, fue ése el primer regalo que he hice, Martes 20 de mayo, 1980, John Peel, de Radio 1, informa a todos los británicos: «malas noticias, muchachos, Ian Curtis, cantante de Joy Division, se ha suicidado». Los hechos: llegó a su casa, puso en el giradiscos el álbum, The idiot, de Iggy Pop, dejó una huella dactilar sobre los surcos del vinilo. Hay en la muerte de Ian Curtis un código secreto, cifrado en esa huella, que nadie ha podido desvelar, se buscan señales, pongo mi oído en tu piel, oigo el corazón cada vez más troceado por el sampler de tu cuerpo, la nieve borra todo rastro de regreso, pisadas de pájaros, flechas en sus adormecidas patas, el neumático deja líneas en el barro, frases que quise decir, habíamos grabado una canción con Vacabou y tu guitarra eran pisadas de sioux en la Luna, en el artículo «Las Estéticas del Error: tendencias Post-Digitales en la música contemporánea por ordenador», Kim Cascone dice: [... es gracias a los errores de la tecnología digital, que este nuevo trabajo ha emergido: fallos, virus, incompatibilidad de sistemas, clipping, aliasing, distorsión, ruido cuántico, incluso el ruido de las tarjetas de sonido, son los materiales primarios que los compositores buscaron para incorporarlos a la música...], sudas agua mineral, supongamos la luz esas burbujas, supongamos zapatos que expresan el horizonte de sucesos, supongamos que abres la maleta y un rostro dice, su careta, gracias, hoy Alemania le ha declarado la guerra a Rusia. Por la tarde fui a nadar, escribió Kafka en su diario, alguien deja un zapato de una talla imposible en nuestra puerta, el objetivo de los versos es pactar una muerte digna con especies en vías de extinción, me acerco más tu ojo izquierdo, estrellas grises + enanas blancas = moteado cuántico que me avisa, todo en ti ya es naufragio, el silencio sólo sirve si añade, lo contrario es retórica [de silencio], no sabía quien inventó tu cuerpo nada de la microscopía, ni que no hay deseo que se sostenga más allá [ni más acá] de cierta equidistancia, si en cada fotograma hay un TAC, el celuloide es el homenaje que voz y movimiento le hacen al silencio, play it, Sam..., play As Time Goes By, después hubo un límite al que iban a morir los animales que ya no emitían sonidos, [aunque los sonidos morían con ellos], el silencio mordía las siluetas dejándolas a medias, las couldinas eran hundidas por sus propias burbujas, no había envase ni piel para tanta tarea, las 4 estaciones fundidas en una sin color, venía del subsuelo el cordón umbilical que las manos siguieron hasta un fin que era el propio ombligo, impresionaba lo absurdo de los pájaros, que a pesar de enjaulados aleteaban, tú, no obstante, carnosa como siempre, los animales se quedaron sin tímpanos, sorprendía también que todos se parecieran tanto a sí mismos, entre el centro y la idea de centro hay un error de un par de milímetros, el gemelo vigila el sueño y se agota exfoliado en subsueños, quise enviarte una postal que el Servicio de Correos fue fragmentando hasta corromper el mensaje, «Se nos cruzan los cables», dice el periódico Qué, «diecisiete millones de hogares tienen instalaciones eléctricas inseguras», se vive a hachazos de instantes que te parten en 2, en 3, en 4..., y así hasta infinito, donde paradójicamente eres un sólido 1, y ahí mueres, la soledad definitiva carece de otra cifra en la que reflejarse, pasa una ambulancia, escribo Delete, ascender de tu pubis a tu cabeza equivale a dejar atrás el calor de una linterna, en la cumbre del Mont Blanc el agua hierve a 80 grados centígrados [no hay escena equivalente en el fondo de tu sexo], si pudiéramos adivinar el punto medio entre vida y muerte, el instante en que 2 dados se cruzan en el aire, somos los que creamos segmentos, los que ensamblamos sombras, destruimos cartografías, entre bloques de luz construimos carreteras de luz, y en la tele Cateto a babor, «Cine de Barrio», no duermo [todo me aburre, no leo, no escucho música, no hablo de nada, me veo cerrando compuertas en beneficio de este poema sin más influencia que toda esa quincalla que palabra a palabra vengo acumulando, selva sin más conexiones que la prensa, tele-basura, un par de libros ya leídos, la sospechada curvatura que hay en todo objeto, y nada más, acabo de pensar que este libro se llamará, Tarzán de los versos], revuelvo cajones, una hoja en sucio, tenía 21 años, y ya no la entiendo [lo que impresiona no es que un barco flote sino que alguna vez estuvo en tierra], lo que impresiona en las fotografías es que las caras no envejezcan aunque la ropa pase de moda, aceleración que separa los objetos de los cuerpos y no lo entiendo, el período más feliz de mi vida concluyó con mi imagen detenida en un espejo, y en la mano un vaso de leche que no se reflejaba [pero esto ya casi salió en Forrest gump], los bronquios imitan el aspecto de cortinas de ganchillo que no te dejaban ver la calle [me lo dice la radiografía, ¿es esta imagen azul y plata de mis pulmones aquella calle?], por eso Petrarca subió a la colina que dominaba su ciudad, ver el aspecto [primer Google Earth], del Mundo desde una ilusión 100 % humana, y nace el Renacimiento, y el sol, que es oxígeno, está en el mar, paseábamos por la orilla, felices y horteras como un anuncio de Mon Chéri, funambulistas en la línea de la espuma: a un lado la sangre de las sábanas, al otro lado la de la guerra, y de repente tus manos eran un montón de quarks sin fuerzas que los recompusieran en manos, simples manos, no hay fe [sólo hipótesis] en el avance de las cutículas, meamos siempre en una taza vacía, comemos en recipientes huecos, vemos películas en la misma caja, procreamos en orificios, vertemos gasoil en depósitos, besamos en cavidades orales, guardamos el DVD y lo sellamos bajo tierra, anticipos de ese otro agujero final: un tipo te limpia el cristal del coche y descubres un paisaje en el que ya nadie te observa, pilotamos solos, qué miedo, la esperanza cóncava que se forma al mear sobre nieve, consentir una oscuridad que es todo menos paciente, tu intestino: Futurama, una luna llena de quimioterapia, hay un momento en el que la sombra de quien se acerca se cuela por debajo de tu puerta, cada beso es una caja negra, ingenua como el bostezo de un perro recién nacido, o el de un avión cuando despega, su combustible incuba un componente espantosamente triste, si la luz nos alumbra y descubre el mundo es porque le es extraña al mundo, un skater atraviesa la plaza, su trayectoria insinúa el perfil de un cosmos en expansión, todo objeto es el recorte de un acontecimiento que le sobraba al tiempo [pero la Tierra, globo ocular sin nervio óptico: certifica pero no siente. El tamaño del Universo es la velocidad de una palabra, su vuelo en el paladar. Se cierra el párpado, cae el verbo al estómago. ¿Se puede imaginar un estómago seco de imágenes pero no de verbos? Son mis primeros años haciéndose nieve en la boca. Sopa cósmica en los 3 primeros minutos del Universo. ¿Alguna vez volvió tu madre del mercado? Cohete sin viajero, fue la infancia. Radar que desde la adhesividad de aquella noche periódicamente te llama. [No te queda más remedio que ser feliz y maldecirlo todo, hoy más que nunca maldices todo]]. Un banco de peces cambia súbitamente de dirección, refleja en la plata de sus lomos la absurda existencia del agua que, como un dios o una tabla periódica, existe porque sólo se parece a sí misma. Lo primero no fue el plancton sino el esplendor de una plancha de formica apoyada en un contenedor de basura, la última birria del mundo. Hacer fotos en B/N y pintarlas con rotulador, dejé de hacerlo porque sí, por nada], paseábamos y pasamos un peine a las palabras, caían las letras para hallar elementos químicos que nos definieran, mi [Ag]47 tu [¿X?]n que al fin no encontramos, desierto de ojos impares son los lavabos, sé que el número de lavabos del mundo es impar para que sobre 1, ecuación o poema que todos [somos agua] andamos buscando, consumes a medida que lo generas un inmenso bucle de tus dobles, triples, cuádruples, etc., en cuyo fin te reflejas escuálido, se agota la materia disponible en la que escindirte, aparece el mito del amor, el continuo troceado a través de un microscopio sin eco de salida, pero vas al Xoriguer y cenas [40 euros/ración] especial carne de otoño, el mundo aún no era chino, y era verano, un software es un ejecutor de instrucciones formales: el músico que interpreta la partitura es software, el poeta que confecciona endecasílabos es software, también el soldado, el taxista, el abogado, el fuego, el lector, pero el software al que nunca nos acostumbramos es la muerte, espacio [cajas negras], fibrado en besos, la actividad del francotirador consiste en ir al encuentro del tiempo, llegamos a este pueblo deshabitado una tarde de noviembre de los 90 [el coche y el espejismo de una ilusión en la 3.a marcha del cambio de marchas, eran prestados], siguiendo una guía de viajes escrita por un hombre llamado Ridruejo [aquel que trasladó a pie las cenizas de un tal José Antonio de un lado a otro de España para imitar una performance de La Fura dels Baus, dijiste], estábamos de acuerdo en que lo nuestro sólo era un radiador simulado, que el jamón ibérico era asqueroso porque tiene mucha grasa, y poco más, había anochecido, la intermitencia en la bombilla del alumbrado público indicaba que la sombra es una confusión de siluetas animales crecidas en su filamento, y que toda vida necesita la incandescencia de un alambre donde carbonizarse, no era el frío sino tu piel de tigre lo que copiaba estrías en mis labios, después te la dejaste en aquellas sábanas, bella como el bañador de Eva Braun en el Nido del Águila, pero da igual, yo quería que todo eso existiera y existió, en silencio veías la tele, un documental creo recordar, yo leía un libro de Wagensberg, sólo hay tres formas fundamentales de conocimiento: el científico, el artístico y el revelado. Todo conocimiento real es la superposición de las tres formas, alcé la vista, te miré, el ruido comienza en la apatía de un gesto, una lámina de grasa flota en la memoria y desactiva el calambrazo de los peces, el destino no tiene intenciones, el mal se reproduce sin causas, decidimos que nacer es un eco cuyo rebote no es la muerte sino aprender a gestionar el agua de un vaso, el mando de la tele que escribe hojas tras hojas en blanco, habíamos comprado una bola del mundo, que mondamos como una naranja, Cinta-Planeta de todos los países conectados, también odiábamos el rock sinfónico, la poesía, el jamón de jabugo, las paellas, el sol, las playas y la política nacional [piensa en una monstruosidad cotidiana: esperas un ascensor que baja, abres la puerta, y nadie baja], decidimos que el lector es un parásito, todo poema reactualiza el mito del paisaje, se fija en un paisaje y habla de un paisaje se fija en la borra de un ombligo y habla de un paisaje se fija en un relé y habla de un paisaje se fija en su propia asimetría y habla de un paisaje, Definición: llamamos poema a una superficie continua, dotada de un punto de fuga, derivable en todo el espacio, y en la que se pueden definir las operaciones adición sustracción multiplicación división, y que además posee un elemento neutro que puede ser el 0, el 1, o el propio poeta, si se da la circunstancia de que en algún lugar de esa superficie el elemento neutro es el propio poeta, entonces éste ha desparecido de la obra y la llamamos obra maestra, o el hilo suelto del jersey, que conduce a todo, cada mota de arena es una cámara, alguien desde dentro de la tierra vigila tus paseos, no me interesa el tiempo, ni su termodinámica flecha, se partió cuando escribiste: «tus poemas se expanden como peces globo», tu rostro, cama elástica, rebota mi voz [luz o glamour], el trenzado de ombligos en aros olímpicos, los libros comienzan por el lugar menos adecuado, un abridor muerde el milímetro de chapa, la concavidad de una tecla recoge el hallazgo dactilar, trayectorias de agua dejan su baba de cal en el cristal, son los huesos del mundo a su manera, la luz dibuja pestañas en la estrella [tecnología del sexo], hay bolsas de basura destrozadas en cunetas donde arde en metano el horizonte, un paseo entre chapa y Uralita, tatuajes, mecano periurbano, objetos lucen su abandono en el fondo de las piscinas, se rearma el rostro de quien mira, hombres y mujeres deformados simulan un porno mudo en los gimnasios, no caeré en la imagen de la ruleta rusa, caeré en otra aún más fácil: la nada: Alzado, Planta y Perfil de una casa cuyos vasos sanguíneos son dioses que nos compadecen desde el parpadeo de su luz roja, el stand-by de los electrodomésticos, cualquier poema reactualiza el mito del cono que se abre al fondo de una habitación, y Brodsky diciendo, yo no tengo personalidad, sólo soy un hombre nervioso, mientras observa el estampado filamentoso del wallpaper, o yo respirando el aire que media entre gota y gota cuando llueve, rechazar esos impactos, después se hacen videojuego de tinta en el papel, bebamos antibióticos, te digo, que la noche es el horno donde la vida muere sin saber que fue corcho, aquí nada flota, mi método de trabajo es sencillo: me quedo mirando un objeto y espero a que me afecte, o esa propiedad arquimediana que posee el poema, por la cual se sabe que a la última metáfora imaginable la rodea siempre otra aún más inimaginable, se aparea la sombra al objeto para incardinarlo, cotas de piel en los mapas, alumbramiento, palabras gravitantes, hola, no me dejes, qué tal, pásame un vaso lleno de viagras, deja tu dulzor adhesivo en mis labios, el sol yace tirado y el niño lo recoge, utiliza sus manos, ya no quema, es Navidad y aún cree que la Lotería y crecer y multiplicarse son cosas distintas, deseo miniaturizado en el pecho de una desconocida, la veo pasar cada mañana, nadie nos habló del tren que seguía la línea de costa como una cinta métrica amarilla de sol desparramado [a lo lejos unos chicos hacían surf, encadenaban olas mejor que nosotros encadenábamos los cuerpos], una leyenda urbana asegura que si todo el mundo tirara al mismo tiempo de la cisterna, se acabaría el Mundo, en tu perfil se hallaba el resultado de tanto cálculo, paranoicos váteres, desequilibrados, estaba prohibido pero encendiste un cigarrillo, íbamos en un tren, después tiramos nuestras cenizas al mar, en Cabo de Gata vimos un hotel en construcción que parecía un barco varado y precioso, veníamos de ver El desierto rojo de Antonioni en la membrana de luz, la otra membrana, la noche, vibraba muda en el derramarse explícito del auto-cine, todo era archipiélago imposibilitando la emersión de cualquier verso [que sube un segundo a tus pulmones a tomar aire [el que después te falta] antes de bajar a la luz de la hoja intacta], bailan cientos de cuerpos con auriculares en las silent disco, desde una música gusano que te nace dentro, libros que son silencio porque se leen en silencio [de pronto no entiendo cómo puede generar sonidos el silencio], perfume que se expande, aparecen grietas en el aire, tus manos sujetando las páginas de Pedro Páramo eran las propias voces del páramo, dejar que un palo se vaya pelando en la orilla hasta que aparezca el hueso y se hunda veloz por la femoral terrestre, sin otra intención que gravitar lejos del alcance de mi expresión humana [he entendido Venecia como la ciudad más absurda del Planeta], y compras un DVD, y un chico es pura calculadora mientras canta I’m waking up to us, y corre un barco de papel por un río articulado, y en sus pupilas el maremoto de las aguas de aquel estanque de aquel poema de Dylan Thomas, muchachos en verano nadan entre ruinas y son eternos, o algo así, la invariabilidad de los días es cuestión de fe ciega en el sorteo de fuerzas que antes de nacer te hacen viejo y simultáneamente feto, se me aparece un poema: 5 de la madrugada, volvíamos atravesando un puente, ella, él, el río y yo, y él con una solución acuosa bajo el brazo [todo premio es suero, agua y oro de catéter]. Echamos un centavo de Brooklyn a una urna con una Santa que ni idea. Allí se quedó un trozo de cobre de los Strokes, o la idea del cobre o la idea de los Strokes, o los Strokes como idea, 1.er disco, siempre 1.er disco. Él se subió a un banco, abrió los brazos, era Dios o una Torre Gemela sin gemela. O Carolina de Mónaco avanzando sola por una plaza madrileña una mañana de mayo, hacia una boda que no era la suya; el pelo rosa mojado. O todos los anuncios por palabras que empiezan por «era verano y llovía». O mejor: «era verano, introduje la tarjeta en Servicaixa y llovía». O aún mejor: «era verano, introduje la tarjeta en Servicaixa, pasó un macarra, y llovía». Visa Oro, Niño Jesús de los archivos informáticos que, adultos y jesucristos, en el siglo 21 vendrían. La cajera pasó la tarjeta por la bacaladera ante las manos de mi padre, y ambos, manos y tarjeta, eran la Armada Invencible, el espectro de Felipe II paseando por El Corte Inglés de una ciudad de provincias, quiero amar el dinero de plástico y los amigos y las mujeres, porque todo amigo y toda mujer es dinero sublimado, muerto y resucitado, y toda épica del dinero y el amor reproduce la del deporte contra el tabaco [el Mundo aún no era chino y era verano], o el futbolista que confundía la Edad de Oro con la Edad de Plástico, la Edad de Piedra con la de la Madera, la tarjeta de crédito con el 9 de su camiseta, centavo de cobre, urna y Santa, 5 de la madrugada y él subido a un banco de piedra, los ojos cerrados como piedra, era Dios o una Torre Gemela sin gemela. me levanto y a tientas escribo, morir no tiene cuerpo, pero esto ya lo dijo José Ángel Valente a colación de no sé qué, del parche de nicotina más misterioso que todo el edificio Dakota, de tu cuerpo como Las Vegas, neón por delante, musulmán por detrás, de la orina, agua de tarántulas, que desciende buscando el punto más bajo de energía y diseña allí su estrategia y limbo de agua mineral [o te sales de ti, o desapareces], morir no tiene cuerpo, es cierto, lo dijo Wittgenstein, Proposición 6.43.2: La muerte no es un acontecimiento de la vida. La muerte no es vivida [no hay ahora entraña que supere los besos bajo aquel cielo de escay], en Cabo de Gata vimos un hotel en construcción que era un barco varado y precioso, ingenuo como el despertar de una civilización, un átomo emite un neutrino, y no se entera el mundo. [repetimos] un átomo emite un neutrino, y no se entera el mundo. yo le explicaba a mi padre mis temores ante los versos, el ámbito de aplicación de los tensores, y él me dijo, los que lo hemos pasado mal no tememos al futuro, volveremos a las patatas con sal y a la lámpara de carburo, todo esto sólo es Brigitte Bardot en un desvío de autopista, hijo, sólo eso. Después la muerte, y ya está, y ya está, qué miedo, final Alemania-Holanda, 1974 en Telefunken Pal-Color, nació mi hermano pequeño, también en color porque era rubio como el bote de Hellmann’s del que comimos todos, los policías preguntaron: «¿quién eres?», «Lennon, John Lennon de los Beatles», respondió herido de bala, hace hoy 25 años, cae Rumasa en la cara norte del Cambio, decía un chiste de escaladores, buenas noches, somos Gabinete Caligari y somos fascistas (Rock-Ola, iniciando los 80), la ciudad recupera su ego en cabinas telefónicas abandonadas, introduzco monedas, descuelgo y hablo y vuelven las palabras a los cables, lo dejo cuando amanece, te recuerdo como mi Proyecto Bronwyn, te recibo alto y claro, tu rostro a los 20 años, contener la respiración y estallan los bombones en la caja, semen y molde de tu cara [he pensado en Venecia como en el efecto dominó más absurdo del Planeta, empujemos una casa] las estadísticas son desastres alimentado tu cabeza, tacones que emiten en morse, manzanas en busca de su Newton, virutas de deseo, tácticas de lava, labios, ojos: elasticidad de un triángulo, han rodado una teleserie donde habíamos quedado, lanzas un poema y cae de canto, sólo ahí significa algo, lo bueno de cumplir años es que todo te va resbalando, fenómenos de edredón, caninas aguas, el cuerpo no es más que una zona del mundo con expresión propia, así se va un verano, PROYECTO: ¿Cuánto tarda un televisor en freír un huevo? 1] Orientar el televisor hacia al cielo. 2] Apretar la tecla de encendido. 3] Cascar un huevo de gallina con precaución de no romper la yema. 4] Echarlo sobre la pantalla, cronometrarlo, la raíz del árbol imita el vuelo errático de mis manos en tu vagina, no es cierto que la Tierra sea redonda, excava un agujero hacia las antípodas, ardes antes en el centro, algún día esto que vemos será paisaje de cuneta, sujetador que conecta hemisferios vacíos, por un instante se convierte en imán la persona sometida a una resonancia magnético-nuclear, te gustaría que algo fallase, permanecer imantado, brújula que camina, no perderte más, existe un lapsus de tiempo muerto entre el presente y el recuerdo que guardamos de nosotros en ese mismo presente: el tiempo que tardan en unirse memoria y vida, fotogramas perdidos, absorción y emisión de tu doble desconocido, el neón exhibe la insolencia del robo a mano armada que al diccionario le perpetra la noche, letras de luz que no recuerdan su posición en el alfabeto, y eso las hace eternas, PROYECTO: coger la película Viaje a Italia de Rossellini, eliminarle todos los fotogramas en los que aparecen personas, montarla de nuevo. Verla. Por ahí tu silueta, PROYECTO: coger el ferry Nápoles-Stromboli. Al llegar a la isla, valiéndose de sprays, dibujar en su superficie las trayectorias que describieron cada uno de los actores en la película Stromboli; asignar a cada una un color. Hacer una fotografía aérea, o cambiar de escala un amanecer de domingo, saltas 15 cm de la acera al asfalto, se abre el cuerpo a señales rotas, impresoras de tinta expulsan las copias que de ti el amanecer ha ido diseñando, y al fondo un triángulo Ceda el Paso enmascara el icono de Dios, la biodiversidad es la variabilidad de organismos que no son tú, así que el mal existe, conduces, cables de alta tensión, el consuelo de que en su final habrá alguien distinto cada 10 años, el mundo tal como lo recordé, el bofetón definitivo de aquel verso, aunque nada pueda devolverte ni aquel tiempo del esplendor en la hierba ni la gloria de las flores, no debes dolerte por ello. En la belleza que quedó atrás tienes que encontrar toda la fuerza, (William Wordsworth), te esperé entonces en la cafetería del hotel en tanto fuiste a comprar un último souvenir, Bangkok, monzones, llovía en V, me entretuve mirando los cuerpos de quienes entraban y salían, a contraluz eran sombras sin cuerpo, como si a una bombilla le extirpas el filamento, escribí unas notas sin intención, algo me hizo pensar en una canción que a ti no te gustaba pero a mí sí, y en cuando pasamos un fin de año en Londres viendo un programa de viejas glorias de la RAI y nos morimos de risa, pedí otra agua, aún llovía, huéspedes que antes habían salido regresaban con bolsas, taxis, motocicletas, yo entonces usaba muletas, te esperé hasta que se hizo de noche, no duermo, el mundo tal como lo recordé, los cuerpos buscan la suma del sudor, la masa es una magnitud sumable, la temperatura no, se agranda el tamaño del monstruo que ya no calienta, aún hay vida en aquel amigo que sudaba luz, somos el destilado de todas las vacas del mundo, ojos tiernos en un paisaje ganadero al que llamamos aire acondicionado o pulmón, se me ocurre un poema: el motivo por el que a los humanos nos atrae sentarnos cada día en torno a una mesa y comer, es porque la materia prima, cuando la compramos en el mercado, la recibimos muerta, y cocinarla, servirla y paladearla equivale a resucitarla en el plato. Hay una conciencia de tiempo marcada por esa muerte y esa resurrección. Cuando compramos comida manufacturada, esa sensación de resurrección desaparece. La eternidad de los productos manufacturados la proporciona el código de barras, te oigo pero no duermo, en el origen todo eran sombras, Proyectos, utilizar la máquina de escribir como instrumento decodificador perfecto, remontan el tiempo las 66.999 letras hasta ahora tecleadas, entre el orden del alfabeto y este poema media un caos, movimientos migratorios trenzan partículas o letras, cuerpos que son restos de serie, el aura de los dedos, y un legítimo aire de tragedia, escribes tu último poema: REUNIDOS: De una parte D. Agustín Fernández Mallo (en adelante designada como EL EDITOR), con NIF 80800267-S, domiciliado en calle Jaime III, n.° 22, Palma de Mallorca (España). y de otra parte D. Agustín Fernández Mallo (en adelante designada como EL AUTOR), con NIF 80800267-S, domiciliado en calle Jaime III, n.° 22, Palma de Mallorca (España), ACUERDAN: el sol viene heredando grafitis inútiles en su corteza, botellas de plástico exhaustas, caprichos sonoros apenas audibles, no duermo, aire de fiesta los chicos y chicas, no duermo, una molécula de aire tarda 3,4 días en cruzar un continente del tamaño de Europa, transcurren 3,4 milisegundos entre que pisas y estalla una mina antipersona, no duermo, tu presencia surge del apagón de tu presencia, flotas entre el paladar y la lengua, chicle, comida que no se ingiere, estómago que infinitamente aguarda, grado cero del alimento, el despertador incuba la ruptura, 6.30 am pasa un saltador camino a la piscina, habla por teléfono, dice algo acerca de qué sentido tiene precipitarse contra un paisaje sin olas, romper una y otra vez la tensión superficial de un cerebro cuyo fondo miente en azul, sin jamás romperla, sus palabras orinan desazón y después silencio calle abajo, somos piscinas, laminar metafísica, socorristas de secano, no duermo, el Mundo aún no era chino, y era verano, preguntar a los objetos porque no responden los objetos, cuando abrí los ojos ya todos los mamuts estaban pintados, el Editor y el Autor acuerdan: no importa el tamaño del cerebro, sino el número de sus circunvoluciones, te despiertas, —¿por qué escribes poemas? —preguntas, —porque está ahí —respondo, el Mundo ya era hielo, de modo que pesaba menos, la esperanza cóncava que se forma al mear sobre nieve, ahora sí, último poema: TÍTULO (marque con una X la casilla que proceda): MI PRIMER DISCO DE AVIADOR DRO PROGRAMA EN ESPIRAL MOTOR AUTOMÁTICO DE BÚSQUEDA [0] Cayó al fin el ángel. No hizo ruido, no levantó polvo, no pasó por el tacto. ¿Cayó entonces el ángel? [1] [y en la radio Rompeolas] troceado por la oscuridad del alumbrado público, un hombre fuma en la cama [la ceniza, el fuego: es tan difícil calcular qué carne hay en medio] escribe en su móvil: ¿estás ahí? Aunque nada exista entre la ceniza y el fuego, esperamos una estrella, que en esta oscuridad la luz de la pantalla gane peso, se engalaxie [y en la radio Rompeolas]. [2] Ni ir a la materia ni abandonarla al cero de su inercia. Ni contar el tiempo en línea ni una orilla que se repite [o ni el péndulo que se detiene tras aspirar todos los dígitos]. Irá mi lápiz de memoria a tu puerto. Mi lápiz. Alcanza su estadística la materia. Alcanza el tiempo su contenido. [3] Llegó el funeral. El único que no acudió a la cita fue el convocado, ruido sin fundamento en el cajón vacío [como la TV que se oía al fondo] Todo se fragmenta, y por alguna ley que no podrá sumarse a otras leyes, rota la simetría sólo quedan palabras sin forma, no obstante llenas: ADN y Telediario en un mismo gramo de tierra [como el érase una vez de los cuentos que deja el tiempo en suspenso]. [4] Ex-céntrica, vibra la bala, difiere de sí. Así que hicimos un arca hermética y metimos las especies que ya estaban muertas. La absoluta oscuridad por ejemplo. Por ejemplo la absoluta luz. [5] un día [recuerdo que fue al principio y amarilla] te compré una flor. Mientras subía la cuesta hasta tu casa sabía ya que aquello era demasiado clásico para llamarlo real. No por la flor, que más que clásica es eterna e instantánea a un tiempo, sino porque en todas las películas, en todos los poemas, en todas las telenovelas, en todos los videojuegos, la amada vive [compruébalo] en una casa que está en lo alto de una cuesta. [6] En el mismo vértice de la lágrima, última dioptría de verdad densa y el tiempo que deja atrás, no hay nada. [7] Entretanto se tensó el centro hasta laminarse, y lo convexo, erigido, tocó aire. Pero el nacimiento, la muerte: no estamos en nosotros. Como si naciera otro; muriera otro. Es la propia materia la que en ocasiones se resetea. [8] Las bajas temperaturas eran entonces dos líneas de tejado en fuga, y el punto al fondo afilado el cero absoluto de lo que vendría, tú diciendo regresa pronto, yo, regresa pronto respondiendo, en Estambul me dio por comprar el Tractatus de Witty en turco, tú estabas preciosa con nuestra borrasca de seda aún dentro, y el Guernica era ya para nosotros una macarrada. Una y sólo una vez se congela la copa entre tus manos. [9] La totalidad del abismo vertido en 1 cm3 de Universo. Entra el presente, que no la realidad [vasta, visceral, latiente, superficial, pegajosa en suma] en coma. Cuando ya nada importa, y tu vagina puro tiempo: 1 minuto3 de Universo. [10] y cayó al fin el ángel. Lo supe por el beso que me dio como quien escribe: la infancia es un átomo que emite la partícula © hasta que morimos. CRÉDITOS Este libro es la materialización de una idea concreta: realizar un texto de un solo poema escrito íntegramente en soledad, y sin pausa, entre los días 1 y 15 de diciembre de 2005, en una casa ligada a los veranos de mi infancia, localizada en un pueblo de la montaña leonesa en el que sólo queda 1 habitante. Me interesaba conocer mi reacción en ese entorno. [El primer ready-made no fue un portabotellas, sino el traje de tweed con el que Mallory intentó escalar el Everest.] Aislado debido a la nieve, sin teléfono fijo ni cobertura de teléfono móvil, ni Internet ni ningún otro tipo de comunicación, elegí un horario rotatorio: cada día me levantaba 2 horas más tarde y me acostaba también 2 horas más tarde, con lo que al fin de los 15 días que dediqué a este texto cumplí un ciclo de más o menos 24 horas de modificación de horario y hábitos. En algunos de esos momentos fui encontrando por ahí cosas importantes, como un ejemplar de la revista de medicina Jano del año 1986, que me comunicó algún verso, un cómic del piloto de carretas Meteoro, un casquillo de bala de caza mayor junto a unas pisadas de jabalí, o una lata de champiñones caducada el día de mi cumpleaños, y que, lógicamente, no abrí. Las fotografías adjuntas también son producto de la excitación o aburrimiento de esos días, algunas de objetos hallados en la casa o alrededores. Cuando, sabiéndote el único habitante de un lugar, te metes en la cama y te imaginas el pueblo a vista de pájaro, y les quitas a todas las casas su tejado, ves todas las camas perfectamente hechas y sólo en una un bulto, un muñeco, que eres tú. En ese momento se te aparece una extraña acepción de la palabra soledad. Por lo demás, podrías entrar en todas las casas, saquearlas sin que nadie reparara en ello, las tienes a tu entera disposición, y no lo haces. Eso es algo que me sigue pareciendo un misterio. Los objetos de compañía, destacables por su implicación en el proceso fueron: un PC portátil, un escáner, una cámara de vídeo digital, una pequeña TV rotuladores gruesos indelebles un plumífero Solo Climb 3⁄4 una sierra para troncos diez paquetes de tabaco calculé mal la comida; me sobró más de la mitad Los poemas de los amigos, son: (...) Se me aparece un verso, me levanto y a tientas escribo: (...) de Eduardo Moga en, Las Horas y los labios (DVD, 2003). No ha vivido del todo / quien se ha perdido el celo de los gatos (...) de Román Piña en, Los trofeos efímeros (inédito). a ciento ochenta saltándome los semáforos... de Manuel Vilas, Resurrección (Visor, 2005). El pedal de freno no responde es de José Vidal Valicourt, La Casa de Mallarmé (Dip. Prov. de Soria, 2005). Además: cuando todo se acabe y nadie nos recuerde (...) seguro que nos vemos / en cualquier fiesta, es un fragmento de la canción En Cualquier Fiesta, de La Mode. El poema «Borges y yo», también está incluido en El hacedor (de Borges), Remake (Alfaguara, 2011), y había aparecido anteriormente en Campo Abierto, antología del poema en prosa en España, 19902005 (Marta Agudo y Carlos Jiménez Arribas, eds., DVD, 2005). Algún otro verso, en la novela Nocilla Lab (Alfaguara, 2009). El Poema Postpoético n.° 0, lo incluí en el ensayo Postpoesía, hacia un nuevo paradigma (Anagrama, 2009). Algunos fragmentos los he usado en actuaciones de Afterpop Fernández&Fernández, spoken word que vengo desarrollando junto con Eloy Fernández Porta, así como en la película Proyecto Nocilla, disponible en el blog El Hombre Que Salió de la Tarta. También, en el disco Pacas go downtown, del grupo Frida Laponia, que compusimos y grabamos Juan Feliu y yo, www.fridalaponia.com Otros fragmentos fueron publicados en algunas revistas como La Bolsa de Pipas y Casatomada. A continuación, adjunto un material que inicialmente pertenecía al poemario, casi a los últimos versos, y que después retiré, pero que aun así me parece interesante. Se trata de la confección de un «topograma alfabético», una especie de geografía de letras de todo el poemario. Éste era el fragmento: [...] no duermo, cuento la repetición de cada letra en este texto, observo la curva resultante: aunque existan picos de tensión, desiertos, o inmersiones en muertes aparentes, el topograma presenta un claro descenso, me viene una pregunta: ¿será el mismo que acompaña a estos días? [...] después, casualmente, leyendo un artículo sobre criptografía, me di cuenta de que en cualquier texto lo suficientemente extenso [y en todo idioma o alfabeto], el número de repeticiones de cada letra es siempre, más o menos, el mismo, así que, en cierto modo, todos los poemas que puede concebir una persona en cualquier idioma son el mismo poema, presentan idéntico carácter cómico y dramático en términos plásticos: una curva que desciende. no podemos huir de ese mapa, El mundo tal como lo recordé. Dedicado a mi padre, que ya es nieve. Notas * Todas las palabras y frases que aparecen en letra cursiva, salvo las correspondientes a la cita cabecera de Shakespeare, pertenecen a Agustín Fernández Mallo y están presentes en su libro Ya nadie se llamará como yo. (1) Una vez alcanzado el radio crítico, rc, la estrella seguirá contrayéndose de tal forma que sus partículas alcanzarán todas el centro en un tiempo finito. Pero este efecto no es observable desde el exterior, así que la contracción va acompañada de un encerrarse en sí misma de la estrella. El tiempo t de propagación de una señal emitida desde esa estrella tiende entonces a infinito, tal como lo muestra la fórmula: (si r tiende a rc) Ya nadie se llamará como yo + Poesía reunida (1998-2012) Agustín Fernández Mallo No se permite la reproducción total o parcial de este libro, ni su incorporación a un sistema informático, ni su transmisión en cualquier forma o por cualquier medio, sea éste electrónico, mecánico, por fotocopia, por grabación u otros métodos, sin el permiso previo y por escrito del editor. La infracción de los derechos mencionados puede ser constitutiva de delito contra la propiedad intelectual (Art. 270 y siguientes del Código Penal) Diríjase a CEDRO (Centro Español de Derechos Reprográficos) si necesita reproducir algún fragmento de esta obra. Puede contactar con CEDRO a través de la web www.conlicencia.com o por teléfono en el 91 702 19 70 / 93 272 04 47 Diseño de la portada, Departamento de Arte y Diseño, Área Editorial Grupo Planeta © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2015 Ya nadie se llamará como yo © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2015 Poesía reunida (1998-2012): Creta Lateral Travelling © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2004, 2015; Yo siempre regreso a los pezones y al punto 7 del Tractatus © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2001, 2012, 2015. Prólogo © Eduardo Moga, 2001, 2012. Imágenes © Pere Joan, 2012. Cedido por Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial, S. A. U.; Joan Fontaine Odisea © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2005, 2015; Carne de píxel © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2008, 2015; Antibiótico © Agustín Fernández Mallo, 2012. Cedido por Visor Libros © Frontispicio: Antonio Gamoneda, 2015 © Prólogo: Pablo García Casado, 2015 © Editorial Planeta, S. A., 2015 Seix Barral, un sello editorial de Editorial Planeta, S. A. Avda. Diagonal, 662-664, 08034 Barcelona (Espa.a) www.seix-barral.es www.planetadelibros.com Primera edición en libro electrónico (epub): septiembre de 2015 ISBN: 978-84-322-2529-1 (epub) Conversión a libro electrónico: Newcomlab, S. L. www.newcomlab.com Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. Official Telegram channel Z-Access https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library z-library.sk z-lib.gs z-lib.fm go-to-library.sk This file was downloaded from Z-Library project Alone and Not Alone Ron Padgett Coffee House Press Minneapolis 2015 Copyright © 2015 Ron Padgett Cover design © 2014 by Jim Dine Book design by Linda Koutsky Author photograph © John Sarsgard Coffee House Press books are available to the trade through our pri- mary distributor, Consortium Book Sales & Distribution, cbsd.com or (800) 283-3572. For personal orders, catalogs, or other information, write to: info@coffeehousepress.org. Coffee House Press is a nonprofit literary publishing house. Sup- port from private foundations, corporate giving programs, govern- ment programs, and generous individuals helps make the publication of our books possible. We gratefully acknowledge their support in detail in the back of this book. Visit us at coffeehousepress.org. library of congress cataloging-in-publication data Padgett, Ron, 1942– [Poems. Selections] Alone and not alone / Ron Padgett. pages cm ISBN 978-1-56689-401-2 (softcover) ISBN 978-1-56689-402-9 (eBook) I. Title. PS3566.A32A6 2014 811’.54—dc23 printed in the united states first edition | first printing acknowledgments Some of the poems in this volume were published in Aphros, Cerise Press, Coconut, Connotation Press, Court Green, Courtland Review, For the One Fund Boston (Granary Books), Hanging Loose, Poem-a-Day (Academy of American Poets), Sentence, T ablet, T est Centre, and Upstreet. for Wayne Contents 1 What Poem 2 The Roman Numerals 4 Butterfly 6 Reality 8 The Chinese Girl 10 Smudges 11 It Takes T wo 12 The First Time 13 Circles 14 Grandpa Brushed His T eeth 15 Coffee Man 16 Where Is My Head? 18 Survivor Guilt 20 The Young Cougar 21 Radio in the Distance 22 Face Value 25 The Plank and the Screw 27 102 T oday 28 The Pounding Rabbit 29 Mountains and Songs 30 It All Depends 35 The Elevation of Ideals 37 Birgitte Hohlenberg 39 Pep Talk 40 Preface to Philosophy 42 You Know What 44 A Bit about Bishop Berkeley 45 The Step Theory 48 My ’75 Chevy 49 For A. 50 Art Lessons 51 A Few Ideas about Rabbits 54 The Value of Discipline 55 Pea Jacket 57 The Ukrainian Museum 59 The 1870s 61 One Thing Led to Another 62 The Rabbi with a Puzzle Voice 64 Syntactical Structures 65 The World of Us 68 Curtain 69 Homage to Meister Eckhart 72 The Incoherent Behavior of Most Lawn Furniture 73 This Schoolhouse Look 74 The Street 75 Paris Again 76 London, 1815 77 Of Copse and Coppice 80 Manifestation and Mustache 81 Shipwreck in General 82 French Art in the 1950s Three Poems in Honor of Willem de Kooning 83 I Felt 84 The Door to the River 85 Zot 86 Alone and Not Alone Alone and Not Alone 1 What Poem What poem were you thinking of, my dear, as you breezed out the door in your long coat fur-tipped at the top? What animal once wore that fur and licked it with a long, raspy tongue that lolled to one side in the afternoon shade? If only you too could lope across the Serengeti Plain and grab something in your powerful jaws, instead of pausing at the door and saying, as if in afterthought, “Write a poem while I’m out.” 2 The Roman Numerals It must have been hard for the Romans to multiply —I don’t mean reproduce, but to do that computation. Step inside a roman numeral for a moment, a long one such as mdcclix. Look at the columns and pediments and architraves: you cannot move them, but how beautiful they are and august! However, try to multiply mdccclxiv by mcclviii. How did they do it? I asked this question some years ago and never found an answer because I never looked for one, but it is pleasant, living with this question. Perhaps the Romans weren’t good at math, unlike the Arabs, who arrived with baskets of numerals, plenty for everyone. We still have more than we need today. 3 I have a 6 and a 7 that, when put side by side, form my age. Come to think of it, I’d rather be lxvii. 4 Butterfly Chaung Tzu wrote about the man who dreamed he was a butterfly and when he woke up wondered if he weren’t now a butterfly dreaming he was a man. I love this idea though I doubt that Chaung Tzu really thought that a man would think he is a butterfly, for it’s one thing to wake up from a dream in the night and another to spend your whole life dreaming you are a man. I have spent my whole life thinking I was a boy, then a man, also a person and an American and a physical entity and a spirit and maybe a little bit butterfly. Maybe I should be more butterfly, that is, lurch into a room with bulging eyes and big flapping wings that throw a choking powder onto people who scream and fall dead, 5 almost. For I would rescue them with the celestial music of my beauty and my utter harmlessness, my ætherial disregard of what they are. 6 Reality Reality has a transparent veneer that looks exactly like the reality beneath it. If you look at anything, your hands, for instance, and wait, you will see it. Then it will flicker and vanish, though it is still there. You must wait a day or two before attempting to see it again, for each attempt uses up your current allotment of reality viewing. Meanwhile there is a coffee shop where you can sit and drink coffee, and where you will be tempted to look down at the cup and see the transparent veneer again, but that is only because you are overstimulated. Do not order another cup. Or do. It will have no effect on the veneer. Sometimes the veneer becomes detached and moves slightly away from reality, as when you look up and see a refrigerator in refrigerator heaven, cold and quiet. But then the veneer snaps back to its former position and vanishes. This is a normal occurrence— do not be alarmed by it. 7 Instead, drive to the store and buy something that looks like milk, return home and place it in the refrigerator. Days go by, years go by, people grow older and die, surrounded, if they are lucky, by younger people who do not know what to do with feelings whose veneers have slipped to the side, far to the side, and are staying there too long. But eventually they will grow hungry and tired, and an image of dinner and bed will float in like a leaf that fell from who knows where, and sleep. 8 The Chinese Girl When I order a coffee that is half-real, half-decaf, with half-and-half, the women behind the counter invariably give me a blank look and wait for something to come clear in their heads, and when it doesn’t I repeat, slowly, my order, gesturing with my fingers to demonstrate the half-real, then the half-decaf part. When it finally registers on them and they fill the cup, I point to the carton of half-and-half. Then one of the two—they work in pairs—asks, “Shu gah?” However, the youngest of the morning crew of five understands better than the other four, so I always hope to have her wait on me, not only because of her better English but because she is the cutest. Of course not all Chinese girls look the same, but descrip- tions of them tend to sound the same, so I’m not sure that it would help to say that she has straight black hair, parted in the front and held in place by the bakery uniform’s light-green kerchief, a slightly flattened nose, and dark eyes, with a small mole on the right above her top lip. Her modest demeanor lends her an air of innocence. She is what, around eighteen? I always look forward to seeing her on my weekly visit to the bakery. This morning when I walked slowly along the display case of dazzling muffins, buns, rolls, danishes, and other pastries, trying to decide among them, I heard her voice on the other side, asking, “Can I help you?” Never before had one of the crew left the cash register area to do this. Concealing my surprise, I asked her, “Are the croissants ready yet?” 9 “I will see.” When she came back from the kitchen she said, “Five minutes.” “Then I’ll have one of these danishes.” “You want small coffee, no? Half-regular, half-decaf, with half-and-half?” Astonished, I said, “Yes, that’s right. You have a good memory.” “I remember you,” she said, causing my heart to flutter. But my composure returned when she asked, “Shu gah?” At the register she handed me the change from a five. I took a single and, pointedly ignoring the tip jar, handed it to her, saying “This is for you. Sheh sheh.” “Thank you,” she said, lowering her eyes and almost imperceptibly drawing back. I got the signal, so I headed toward an empty table, where I removed the plastic lid from the paper cup and took a bite out of the danish. A band of steam rose from the coffee, like a curtain on a miniature stage. The Chinese girl and I are living in a remote part of China. Our past lives have been erased. She is unspeakably devoted to me and I adore her. We say little, passing our days in a state of calm I could never have imagined. 10 Smudges Smattering of gray puffs rocks are they large ones but if you pick them up light too light but fun to lift and marvel at they don’t make “sense” they aren’t broken they are what you have laughing in you almost out smudges come out of the rock you breathe in and out the same gray rock each time as if looped in a cartoon of a sleeping man from whom z’s emanate Smattering of gray puffs a man is one of them a cloud a smudge a powder of stone from which a city arises with people in it and ideas that flow toward you and through you it’s too late it’s already happened to the next you and the gray smudge that is your face turning into your next face the one you forget as soon as it happens as you fall away among other smudges that are falling away smudges and puffs falling away 11 It Takes Two My replacement in the universe is the little tyke who’ll soon arrive and let me be superfluous if and when I feel like being so. I don’t really mean that. It’s just the openness of what will or might be, when what matters most is the right now of now, which, when I draw back and look reveals an old fool in the foggy bliss of whatever this morning is. Straighten up, old thing! You aren’t that old and he or she will reach right up and grasp some years and break them off your psyche—what is it? like stardust? glittering on those tiny tiny fingers. 12 The First Time The first time Marcello went outside the sun and moon were at his side (his happy mom and happy dad) (also the happiness known as granddad). The first time Marcello breathed the outside air he seemed to like it there. The first time he got in a car it zoomed him fast and far (for such a little guy) to Brooklyn: “Hi, Brooklyn!” he didn’t shout: his words were too little to get out. But clearly in his sleeping face he felt comfy in the human race. 13 Circles Marcello sees the sun is yellow. But then at night it’s white. No, that’s the moon or a white balloon above his bed— wait, it’s his head! Colored circles rise and fall. Marcello seems to like them all. 14 Grandpa Brushed His Teeth This morning Grandpa brushed his teeth so hard it knocked Marcello down but he got back up to watch Grandpa brush those teeth Ah Grandpa brushing up and down with joy he sang almost Glug glug! The toothpaste tasted excellent and the brush it zigged and zagged It’s a good thing he has teeth to brush and that he likes the brushing of them The only missing ones are Wisdom and Marcello does not need them And Grandpa doesn’t either Good-bye to Wisdom teeth and Wisdom Buon giorno to Marcello Little toothbrush fellow 15 Coffee Man She might be hearing the burbling song of the bird outside, but it is impossible to tell, since she has rolled over and I think gone back to sleep. If I were to say quietly, “Good morning, dear, here is your coffee,” she would open her eyes and manage a groggy “Thank you.” But when she realizes that I am standing there without coffee, I would forget which tense I’m waiting to lift from the jar with the red lid in the kitchen. 16 Where Is My Head? It makes you nervous to think not about death but about dying and being dead yourself but when you don’t think about it it doesn’t exist, at least in your universe. And since that’s the universe you happen to be in you want to stay there: you have to fix the world and then save it, you have to do that one thing you can’t remember what it is but you know it’s there somewhere like the death you forgot for a moment. I should have spent my life meditating so deeply that the thought of death would be relaxing like a breeze or a feather but instead I have spent it promising myself that someday I would go to that special place in my psyche where the spirit enters and leaves and make my peace with the beast I call myself. I hate myself for dying, how could I have done this! But all I did was nothing other than believe that I was actually important! Everything my mother did proved it. But when she died she just glided away— 17 she didn’t mind at all. She didn’t think she was important and she had a farmgirl’s view of dying: chickens do it all the time, they run around the yard with blood gushing from where their heads used to be. I wish I could do that! In Paris the heads that dropped into the basket —were they still thinking about the executioner? T oday I am my own executioner. 18 Survivor Guilt It’s very easy to get. Just keep living and you’ll find yourself getting more and more of it. You can keep it or pass it on, but it’s a good idea to keep a small portion for those nights when you’re feeling so good you forget you’re human. Then drudge it up and float down from the ceiling that is covered with stars that glow in the dark for the sole purpose of being beautiful for you, and as you sink their beauty dims and goes out— I mean it flies out the nearest door or window, its whoosh raising the hair on your forearms. If only your arms were green, you could have two small lawns! But your arms are just there and you are kaput. It’s all your fault, anyway, and it always has been— the kind word you thought of saying but didn’t, the appalling decline of human decency, global warming, thermonuclear nightmares, your own small cowardice, your stupid idea that you would live forever— all tua culpa. John Phillip Sousa invented the sousaphone, which is also your fault. Its notes resound like monstrous ricochets. But when you wake up, your body seems to fit fairly well, like a tailored suit, and you don’t look too bad in the mirror. Hi there, feller! 19 Old feller, young feller, who cares? Whoever it was who felt guilty last night, to hell with him. That was then. 20 The Young Cougar The doors swing open and in walks a young cougar wearing white shoes and light-blue socks, come to help his father. “Where do we put this in the registry?” one servant asks another. Or they were wearing the shoes and socks. 21 Radio in the Distance for Yvonne Jacquette Beneath the earth covered with men with snow atop their heads, down to where it is dark and deep, to where the big black vibrating blob of wobble is humming its one and only note, I lie, orange hair not in the idea of diagonal, a Betty not composed of vertical fish or dog with grid-mark cancellations, but easy as an orchestra of toy atoms lazy with buzz and fizzle in their drift as if above this late and lost Manhattan spread out like a diagram of what we want from heaven, wherever it is when we think we know what it is and even when it really is. 22 Face Value From a face comes a body an entire body and from a body everything but I can’t face you fully not yet maybe never and even if I did or thought I did how would I know How would I know what face value is From a face comes face value and from face value a lot of baling wire —the face scribbled over with dark coils of it I was born in Kentucky almost There were no faces there so I was born elsewhere from inside a fencepost to which barbed wire had been affixed by Frederic Remington The air was cool, the night calm and each star had a face like a movie star’s or someone in the family 23 They too had star quality I thought but they had statue quality and then turned sideways like music blending into fabric and little curtains along the kitchen windows attractive kitchen windows Now you can sit down at this table and look me square in the eye and tell me what you’ve been wanting to or you can stand up like a photograph on a piano and sing to me a song that has no words or music Which is it? —But a heavy magnetic force pulls you to the wall and holds you there As soon as you get used to it it lets you go for a while and then your heavy magnetic force pulls the wall to you and you walk around with a wall stuck to your side The Wall of Forgetting it’s called 24 but it’s not a wall it’s a mirror that picks your face up off the floor and whirls it onto a head that has gone on without you 25 The Plank and the Screw There is one thing. In a fishing village on the coast of Norway an idea came forth and spread over the country and from there to the rest of the world, namely that floating inside the sun was its power source: a plank and a screw that had come loose from it, and as long as they floated around, never far one from the other, the sun would continue to burn. Let’s try to imagine how hot it is one inch from the sun. Now that we have found it impossible to imagine we can go on to the next thing we do not understand. Meanwhile, the plank and the screw continue to float— the plank is roughly an eight-foot one-by-ten, the screw a three-inch flathead— but since there is nothing around them except burning gas they are both highly visible. 26 Many years passed. Gradually the idea that had come from Norway became so assimilated into the everyday lives of people that they never thought of it— it changed from an idea into people, so they forgot and for all practical purposes the idea ceased to exist. But everyone has inside them a plank and a screw floating around. Everyone is warm enough to be alive. 27 102 Today If Wystan Auden were alive today he’d be a small tangle of black lines on a rumpled white bedsheet, his little eyes looking up at you. What did you bring? Some yellow daffodils and green stems. Or did they bring you? Auden once said, “Where the hell is Bobby?” and we looked around, but there was no Bobby there. Ah, Auden, no Bobby for you. Just these daffodils in a clean white vase. 28 The Pounding Rabbit After a clock designed by Neya Churyoku (1897–1987) If you know the Japanese folktale about the rabbit that ended up on the moon, you will not be puzzled by a table clock depicting a rabbit pounding rice cakes on the moon, but if you do not know this story you will look at the clock and pound your own head in disbelief, as if to knock from it the spirit you wish to offer to the gods who munch the rice cakes and never turn to say thank you except by sending down a genius to create such a clock, such a rabbit. 29 Mountains and Songs Mountains of song exert their force up through the earth and rise above it Peasants and villagers cling to it as it rises and they sing and then they don’t for this is a pause in the history of the world and its mountains and songs I saw them rising and I knew it was weeping this rising for the mountains were going away the villagers and peasants too folded away in cupboards in mountains and songs 30 It All Depends Que reste-t-il de nos amours? —charles trenet Et nos amours, faut-il qu’il m’en souvienne? —apollinaire But it is not love that I would speak of for as you see, I am of the nineteenth century, when love was . . . well, it all depends, and I can’t get out of it, whatever this love is. I will die in it and I hope of it, it is the preamble to walking in and sitting down and saying “Hi” before anything else has a chance to happen. And then of course nothing does, which is why you keep saying it— you can’t get out of saying it. So you may as well take off your hat and stay a while, which is what you always planned on anyway. The nineteenth century, what a tremendous thing to be in love in! Cottages go by and music piles up 31 like excited dead people. They stop but don’t, like sleeping people who are alive, but it’s not that easy, the century is more complicated than one had expected now that everyone has a pot and a pan but not a love of the pot and the pan. Still, look at those sailing ships on the wide main and the stairways that spiral into heaven and that bird with a long red beard sticking straight up! It’s our chance to separate ourselves into numerous pieces and have them go in different directions, reassembling what time had dispersed in the form of granules and mist. Or was it even really there? A nightingale warbled the tune it was supposed to so the world would calm down. There’s nothing wrong with resting alongside this shady rill and taking medications as if they were piles of stones placed at intervals by people who must have had a meaning in mind but with no thought of telling you what it was, for they didn’t know that you would exist. Therefore, lie down and rest. The afternoon is mild and your love is not driving you crazy, temporarily. 32 A rest might give you the strength to look love straight in the eye and not fade into granules and mist. Reverdy said “One must try to live”— the statement of a man who didn’t love or wasn’t loved enough. A small rectangle of light lay on his floor and his shoe flashed as it went by. His wife was hidden in the kitchen, his girlfriend hidden in celebrity, his God just hidden. Pierre opened the kitchen door, the trap door of fame, and the side of the cathedral, but there was nothing there, and when he opened his heart he found only a rectangle of sunlight on the floor. But it was enough. Perhaps his wife was hiding her love in the kitchen, the dark kitchen in Solesmes, where I saw her walking briskly down the street 33 at the age of 97 or 98, the same street a few years later she would move slowly up and down the way to lie down in the tomb next to Pierre, her Pierre. By then the girlfriend had twirled into Eternity, and God had hidden so deeply in Pierre’s poems Pierre didn’t know He was there— He had gone back and disappeared beneath the period that ended Pierre’s first book, like a dark glint. But God too was trying to live. He hasn’t been around lately, which is perhaps why the landscape is so cheerful— it gets to be just itself, brutally wonderfully so, and birds veer and chirp and lift their wings to see what’s there. It’s air. And so singing. 34 “But that’s what I did,” says Pierre out of nowhere. “And you can’t tell if the singing made the air or the other way around— or both, which is most likely.” And then, like a Frenchman, he left, before I had a chance to throw him around the room, but with respect, affection, and mountains, the kind they had in the century he was born in, mountains as black as his tomb, which I am unable to throw around now that his wife’s in there too. Henriette: her name. (Henri: his real first name.) (Her name a little feminine version of his.) (But we all get smaller and smaller.) (Hoping to fit inside a rectangle of sunlight.) (And not be a shoe!) (Though have the calmness of a shoe.) (Beneath the bed at night.) I will tell you this tonight. 35 The Elevation of Ideals T o construct a set of ideals, a toy tool kit suffices, provided that the handles of the hammer, saw, and screwdriver are of wood and painted light blue. However, a full set of adult tools enables the builder to work more rapidly and with greater precision. Of equal importance are the raw materials, though it is possible to use various bits and pieces that one finds along the way. Remember, though, never to use metaphors in the construction, for over time they will shift, and the entire construction will sag and perhaps collapse. (Of course these rules apply only if you live on dry land; another set covers undersea construction.) (If you end one ideal in parentheses, you must begin the next also in parentheses. Otherwise, the joint will not bond.) T o construct a solid set of ideals, do not begin too early, for all too often the ideals do not turn out to be ideals at all: they are ideas, and, like bubbles, they tend to float away and pop. In doing so they can be beautiful, but æsthetic beauty is not of great importance here, unless it happens to be the same as moral beauty, which happens very rarely in modern societies. So allow your ideals to evolve through the decades. If you cherish them and don’t think about them too much, they will change themselves by rotating on their axes while flashing on and off, to show you that all is well. When you turn fifty, they stop flashing, and for a while you think they have vanished, but it is you who have vanished, so thoroughly that even you do not know you are there. But you are. You are, the way your mother is there, and your father, too. At this point you can obtain a set of tools and start thinking about the 36 construction, how to begin it and where. These choices will be up to you: some choose the head, some the heart, and others even elect to build it outside themselves. The choice of location might bedevil you, but I will tell you now that the location doesn’t really matter, except to you. Deciding on the design of the construction can prove extremely difficult. This is normal, so don’t fret about it. Just pick up the first ideal and see how it feels in your hand, then pick up a tool in the other hand. You will know immediately if they match. If they don’t, try others. If nothing seems to work, you are not really fifty, and it is best to put the tools away and try later. But do not postpone the resumption too long, for you might have grown so old that you no longer remember your project, or you may not be physically strong enough to make difficult moral decisions. Assuming, however, that you do resume, aim to build a perfect structure, no matter how small, for if the one you do complete is good enough it will float up of its own accord and stop in midair, where you can sing to it any time you want. If a door or window falls off, do not be concerned. Another door or window will appear in its place. And anyway, you will be inside, looking out. 37 Birgitte Hohlenberg for Bill Berkson I do not know who Birgitte Hohlenberg was or why C. A. Jensen painted her portrait, in 1826, but I’m glad he did, because then I could see it in the Statens Museum for Kunst in Copenhagen and buy a postcard of it and send it to my wife: “Isn’t she beautiful?” She being Birgitte Hohlenberg and the painting of her. I don’t know which of them I love more. Both are bright, calm, and sweet— she had a way with beauty. You see it in the brown satin dress with fluffy sleeves and big white collar edged in lace, the hat a light white puff around her head and neatly tied beneath the chin, her curly chestnut hair an echo of the ribbon curling around the brim and returning over the shoulders to a loose knot at the collarbone, her slender neck rising to a face whose high color elevates how interested she is to be sitting there looking straight at you without the slightest hint of carnality. Just being in her presence would be enough for me, now, at my age. When did I send this card? August 15, 2001. That long ago. Before the T owers came down— before a lot of things came down. But she 38 has stayed up, on my wife’s dresser. How she died I don’t know, or at what age. C. A. Jensen lived to 78, a long life back then. Good for him. I hope he was as happy as he makes me every time I see his picture. I hope you see it too. 39 Pep Talk Dinner is a damned nice thing as are breakfast and lunch when they’re good and with the one you love. That’s a kind of dancing sitting down and not moving but what dances exactly we do not know nor need to know, it is dancing us around and nothing is moving in the miracle of dinner breakfast and lunch and all the in-betweens that give us pep. 40 Preface to Philosophy An ugly day it must have been, when the first man stood face to face with the idea of the worthlessness and absurdity of life. —w. macneile dixon But it wasn’t such an ugly day when I read Dixon’s remark, at the age of fifteen, because I had already been charmed by the idea of the worthlessness and absurdity of life, which seemed far more sophisticated than the idea that life is meaningful and wonderful. Now as I read it again for the first time in fifty-four years, what strikes me is not the truth of his statement, but the image of an early man’s finding himself “face to face” with an idea; that is, with a ghostly being three times his size, wavering before him and commu- nicating without speaking. Of course this is not what Dixon meant to convey; he was using “face to face” metaphorically, as an expres- sive device. But now I am face to face with his metaphor. However, I can escape it by trying to picture the room in which I first read his remark, my bedroom, with its front window and side window. Sitting at my desk, I could have gazed out the front window and across the street to the window of my friend, from whom I had bought the book in which Dixon’s writing appears, but if I was propped up in bed I could not have seen out the window directly behind me, whose curtain I usually kept drawn so that anyone stepping onto our porch would not glance in and see the back of my head. I did not want anyone to look at the back of my head. 41 As for its having been an ugly day, who knows? That is, “ugly” meaning what? Stormy? Dark? Probably the latter. Again he is speaking metaphorically, referring here to the psychological weather of the human nearly struck down by an idea, as I am struck, though not down, by the idea of a dark cloud in a protohuman shape fifteen feet high that descended and stood before the man and emanated the idea of the worthlessness and absurdity of life. What made the man believe it? And then go on, as I have gone on? 42 You Know What Every once in a while it occurs to me that I am a vibration as hard as a living creature and that that creature is me. It occurs when I look out of my eyes at it and it skulks away into the dark area. But you know what? Take your philosophy and put it in a paper bag and carry it to a destination and open it and see if it looks back at you and if it does then you are occurring because it is occurring too. I learned that in my childhood and I did have a childhood it was better than most but I got nervous when my mother got nervous and my father was always quietly nervous. We were a bundle of secret nerves sometimes and at others we had quite a good time especially my mother and me. We would sing duets in the car 43 in harmony. Sometimes she’d take the alto sometimes I would. It was oddly satisfying to come to a stop sign and stop. Lithuania wasn’t something I had heard of and Stalin was I thought a cartoon character because he had only one name and a mustache. No one in America had a mustache because Hitler had had one and he wasn’t funny he was shouting and shaking his face around a tight nervous fit. Our family was a little nervous but not like that. He had a real problem we had a slight one. One day someone told me to relax. I didn’t know what they meant, I thought we were just the way we were. We had names and identities and we knew who each other was and what to say. So what is “relaxing”? It is turning into someone else in your own body which is what is happening every moment anyway but so slowly we can’t see it— in effect it isn’t occurring though really it is. 44 A Bit about Bishop Berkeley Bishop Berkeley is fond of saying, in the middle of making a point, “This is obvious to anyone who takes a moment to examine it with an attentive mind.” Then he says “Abstract ideas do not exist,” which sounds odd until you see what he means by abstract and remember that he says that language makes everything unclear, though we need it to get what we want. He convinced investors to give him a tidy sum to open a school for colonial and Native American children, but the final funding fell through so he bought Rhode Island or a chunk of it and went back to England and told his investors, “Abstract ideas do not exist.” This is obvious. And oh, his name was George. 45 The Step Theory An idea went by like a bird and a bird went by like a cloud and a cloud went by like a moment: this is the Step Theory of Reality and its by-product the Ziggurat Configuration. Then a bird went by like an idea— the idea of the Step Theory itself, for no one thinks of it anymore, because its pieces lock together seamlessly, the way a play on words is just words and not just words at the same time, for a moment. It can’t come back because it never went anywhere, unlike a cloud that can’t come back because it went everywhere. And so we jump around and sputter, to the great amusement of our higher selves, the ones we can’t find, their laughter echoing forever in the few moments we have. That’s step 1. Now sweep idea, bird, and cloud into a little pile and put them in a box. (They will come in handy later.) 46 For step 2 you must forget who you aren’t, that is, everyone else, even though you are part everyone else. This in itself is not difficult: you do it all the time when you’re not looking. What is difficult is what follows: you must make yourself as flat as a pancake and try to avoid having syrup poured onto you. Most people will not pour syrup onto a human pancake, but there are a few who would. Once you are flat, just lie there for a while. Look at those clouds and the bird that flew into the idea of them. Eventually the Ziggurat Configuration comes into play. The weather is hot and humid but the ziggurat keeps climbing itself until it gets to the top, then it comes back down, only to climb back up, and so on. I once had an aunt like this —there was no stopping her— her face in profile formed a ziggurat. We children put glasses of water on the steps, thus representing the soul without knowing that it takes a while to learn that we have one, but 47 by that time the soul had vanished into the process of being itself, like the idea, the bird, and the cloud: song, song, and song. Step 3 is for later, but I can tell you now that it involves rolling green pastureland you step into but not onto and follow your nose, no cloud, no bird, no idea. 48 My ’75 Chevy Out in the yard sits my 1975 Chevy pickup truck, repainted red with a white roof, body smooth, carburetor rebuilt, new tires, new dashboard, black leather seat covers, new floorboards, and two new side mirrors. In a timeless yard— it creates its own time zone. 1975. I can’t drive simultaneously in 1975 and 2012, but I do because when the truck goes forward I enter the sliding zone known as Miles Per Hour and I’m just someone in something red. 49 For A. The little blue heron’s back again Was he here when Joe was here too with Bill and me and you when we were all just fifty? If the three of us add twenty we’ll get something unreal unlike what we are and feel which is what Joe couldn’t imagine and ever know: how my grandma said now and then “I’m in good shape for the shape I’m in.” 50 Art Lessons Narrative Painting The Madonna never walks. The Portrait Bronzino did for the portrait what the portrait did for the sitter. Still Life The best still lifes have emptiness. The Self-Portrait The self-portrait did for the self what the self did for the portrait. Landscape Landscape is a window through which you see what you thought. Sculpture Don’t move. 51 A Few Ideas about Rabbits It’s hard to understand what a rabbit is It lifts a paw and hesitates For a moment its nose and mouth are all cat and those eyes, so worried so harmless but it might scratch you accidentally and that camel back and tiger crouch ears of lemur perked up Mouse-kangaroo The rabbit runs around eating and doing arithmetic There is the story of the grateful king who offered his subject anything 52 he wanted, and the subject said Take this chessboard and put a coin on the first square then double that amount for the second and so on, to which the king readily consented and when they counted it turned out to be a billion trillion coins (or something like that) more than the richest king could afford Imagine if the man had asked for rabbits Well that’s what Nature asked for. In Australia I think there’s an area that has ten rabbits per square yard Ah, we must shoot them cry certain Australians 53 and others say No ship them to a place that has no rabbits But there’s a reason there are no rabbits there like at the North Pole or in the Gobi Desert or on Park Avenue Anyway I do not trust a rabbit because I have no idea what it is thinking I trust a worm because it isn’t thinking If rabbits could say “I will hop into this garden and eat the lettuce” I would like them more 54 The Value of Discipline I am very disappointed in you, Myron. You are a very smart boy, and we had high hopes for you. But now this. I don’t know. Go to your room. Myron heads toward his room, but does his head hang low? No way! He is looking straight ahead and feeling a hot black liquid trickle through his heart. Great galleons bound through the rough seas and on them bearded men are shouting sailor things as if to the wind. Back in his room the objects look older. What joy to make them walk the plank! Avast! Avaunt! Splash! Garrrr! 55 Pea Jacket Years ago I had an old pea jacket Slightly scruffy but not unclean was my overall look and I lacked the easy assurance that comes with money because I had very little It was okay, not having money I wasn’t starving or lacking anything I needed though by contemporary standards I should have been envious or angry I wasn’t All I cared about was my wife and friends and family Books writing perception great art and gigantic metaphysical questions floating in on good humor Society could take care of itself more or less (It turned out less) and I was happy enough and eager I think what I mean is I was young so that no matter what anyone might think of my jacket I liked it it fit well and was warm in the New York winter collar turned up and hands snug in pockets It came from a secondhand clothing store at the corner of Bowery and Bleecker maybe it had belonged to a drunken sailor What do you do with a drunken sailor early in the morning? Put him in bed with the captain’s daughter! 56 There was a label inside with his name and serial number scrawled on it It felt odd wearing his name I snipped it out I don’t have anything monumental or metaphoric to say about my jacket It’s just a pleasure to remember it and how good it felt on me Then one day I started wearing something else and a few years later I gave the jacket to someone I liked I don’t recall who 57 The Ukrainian Museum Just walking into the new and beautifully designed Ukrainian Museum was a pleasure: varnished hardwood floors, white walls, clean lines, understated lighting, and the luxury of newness. An older Ukrainian Museum had been located in a second-floor apartment in a tenement building on Second Avenue, without even a sign outside, several rooms of dismal paintings in drab light; the one time I ventured in, there was not a single soul in the place, not even a guard. T wenty years later the museum moved a few blocks up the street to a space protected by two security checkpoints. I was greeted, if that is the word, by a woman who coldly asked me what I wanted. The two exhibition rooms were slightly larger than closets. Now, walking into this third incarnation made me feel so light and carefree that I had to be reminded to buy a ticket. The Alexander Archipenko exhibition was the largest I had ever seen of his work, and as I moved from sculpture to sculpture I felt grateful just to be there. But I wasn’t really “there,” I was in a whole- sale meat market. The smell of raw flesh and gore oozes out the ramshackle front doors where trucks have backed up to disgorge sides of beef and pork. Just inside are butchers in threadbare aprons streaked with blood. One of them waddles his mammoth girth toward me, a cigarette dangling from his pudgy lips, a strange leer on his face. He is the one who lewdly propositioned a friend of mine who lives a few doors away. Nineteen sixty-one. Now, in 2005, I am walking through this museum on the very spot where those butchers slashed and chopped up carcasses. The 58 fat one is no doubt dead, like my friend and Archipenko. The exhibition is fine, but I can’t focus on it, so I simply pause before each piece. Finally I can’t restrain myself from approaching someone, who happened to be a guard, an Indian or Pakistani woman, to whom I say, “Many years ago, when I first came to New York, I had a friend who lived a few doors down the street. Do you know what this place was then? It was a wholesale meat business.” She looks at me and says, “Yes, it’s amazing the way they change things so fast,” and looks away. 59 The 1870s Homage to Michel Butor 1870 Work on Brooklyn Bridge begun. Charles Dickens dies. Jules Verne writes 20,000 Leagues under the Sea. Rockefeller founds Standard Oil. Robert E. Lee dies. 1871 British Columbia joins Canada. Marcel Proust born. Rasputin born. Pneumatic rock drill invented. Stanley meets Livingstone. Whistler paints The Artist’s Mother. The Great Fire of Chicago. P . T . Barnum opens “The Greatest Show on Earth.” 1872 Jesuits expelled from Germany. Grant reelected President. Bertrand Russell born. First operation on the esophagus. Piet Mondrian born. 1873 New York financial panic. Germans evacuate France. First color photograph. Zanzibar abolishes slave trade. E. Remington & Sons, gunsmiths, produce typewriters. T olstoy writes Anna Karenina. Buda and Pest unite. 1874 Winston Churchill born. Gertrude Stein born. First roller- skating rink. First Impressionist exhibition. Pressure cooking invented. Thomas Hardy writes Far from the Madding Crowd. First ice cream soda. 1875 Carl Jung born. Thomas Mann born. Rainer Maria Rilke born. Maurice Ravel born. Madam Blavatsky founds Theosophical Society. Camille Corot dies. Georges Bizet dies. Hans Christian Andersen dies. First swim across the English Channel. 60 1876 Korea becomes a nation. Brahms composes Symphony no. 1. T urks massacre Bulgarians. Pablo Casals born. George Sand dies. Bruno Walter born. Carpet sweeper invented. Degas paints The Glass of Absinthe. 1877 Edison invents the phonograph. Gustave Courbet dies. Queen Victoria becomes Empress of India. First contact lenses. Canals on Mars observed. First public telephones in the U.S. 1878 Greece declares war on T urkey. Hughes invents the micro- phone. Mannlicher invents the repeater rifle. W . A. Burpee does something with Burpee seeds. 1879 British/Zulu War. Joseph Stalin born. Albert Einstein born. Discovery of saccharin. First public telephones in London. Paul Cézanne paints Self-Portrait. Edison has an idea and invents the light bulb. 61 One Thing Led to Another If it wasn’t one thing it was another. You can’t believe how charged everything is with meaning because it is meaningless. Joy in the curtains, the farmer in the dell, a fellow named whatever it was—Floyd? And then you had arms and legs and it wasn’t funny. It was a freshly baked pie. I could care more or less. Like a machine in the heavens, shooting, or an exclamation point in the motion picture industry. Cut. It’s always something. “T uck in your shirt” is not said to a dog. What’s the use of whining? No one really enjoys it. 62 The Rabbi with a Puzzle Voice Wait a minute I forgot something The rabbi with a puzzle voice Pieces flying around in the air T exas Lithuania and now another one A rectangle He is singing them I always knew he was And the song is oh I don’t really know what Very old like a doughnut And a look through its hole But he is singing And that’s the main thing, no? The other main thing Is that you’re on that rectangle Floating to the ground As it loses its oomph And other shapes are flying out above you And you are on them too! How can this be? It is part of the jigsaw puzzle And the sad voice that created it Why did you have to be anyone Whoever you are 63 Is what the rabbi sings Whoever he is Maybe he’s not a rabbi at all There was a reason I had forgotten him And a reason I remember him And his puzzle voice But where are his edges going As now he too breaks into pieces Pieces pieces That arc out in his song 64 Syntactical Structures It was as if while I was driving down a one-lane dirt road with tall pines on both sides the landscape had a syntax similar to that of our language and as I moved along a long sentence was being spoken on the right and another on the left and I thought Maybe the landscape can understand what I say too. Ahead was a farmhouse with children playing near the road so I slowed down and waved to them. They were young enough to smile and wave back. 65 The World of Us Who was the first person to say “I think the world of you” and how did he or she come up with it? It’s the kind of thing one ascribes to a god or a great philosopher or a lunatic on a good day. Now it’s a cliché because we can’t think it, we can only hear ourselves saying it. There are a lot of things we can’t think or don’t want to. It’s hard for example to think of skin as an organ —an organ is a kidney or a musical instrument or even a publication— but ask any doctor and the doctor will say “Yes, the skin is an organ.” Imagine having that organ removed (being skinned alive) or rather don’t at least not too vividly. It’s better to keep a barrier between oneself and things that can be horrendous like life. 66 Don’t go around all day thinking about life— doing so will raise a barrier between you and its instants. You need those instants so you can be in them, and I need you to be in them with me for I think the world of us and the mysterious barricades that make it possible. But you say “First you say to raise a barrier and then not to.” Yes, because these are two different barriers, one a barrier against life, the other a barrier against being alive. Being alive is good, life is bad. “So, what about being dead? Is that bad? And what about heaven?” I don’t know about being dead because I can’t remember what it was like, but I do know that it is awful and amusing to be part heaven and not know which part of you it is. Unless you don’t think about it, in which case you find yourself looking up and saying 67 “That is the best cornbread I’ve ever eaten.” Along with it comes a yawn at the end of a long and satisfying day, everything quiet and thrilling inside a consciousness surrounded by a night in which exclamation marks are flying toward a single point. 68 Curtain Standing in the bathroom peeing I look up at the curtain in front of me red cotton with little yellow flowers from Liberty Fabrics (London) 1970 and I feel I am flying up into the heavens until I remember that soon I will turn 70 and at any moment I could feel a sudden paroxysmal pain in my head and with the curtain dropping away fall over dead— this could happen right now! But it doesn’t, the curtain stays put and I’m standing there and the curtain still looks good. 69 Homage to Meister Eckhart I promised myself I would explore my void the space I occupy and won’t but I’m still waiting waiting waiting in a room for the room to change into an idea a flower might have The sun shines down on the flower in the idea the flower does have at all times and at all times you hear its thudding and in between the thuds is a silence in which a thud almost is The first time I heard the word void it was from the Bible: “And the earth was without form and void.” I was a child. I thought it meant the earth was without void. Which meant nothing to me because I did not know the meaning of void. And I didn’t know there was a comma that changes everything: 70 “was without form, and void.” The cosmos changed by a comma! Years later a big face with no features came out of the trees in the night and said, brutally, “Void” as if handing me a gift I opened my eyes and there it was in the mirror it was I or something else I wasn’t sure but I was happy to be in between My soul was growing up It had learned how to put quotation marks around everything which destroyed everything to make two of everything one for each eye and one for each ear but the eyes get further and further apart from what they see as the ears get closer and closer to what they hear like the dot terribly far away and big in front of your face at the same time and loud So move the mirror the Void 71 into another mirror or Void and just let go But the eyes eventually alight on words like spongebob squarepants printed on the side of everyone’s head the way clem kadiddlehopper used to be and meister eckhart and max jacob all appearing nightly in a revue set in the void of heaven, the void that allowed God to be there as the sole spectator until your void and his void were almost the same as the void of Spongebob and Max, Clem too, but not quite, for, as Eckhart says, “The nothingness of God fills all things while his somethingness is nowhere” and so “The very best thing you can do is to remain still for as long as possible” and wait for the nothingness of God. 72 The Incoherent Behavior of Most Lawn Furniture Suddenly the lawn furniture moves to different spots and stops, overturned or sideways on the ground or hovering in the air, then the pieces jerk, flip, or fly into new spots, in no pattern or rhythm. But the wooden fold-up lawn chair, with its wide strip of canvas forming a gentle sling from top to bottom, remains still. Its striped pattern ripples in the breeze, and though its wooden frame eventually turns gray it never rots or breaks, no matter how inclement the weather. Over the years, however, this lawn chair slowly grows less and less visible, so slowly that no one notices, until it disappears. It remains there, unseen and lost to memory, until one day someone remembers its green and orange stripes, its welcoming curve, its simplicity, there in the sunlight. 73 74 The Street The last time I came back to New York I didn’t know that it would be the last time you’d be here though you are still here in the form of you who a block away walk toward me until it isn’t you, it’s someone with a fine head and silver hair and blue eyes and the suggestion of not being like anyone else and it’s you I’m waiting for as I walk past Little Poland or come out of New York Central Art Supply or stop to look at the poppy seed cake in the window of Baczynsky’s on Second Avenue, the cake I brought up to your place sometimes when we were working together and you’d say “T ea?” as if it were spelled with only the one letter. Knowing you were there made me be more here too, made New York be New York, fueled my anger at the new buildings that ruined the old ones and at the new people with their coarseness and self-involvement you avoided by going out to buy the Times at 5 a.m., then came back and made yourself a pot of espresso and read the paper as if you were in T uscany which is where you soon will be in that niche in the wall all ten pounds of you and I’ll leave the city that’s slipped a little further away no a lot. 75 Paris Again I’m afraid of the thrill of touching you again and seeing you appear before my eyes because you are beautiful the way things used to be. One day I sat down in a café and ordered an accent aigu and a citron pressé and looked at Paris. I said to myself This is Paris and you are in it so you are Paris too. Garçon, encore un accent aigu s’il vous plaît but he didn’t look pleased he was Parisian. Maybe I too could learn how to be grumpy and snooty and Cartesian and quick all at the same time. The Nord-Sud metro line ran all the way from the tips of my toes to the top of my head where it paused and went down again and every time it went past Odéon I thought of Reverdy and how grumpy and suddenly fiery he could be and figured he would have no patience with a guy like me who had a touch of Max Jacob ready to leap up and turn an angel into a sad witticism about the God Pierre was wrestling with as if they were both made of granite. But they weren’t. And neither was I, like those who love and have loved and are still afraid of the thrill of the beauty of everything that is gone. 76 London, 1815 We go clippety-clop because we are horseshoes on cobblestones. O to be a houseshoe in a house and resting comfortably alongside another houseshoe! But the horse clops on, our echos echoing down a dark alley behind a dark house. 77 Of Copse and Coppice When asked if I knew the meaning of the word copse c-o-p-s-e I said “Of course, it means . . . I think it means a field or meadow.” One of the first poems I ever wrote said “Where is the copse with verdant green?” because at age thirteen I wanted to use words new to me. Now copse is new again because I’m now not sure just what it means. A coppice is a thicket, no? Oh you’re such an American! out of touch with the natural world and English English and your own adolescence all at the same time! Alas, I’ve wandered lonely as a crowd 78 of words blown down the street this way and that, vagabond lexicon dressed as a citizen. Maybe a wood or a grove? I’ve always liked my grandfather’s name Grover and one of the most beautiful girls of my adolescence was named Madeleine Grove and back then my favorite publisher was Grove. Shady Grove, my true love the song goes. Them I remember. Copse and coppice are phonemes from literature. I preferred cops and robbers. But it got better. I nabbed the robbers and shot a few Indians clean out of their saddles but they didn’t have saddles and weren’t even Indians and it didn’t matter: you had to go and in a few minutes I did too, 79 due as I was in this verdant copse splashed with shadows that shift and wave like plaid in the wind from off the brae. 80 Manifestation and Mustache I love living here away from a lot of things that annoy me and close to a lot of things I love like air like trees and emptiness. But the thing I love best goes where I go and will go with me when I am gone from where I am and into where love doesn’t figure, which I have done a few times in my life, if memory serves. Then the mustache comes in and says, “You can’t be right and wrong at the same time,” but I don’t believe it. 81 Shipwreck in General Is there no end to anything ever I release the question mark From its tether and it floats Like a life jacket In search of the shipwreck That every question is But today it finds no victim No flotsam no captain’s cap For today is shipwreck-free it is The end of shipwreck in general And the curl and the dot below Can go their separate ways And be whatever they like 82 French Art in the 1950s Ronnie is finding out about art in the 1950s. He is learning that it had a palette and brushes and colors, and the palette had a hole, in which the brushes were inserted and where they seemed debonnaire and ready to do something but also happy not to. There is an artist in the room. He wears a smock and a beret, and he has a pencil mustache. His name is Pierre, for he is French. Art comes from France. Pierre is going to bring some more of it to us. But at the moment he is thinking about what he is going to paint today. A pear? A young woman who is wearing no clothing? Or perhaps just a lot of colors flying around on the canvas, to represent his feelings? But wait, it is time for lunch. Later in the afternoon he will execute his picture. For now he must go to the café and greet his admirers, who, on seeing him, call out “Pierre!” and “Over here, Pierre!” and, cleverly, “There he is, the rascal!” But everyone knows that Pierre is not a rascal. He is a French artist. You can tell by the smock he has forgotten to remove. Later, when it has paint smears and spots on it, even an imbecile will be able to see that he is an artist. Ronnie already knows. 83 Three Poems in Honor of Willem de Kooning I Felt For a moment as if I were talking to you and you were listening and taking me seriously the way a grandfather does when he’s open and kind, you knew what was troubling me and you knew that the best thing to do was to listen and say nothing, allowing a calm to settle into the grandfather that turns out to be me. 84 The Door to the River You walked through it before you even knew it was there The river came up to the door and asked to come in Then the river came through the door and the door floated away I once threw away a river because it looked old enough And I bought a new one and a door along with it Except it never was a door It was a doorway Like Norway with windows 85 Zot In de Kooning’s painting, the word zot. I thought sot? Then learned that zot is Dutch for foolish. So foolish and drunk swirled around and separated out into the Dutch foolish and the English drunk. He wasn’t such a big drinker when he did that painting, but maybe he felt like a fool sometimes —of course he did. He was zot and he knew it and he told you so, you being almost nobody, so almost nobody you were even more zot than he! Zot is vat I tink. 86 Alone and Not Alone Out of the water came the one who reached back into the water and pulled out the zero. The time is now. The time is now 8:15 p.m. Eastern Standard Time. In Beijing Lan Lan is getting up tomorrow. I see her pretty, smiling face as she curls back the covers. T onight I will get under the covers and think of her face not because I am in love with her but because I like her face though I do not want it on my head. 87 Out of the water came my head, head first, whoosh! A person’s head does not belong underwater. Look at fish! Who wants to be one? I would for a moment or two. Then back to me. It would be terrible to alternate being fish and person every few seconds. We inhale then exhale every few seconds. Lan Lan’s two daughters are inhaling and exhaling, still asleep— it is Sunday in Beijing. 88 Lan Lan’s husband is sitting at a table in the kitchen thinking about the poetry of Alexander Blok. Alexander Blok is pouring hot water into the teapot. Out of the water came the tea and out of the tea came the scent of jasmine. And then Alexander Blok was not there. He had to go away and die again. He exhaled and then exhaled, and then was like a dead fish, wrapped in a newspaper whose headline says blok dead. He reached back and pulled himself out of life and into those two words. 89 Lan Lan’s husband looks up confused— his mind is in Russian but everything else is in Chinese when she comes in and the jasmine is deeper and more of you now. It is 8:33. What happened? You were not alone in thinking you were alone. C O F F E E H O U S E P R E S S The mission of Coffee House Press is to publish exciting, vital, and enduring authors of our time; to delight and inspire readers; to con- tribute to the cultural life of our community; and to enrich our literary heritage. By building on the best traditions of publishing and the book arts, we produce books that celebrate imagination, innovation in the craft of writing, and the many authentic voices of the American experience. Visit us at coffeehousepress.org. Funder Acknowledgments Coffee House Press is an independent, nonprofit literary publisher. All of our books, including the one in your hands, are made pos sible through the generous support of grants and donations from corporate giving pro- grams, state and federal support, family foundations, and the many indi- viduals that believe in the transformational power of literature. We receive major operating support from Amazon, the Bush Foundation, the McKnight Foundation, the National Endowment for the Arts—a federal agency, and Target. This activity is made possible by the voters of Minnesota through a Minnesota State Arts Board Operating Support grant, thanks to a legislative appropriation from the arts and cultural heritage fund. Coffee House Press receives additional support from many anonymous donors; the Alexander Family Fund; the Archer Bondarenko Munificence Fund; the Elmer L. & Eleanor J. Andersen Foundation; the David & Mary Anderson Family Foundation; the W . & R. Bernheimer Family Foundation; the E. Thomas Binger & Rebecca Rand Fund of the Min- neapolis Foundation; the Patrick & Aimee Butler Family Foundation; the Buuck Family Foundation; the Carolyn Foundation; Dorsey & Whitney Foundation; Fredrikson & Byron, P .A.; the Jerome Foundation; the Len- festey Family Foundation; the Mead Witter Foundation; the Nash Foun- dation; the Rehael Fund of the Minneapolis Foundation; the Schwab Chari table Fund; Schwegman, Lundberg & Woessner, P .A.; Penguin Group; the Private Client Reserve of US Bank; VSA Minnesota for the Metropolitan Regional Arts Council; the Archie D. & Bertha H. Walker Foundation; the Wells Fargo Foundation of Minnesota; and the Woessner Freeman Family Foundation. The Publisher’s Circle of Coffee House Press Publisher’s Circle members make significant contributions to Coffee House Press’s annual giving campaign. Understanding that a strong financial base is necessary for the press to meet the challenges and opportunities that arise each year, this group plays a crucial part in the success of our mission. “Coffee House Press believes that American literature should be as diverse as America itself. Known for consistently championing authors whose work challenges cultural and æsthetic norms, we believe their books deserve space in the marketplace of ideas. Publishing literature has never been an easy business, and publishing literature that truly takes risks is a cause we believe is worthy of significant support. We ask you to join us today in helping to ensure the future of Coffee House Press.” —the publisher’s circle members of coffee house press publisher’s circle members Many Anonymous Donors Mr. & Mrs. Rand L. Alexander Suzanne Allen Patricia Beithon Bill Berkson & Connie Lewallen Robert & Gail Buuck Claire Casey Louise Copeland Jane Dalrymple-Hollo Mary Ebert & Paul Stembler Chris Fischbach & Katie Dublinski Katharine Freeman Sally French Jocelyn Hale & Glenn Miller Roger Hale & Nor Hall Jeffrey Hom Kenneth & Susan Kahn Kenneth Koch Literary Estate Stephen & Isabel Keating Allan & Cinda Kornblum Leslie Larson Maheras Jim & Susan Lenfestey Sarah Lutman & Rob Rudolph Carol & Aaron Mack George Mack Joshua Mack Gillian McCain Mary & Malcolm McDermid Sjur Midness & Briar Andresen Peter Nelson & Jennifer Swenson Marc Porter & James Hennessy E. Thomas Binger & Rebecca Rand Fund of the Minneapolis Foundation Jeffrey Sugerman & Sarah Schultz Nan Swid Patricia Tilton Stu Wilson & Melissa Barker Warren D. Woessner & Iris C. Freeman Margaret & Angus Wurtele For more information about the Publisher’s Circle and other ways to support Coffee House Press books, authors, and activities, please visit www.coffeehousepress.org/support or contact us at: info@coffeehousepress.org. Allan Kornblum, 1949–2014 Vision is about looking at the world and seeing not what it is, but what it could be. Allan Kornblum’s vision and leadership created Coffee House Press. T o celebrate his legacy, every book we publish in 2015 will be in his memory. Alone and Not Alone was designed at Coffee House Press, in the historic Grain Belt Brewery’s Bottling House near downtown Minneapolis. The text is set in Adobe Garamond. Composition by Bookmobile Design & Digital Publisher Services, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Manufactured by Versa Press on acid- free paper. RON P ADGETT grew up in T ulsa and has lived mostly in New York City since 1960. Among his many honors are a Guggenheim Fellowship, the American Academy of Arts and Letters poetry award, the Shelley Memorial Award, and grants from the National Endowment for the Arts. Padgett’s How Long was a Pulitzer Prize finalist in poetry and his Collected Poems won the William Carlos Williams Award from the Poetry Society of America and the Los Angeles Times Book Prize for the best poetry book of 2013. In addition to being a poet, he is a translator of Guillaume Apollinaire, Pierre Reverdy, and Blaise Cendrars. His own work has been translated into eighteen languages. THIS IS A BORZOI BOOK PUBLISHED BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC. Copyright © 1991 by Philip Levine All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Distributed by Random House, Inc., New York. www.randomhouse.com/knopf/poetry/ My thanks to the editors of the following publications in which these poems  rst appeared: Antaeus (“Soloing”) The Atlantic Monthly (“Among Children”) The Georgia Review (“Coming Homeward from the Post O ce”) The Gettysburg Review (“The Seventh Summer”) Michigan Quarterly Review (“My Grave”) The New England Review (“The Sweetness of Bobby Hefka,” “Facts,” & “Coming of Age in Michigan”) The New Yorker (“Fear and Fame,” “Coming Close,” “Fire,” “Every Blessed Day,” “What Work Is,” “Snails,” “Perennials,” “Above the World,” “M. Degas Teaches Art & Science at Durfee Intermediate School,” and “On the River”) Poetry (“Burned” and “The Right Cross”) Western Humanities Review (“Growth” and “Scouting”) Zyzzyva (“Gin”) My special thanks to my friends who helped me with these poems and encouraged me to complete them, especially to Larry Levis, Garrett Hongo, Edward Hirsch, Donald Hall, Sharon Olds, and C.K. Williams. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Levine, Philip, 1928– What work is : poems / Philip Levine. p. cm. eISBN: 978-0-307-76195-8 I. Title. PS3562.E9W47 1991 811’.54—dc20 90–53421 Reprinted Twelve Times v3.1 FOR LARRY LEVIS CONTENTS Cover Title Page Copyright Dedication I Fear and Fame Coming Close Fire Every Blessed Day Growth Innocence Coming Home from the Post O ce Among Children What Work Is II Snails My Grave Agnus Dei Facts Gin Perennials Above the World M. Degas Teaches Art & Science at Durfee Intermediate School III Burned IV Soloing Scouting Coming of Age in Michigan The Right Cross The Sweetness of Bobby Hefka On the River The Seventh Summer About the Author Other Books by This Author I FEAR AND FAME Half an hour to dress, wide rubber hip boots, auntlets to the elbow, a plastic helmet ke a knight’s but with a little glass window hat kept steaming over, and a respirator o save my smoke-stained lungs. I would descend tep by slow step into the dim world f the pickling tank and there prepare he new solutions from the great carboys f acids lowered to me on ropes—all from a recipe shared with nobody and learned from Frank O’Mera efore he went o  to the bars on Vernor Highway o drink himself to death. A gallon of hydrochloric teaming from the wide glass mouth, a dash f pale nitric to bubble up, sulphuric to calm, metals for sweeteners, cleansers for salts, ntil I knew the burning stew was done. hen to climb back, step by stately step, the adventurer eturned to the ordinary blinking lights f the swingshift at Feinberg and Breslin’s irst-Rate Plumbing and Plating with a message rom the kingdom of  re. Oddly enough o one welcomed me back, and I’d stand ully armored as the downpour of cold water ained down on me and the smoking traces puddled t my feet like so much milk and melting snow. hen to disrobe down to my work pants and shirt, my black street shoes and white cotton socks, o reassume my nickname, strap on my Bulova, crew back my wedding ring, and with tap water argle away the bitterness as best I could. or  fteen minutes or more I’d sit quietly   to the side of the world as the women olished the tubes and  xtures to a burnished purity ung like Christmas ornaments on the racks ulled steadily toward the tanks I’d cooked. Ahead lay the second cigarette, held in a shaking hand, s I took into myself the sickening heat to quell heat, lunch of two Genoa salami sandwiches and Swiss cheese n heavy peasant bread baked by my Aunt Tsipie, nd a third cigarette to kill the taste of the others. hen to arise and dress again in the costume f my trade for the second time that night, sti ened y the knowledge that to descend and rise up rom the other world merely once in eight hours is half what it takes to be known among women and men. COMING CLOSE ake this quiet woman, she has been tanding before a polishing wheel or over three hours, and she lacks wenty minutes before she can take lunch break. Is she a woman? onsider the arms as they press he long brass tube against the bu er, hey are striated along the triceps, he three heads of which clearly show. onsider the  ne dusting of dark down bove the upper lip, and the beads f sweat that run from under the red erchief across the brow and are wiped way with a blackening wrist band n one odd motion a child might make o say No! No! You must come closer o  nd out, you must hang your tie nd jacket in one of the lockers n favor of a black smock, you must e prepared to spend shift after shift auling o  the metal trays of stock, owing  rst, knees bent for a purchase, hen lifting with a gasp, the  rst word f tenderness between the two of you, hen you must bring new trays of dull, npolished tubes. You must feed her, s they say in the language of the place. Make no mistake, the place has a language, nd if by some luck the power were cut, he wheel slowed to a stop so that you uddenly saw it was not a solid object ut so many separate bristles forming n motion a perfect circle, she would turn o you and say, “Why?” Not the old why f why must I spend  ve nights a week? ust, “Why?” Even if by some magic ou knew, you wouldn’t dare speak or fear of her laughter, which now ou have anyway as she places the  ve apering  ngers of her  lthy hand n the arm of your white shirt to mark ou for your own, now and forever. FIRE A  re burns along the eastern rim f mountains. In the valley we ee it as a celestial prank, for n the summer haze the mountains hemselves are lost, but as the night eepens the  re grows more golden nd dense. On this calm ground he raw raging of burning winds hat cuts the eyes and singes the hair seen as a pencil-line of light moving southward. I know my son there, has been for four days, moved in and out by helicopters with his squad of  re  ghters. y now, without sleep, they’ve one beyond exhaustion. Some can’t waken, some are crazed, a few go n—the oldest—working steadily. know this from the stories he as told me of other famous  res rom which he returned as from dream, his eyes glazed with seeing, is sense of time and place gone. He would raise his shaking right arm bove his head, and with his palm pen sweep it toward me again nd again and speak without grammar, ometimes without words, of what ad taken place. I knew it was true. Now in the cool of evening I catch hint of the forest, of that taking f sudden breath that pines demand; ’s on my skin, a light oil, a sweat orn of some forgotten leaning into  re. EVERY BLESSED DAY irst with a glass of water asting of iron and then with more and colder water ver his head he gasps himself wake. He hears the cheep f winter birds searching he snow for crumbs of garbage nd knows exactly how much light nd how much darkness is there efore the dawn, gray and weak, lips between the buildings. losing the door behind him, e thinks of places he as never seen but heard bout, of the great desert is father said was like o sea he had ever crossed nd how at dusk or dawn held all the shades of red nd blue in its merging shadows, nd though his life was then prison he had come to live or these suspended moments. Waiting at the corner he feels he cold at his back and stamps imself awake again. Seven miles rom the frozen, narrow river. ven before he looks he knows he faces on the bus, some oing to work and some coming back, ut each sealed in its hunger or a di erent life, a lost life. Where he’s going or who he is e doesn’t ask himself, he oesn’t know and doesn’t know matters. He gets o  t the familiar corner, crosses he emptying parking lots oward Chevy Gear & Axle # 3. n a few minutes he will hold is time card above a clock, nd he can drop it in nd hear the moment crunching own, or he can not, for ither way the day will last orever. So he lets it fall. fhe feels the elusive calm is father spoke of and searched or all his short life, there’s o way of telling, for now he’s aughing among them, older men nd kids. He’s saying, “Damn, we’ve got it made.” He’s ghting up or chewing with he others, thousands of miles rom their forgotten homes, each nd every one his father’s son. GROWTH n the soap factory where I worked when I was fourteen, I spoke to o one and only one man spoke o me and then to command me o wheel the little cars of damp chips nto the ovens. While the chips dried made more racks, nailing together wood lath and ordinary screening ou’d use to keep  ies out, racks nd more racks each long afternoon, or this was a growing business n a year of growth. The oil drums f fat would arrive each morning, oo huge for me to tussle with, eeking of the dark, cavernous itchens of the Greek and Rumanian estaurants, of cheap hamburger joints, White Towers and worse. They would ulk in the battered yard behind he plant until my boss, Leo, he squat Ukrainian dollied them in o become, somehow, through the magic f chemistry, pure soap. My job was always the racks and the ovens— wo low ceilinged metal rooms he color of sick skin. When I lid open the heavy doors my eyes tarted open, the pores f my skull shrivelled, and sweat melling of scared animal burst from me everywhere. Head down I entered, rst to remove what had dried nd then to wheel in the damp, raw ellow curls of new soap, grained ke iris petals or unseamed quartz. hen out to the open weedy yard mong the waiting and emptied drums where I hammered and sawed, singing my new life of working and earning, utside in the fresh air of Detroit n 1942, a year of growth. INNOCENCE ide by side against the trunks of the gray oaks hat lined US 24 we sat while Michelangelo concocted rom tomatoes, hot peppers, onions, salami, is long blade  ashing along the blocks of cheese, aying the slices precisely down the two slabs f coarse white bread crafted from a single loaf. eriously and in silence we watched, and when he raised he huge original sandwich to the  rst bite, we raised our quarts of milk in a dumb salute o the sullen gods of time for a thank you or our mid-day rest. Our Michelangelo was not he painter, long dead and forgotten by those eside the road to Toledo during the summer of ’50 ust before the republic went back to its wars, ut Michelangelo the furious lopper of tree limbs who leapt all day from branch to leafy branch o strip those poor old oaks before the earthmovers ragged them down so that there might be wo smooth new concrete lanes all the way o the empires of Ohio. (It’s there now, the road, permanent work of the human imagination, ned colorfully as all great ways must be, with the arches of triumph over good taste.) ach noon Michelangelo told the same joyous tales f surrender to the 3rd Army Corps in North Africa, s though he personally had handed over his sword o Omar Bradley, and then the long sea voyage o serene Michigan and his second Italian family, he prosperous cousins in complicated brickwork, xperts in drainage, masters of tree removal whose thankful apprentice he now was. We toasted the girls who each night lavished heir cares on his long knotted body topped erfectly with a roof of black curly thatch. We even lied back in return, inventing squadrons f blondes and serious brunettes driven by love o wait on our doorsteps until we returned y bus,  lthy and broken by the long days f breaking the earth, women with new cars nd old needs content to take their turns. Michelangelo would smile, the wise European ome to these innocent shores in a time f innocence. Later, when the yellow Le Tourneau arthmovers gripped the chained and stripped trunks, unched down and roared their engines, the earth eld and trembled before it gave, and the stumps owled as they turned their black, prized groins kyward for the  rst times in their lives, urned and rocked back and forth just once n the heavy wet dirt of late afternoon. We smiled, not to hide our tears from ourselves r each other, but because the day was ending, fthere were lamentations they were not ours ut the starlings gathering in the oaks, he starlings and bobolinks and the vireos hanting and bowing in the darkening branches ll along the road to Ohio and the coming night. COMING HOME FROM THE POST OFFICE On Sunday night we would ee the women returning rom an evening with God, heir faces glowing with faith nd the hard sweat of their faith. hey would sing separately r together, and when the bus topped and one got carefully   the sisters would shout ews of the good days ahead nd the joys of handmaidenship. remember an evening in April when I passed in and out of leep, and the woman who stood bove me stared into my eyes s though searching for a sign hat might bring light softly alling among the dark houses we stuttered by. When I closed my eyes I saw cards, letters, mall packages, each bearing particular name and some urden of grief or tidings f loss. Names like my own assed moment by moment nto the gray sacks that slumped pen mouthed. On strong legs he stood easily, swaying rom side to side, a woman n a green suit, a purse held n one hand, a hankie folded n the other. Her pale eyes eld mine easily each time wakened, and so I wakened ot into the colorless light rom overhead but into he twin mysteries of a life n God. When I fell back nto my light sleep I saw great clear river running etween the houses I knew nd a bright shore of temples, lowing public squares, children n long robes  owing, those I oved climbing a high hill oward a new sun. Hours later he driver softly wakened me with a hand on my head nd a single word, and I tepped lightly into the world, my shoulders hunched, my collar urned up against the hour, nd headed down the still street. he new spring winds groaned round me, the distant light f no new star marked me home. AMONG CHILDREN walk among the rows of bowed heads— he children are sleeping through fourth grade o as to be ready for what is ahead, he monumental boredom of junior high nd the rush forward tearing their wings oose and turning their eyes forever inward. hese are the children of Flint, their fathers work at the spark plug factory or truck ottled water in 5 gallon sea-blue jugs o the widows of the suburbs. You can see lready how their backs have thickened, ow their small hands, soiled by pig iron, eap and stutter even in dreams. I would like o sit down among them and read slowly rom The Book of Job until the windows ale and the teacher rises out of a milky sea f industrial scum, her gowns streaming with light, her foolish words transformed nto song, I would like to arm each one with a quiver of arrows so that they might ush like wind there where no battle rages houting among the trumpets, Ha! Ha! How dear the gift of laughter in the face f the 8 hour day, the cold winter mornings without co ee and oranges, the long lines f mothers in old coats waiting silently where the gates have closed. Ten years ago went among these same children, just born, n the bright ward of the Sacred Heart and leaned own to hear their breaths delivered that day, urning with joy. There was such wonder n their sleep, such purpose in their eyes losed against autumn, in their damp heads lurred with the hair of ponds, and not one urned against me or the light, not one aid, I am sick, I am tired, I will go home, ot one complained or drifted alone, nloved, on the hardest day of their lives. leven years from now they will become he men and women of Flint or Paradise, he majors of a minor town, and I will be gone into smoke or memory, o I bow to them here and whisper ll I know, all I will never know. WHAT WORK IS We stand in the rain in a long line waiting at Ford Highland Park. For work. ou know what work is—if you’re ld enough to read this you know what work is, although you may not do it. orget you. This is about waiting, hifting from one foot to another. eeling the light rain falling like mist nto your hair, blurring your vision ntil you think you see your own brother head of you, maybe ten places. ou rub your glasses with your  ngers, nd of course it’s someone else’s brother, arrower across the shoulders than ours but with the same sad slouch, the grin hat does not hide the stubbornness, he sad refusal to give in to ain, to the hours wasted waiting, o the knowledge that somewhere ahead man is waiting who will say, “No, we’re not hiring today,” for any eason he wants. You love your brother, ow suddenly you can hardly stand he love  ooding you for your brother, who’s not beside you or behind or head because he’s home trying to leep o  a miserable night shift t Cadillac so he can get up efore noon to study his German. Works eight hours a night so he can sing Wagner, the opera you hate most, he worst music ever invented. How long has it been since you told him ou loved him, held his wide shoulders, pened your eyes wide and said those words, nd maybe kissed his cheek? You’ve never one something so simple, so obvious, ot because you’re too young or too dumb, ot because you’re jealous or even mean r incapable of crying in he presence of another man, no, ust because you don’t know what work is. II SNAILS he leaves rusted in the late winds f September, the ash trees bowed o no one I could see. Finches uarrelled among the orange groves. was about to say something  nal hat would capture the meaning f autumn’s arrival, something uitable for bronzing, omething immediately recognizable s so large a truth it’s totally untrue, when one small white cloud—not much more than the merest fragment of mist— assed between me and the pale hin cuticle of the mid-day moon ome out to see the tra c and dust f Central California. I kept quiet. he wind stilled, and I could hear he even steady ticking of the leaves, he lawn’s burned hay gasping or breath, the pale soil rising nly to fall between earth and heaven, fheaven’s there. The world would escape o become all it’s never been fonly we would let it go treaming toward a future without urpose or voice. In shade the ground arkens, and now the silver trails tretch from leaf to chewed o  leaf f the runners of pumpkin to disappear n the cover of sheaves and bowed grass. On the fence blue trumpets of glory lmost closed—music to the moon, aughter to us, they blared all day hough no one answered, no one ould score their sense or harmony efore they faded in the wind and sun. MY GRAVE ust outside Malaga, California, ost among the cluster of truckstops here is a little untended plot f ground and weeds and a stone hat bears my name, misspelled, nd under the stone is dirt, hardpan, more dirt, rocks, then one hundred nd one di erent elements mbracing each other in every way hey can imagine so that at times hey remind me of those photographs saw as a boy and which I was assured were expensive and stimulating nd meant nothing. There are also ver a thousand beer bottle caps ne of my sons was saving until e calculated that he would never each a million and so quit. (Quit aving, not drinking.) One document here, ceremoniously labeled My Last Will & Testament.” My sister o hated it she threw it into he bare hole and asked that it be hovelled under. Not one foolish hope f mine is here, for none was real nd hard, the hope that the poor talked from their cardboard houses o transform our leaders, that our  ags wept colored tears until they became othing but  ags of surrender. hoped also to see my mother long distance runner, my brother ive his money to the kids of Chicago nd take to the roads, carless, hatless, n search of a task that be ts a man. dreamed my friends quit lying nd their breath took on the perfume f new-mown grass, and that I came o be a man walking carelessly hrough rain, my hair tangled, my one nswer the full belly laugh I saved or my meeting with God, a laugh I o longer need. Not one nightmare here, nor are my eyes which saw ou rise at night, barefoot and quiet, nd leave my side, and my ears which heard ou return suddenly, your mouth tasting f cold water. Even my forehead not here, behind which I plotted he overthrow of this our republic y means of the refusal to wipe. My journals aren’t here, my right hand hat wrote them, my waist that strained gainst so many leather belts and belts f cloth that  nally surrendered. My enormous feet that carried me safely hrough thirty cities, my tongue hat stroked and restroked your cheek oughly until you said, “Cat.” My poems, my lies, my few kept promises, my love or morning sunlight and dusk, my love or women and the children of women, my guiding star and the star I wore or twenty seven years. Nothing of me here because this is not my house, his is not the driver’s seat of my car or the memory of someone who loved me or that distant classroom in which I ell asleep and dreamed of lamb. This dirt, a  lled hole of earth, stone hat says return to stone, a broken fence hat mumbles Keep Out, air above nothing, ir that cannot imagine the sweet duties f wild owers and herbs, this is cheap, ommon, coarse, what you pass by very day in your car without a thought, his is an ordinary grave. AGNUS DEI My little sister created the Lamb of God. he made him out of used-up dust mops nd coat hangers. She left him whitewashed t the entrance to the Calvin Coolidge branch f the public library, so as to scare he lady librarian who’d clucked at each of us, Why do you want to read a grown-up book?” he lamb sagged against the oaken doors, igh and dark in the deep vault of morning, nd said nothing as we scampered o  cross the dew-wet lawns, our shoes darkening. he rest of our adventure made the Times, ow O cer German took in the lamb and made morning meal of milk and mucilage nd wrapped him warmly in out-of-town papers. How he slept unnoticed for hours and wakening ose in a shower of golden dust, bellowing n rage, and sent Miss Greenglass running o the Ladies Restroom where she fainted nd, waking, changed her life. Books scattered. here was weeping and gnashing. The lamb escaped hrough an expensive, leaded windowpane nd entered the late afternoon  ying low ver the houses of the middle class ntil clouds obscured the world, and it was done. My brother Leopold read this all out loud n Sunday morning while our parents slept bove us in a high dark room we never entered, nd the cellar moaned and rumbled, warming s the best it could. A fresh wind rapped t the front windows, and we stared in silence s, bloodred and wrinkled, the new elm unleaved n public, shuddering with the ache of its growing. FACTS he bus station in Princeton, New Jersey, as no men’s room. I had to use one like mad, ut the guy behind the counter said, “Sorry, ut you know what goes on in bus station men’s rooms.” fyou take a ’37 Packard grill and split it down he center and reduce the angle by 18° and reweld it, ou’ll have a perfect grill for a Rolls Royce ust in case you ever need a new grill for yours. was not born in Cleveland, Ohio. Other people were, or so I have read, and many have remained, which strikes me as an exercise in futility reater even than saving your pennies to buy a Rolls. . Scott Fitzgerald attended Princeton. A student ointed out the windows of the suite he occupied. We were on our way to the train station to escape o New York City, and the student may have been lying. he train is called “The Dinky.” It takes you only few miles away to a junction where you can catch train to Grand Central or—if you’re scared— o Philadelphia. From either you can reach Cleveland. My friend Howie wrote me that he was ashamed o live in a city whose most e cient means of escape called “The Dinky.” If he’d invest in a Rolls, ven one with a Packard grill, he’d feel di erently. don’t blame the student for lying, especially o a teacher. He may have been ill at ease n my company, for I am an enormous man given o long bouts of silence as I brood on facts. here are two lies in the previous stanza. I’m small, ach year I feel the bulk of me shrinking, becoming more frail and delicate. I get cold easily as though lacked even the solidity to protect my own heart. he coldest I’ve ever been was in Cleveland, Ohio. My host and hostess hated and loved each other y frantic turns. To escape I’d go on long walks n the yellowing snow as the evening winds raged. he citizens of Cleveland, Ohio, passed me sullenly, enighted in their Rolls Royces, each in a halo f blue light sifting down from the abandoned lling stations of what once was a community. will never return to Cleveland or Princeton, not ven to pay homage to Hart Crane’s lonely tower r the glory days of John Berryman, whom I loved. haven’t the heart for it. Not even in your Rolls. GIN he  rst time I drank gin thought it must be hair tonic. My brother swiped the bottle rom a guy whose father owned drug store that sold booze n those ancient, honorable days when we acknowledged the stu  was a drug. Three of us passed he bottle around, each tasting with disbelief. People paid or this? People had to have , the way we had to have he women we never got near. Actually they were girls, but ever mind, the important fact was their impenetrability.) eo, the third foolish partner, uggested my brother should have wiped Canadian whiskey or brandy, ut Eddie defended his choice n the grounds of the expressions gin house” and “gin lane,” both f which indicated the preeminence f gin in the world of drinking, world we were entering without nderstanding how di cult xit might be. Maybe the bliss hat came with drinking came nly after a certain period f apprenticeship. Eddie likened to the holy man’s self- agellation o experience the fullness of faith. He was very well read for a kid f fourteen in the public schools.) o we dug in and passed the bottle round a second time and then a third, n the silence each of us expecting ome transformation. “You get used o it,” Leo said. “You don’t ke it but you get used to it.” know now that brain cells were dying for no earthly purpose, hat three boys were becoming ncreasingly despiritualized ven as they took into themselves hese spirits, but I thought then was at last sharing the world with the movie stars, that before ong I would be shaving because needed to, that hair would prout across the  at prairie f my chest and plunge even o my groin, that  rst girls nd then women would be drawn o my qualities. Amazingly, later ome of this took place, but rst the bottle had to be mptied, and then the three boys ad to empty themselves of all hey had so painfully taken in nd by means even more painful s they bowed by turns over he eye of the toilet bowl o discharge their shame. Ahead ay cigarettes, the futility f guaranteed programs of xercise, the elaborate lies f conquest no one believed, orms of sexual torture and ejection undreamed of. Ahead ay our  fteenth birthdays, cne, deodorants, crabs, salves, utch haircuts, draft registration, he military and political victories f Dwight Eisenhower, who brought us ichard Nixon with wife and dog. Any wonder we tried gin. PERENNIALS Winter. The marketplace of the village f Fuengirola. A tattered mongrel, an, brown, and black with a white muzzle. he stubby, bowed forelegs set apart n a stance suitable for a short advance r a sudden retreat. I know this beast, think, I know this dirty, box-like head nged with curls, this dry, foolish bark hat scares o  nothing. “Marilyn,” I say, emembering one who scorned me years before. ach day my son John calls out, “Marilyn!” s stamping we wait our turn in line efore the black oildrums of burning fat where the churros fry. “Marilyn,” he calls ntil she comes to beg bread from his hand. Under the windows onto the gray yard green glass wine bottle with one branch f blood-tipped bursting plum. The odor f mid-summer hanging in winter. he room thickens around the living core s I pass and stop. Where was I going hat I should ignore the heart of my house, his new intruder come in another ark season to tell me the year won’t wait? was on the way to the kitchen or a glass of water, and now I have wine. was looking for a brown paper sack f sleep, an old pillow of forgetting, way out before the world got in, nd found the dining room in riot rom one black branch as arched as I. ABOVE THE WORLD Up through miles of twisting pines, past town of brightly painted caves, their windows urtained and open, the doors ajar revealing he heavy furniture of entrepreneurs, carpets, elevision sets; on the roofs, antennas poking n all directions and the day’s laundry strung rom cave to cave. Up another hour or more winding through dense woods to a high plateau, hen truck farms greening in December, fenced elds of grazing cattle right to the outskirts f the new town, raw, un nished, with wide streets f crowded shops hawking garter belts, canes, ountain pens, goatskin jackets, peeled rabbits. he women, in dark print dresses, clutched heir leather purses with both hands, the men moked in small circles. At the center, a maze f wires and tracks sprouting from a compound f ancient trolleys leaning into silence, heir windows gone, the cane seats unravelling, he paint cracked and  aking. One road led p the mountain, and we took it and left he trucks, the clouds of black soot, the roar f motorcycles to enter something ar older, and found the place and parked. We registered at the Hotel of Heaven, father, a mother, three upright blond sons n American jeans, blue-eyed and suspicious. Would my kids now remember the parapets hat hung out over the edge of the world hat spread before us—the fabled Mare Nostrum we never saw—as everything below dissolved n smoke and dust? The tangled gardens f a long-gone magistrate, their paths clogged with weeds, the roses blown and climbing verywhere, the famous court of stone lions ach as large and  erce as a happy dog, ach facing away from his brothers to guard othing from no one. Even the tall, graying nglishman stooped before his easel was not dream, nor was the painting itself, still argely canvas, though it caught the green xactly, shadowed with black, and a sky f distant clouds, small and bored, oating away. That man would be ninety r older now and still at the task f rendering the magic and nonsense of lives ved at great height, still not answering he unanswerable questions of high mist, rain cells  ghting for breath, our bondage o a line of perfect crows marking the way up. Make no mistake, for even here you could still o up along ragged stone trails that wound heir way into a gray world and from there nto thin air. Or you could descend n summer to the music of water on the narrow obbled streets, or in silent December, s we did, the mother leading the way, he father taking up the rear in Spanish style, aboring over a newspaper of local  lth. here was darkness. It fell even before he cold fell, even before the late sun anished behind the mountains, it fell nto the corners of sight slowly ke stained snow. In the restaurant here was more cold and darkness. A  ne layer f dust had settled on plates and silverware. wondered if anyone else saw it fting down but was scared to ask. One rear door tood open on the night, though no animals ntered or left. We sent the soup back, clear broth of boiled water dotted with islands of fat. We tried the bread hat gleamed like old china, we even tried he thin burned steaks. We tried. And then we walked the streets to a little square where the children sold white paper dolls ou could explode with a lighted cigarette nd necklaces of wooden beads meant or Christmas angels, who were sure to come, or everything is answered in the Old World, he Gypsy peddler told us as he wrapped he chestnuts six to a triangled pack, is stubby burned  ngers working deftly. Everything!” he promised. I turned away rom the laughter and threats, turned away rom my wife and kids. Suddenly alone, elieving he was right, I turned to behold he sky I’d always lived under bulging with huge, unfamiliar stars closer han I’d ever seen them and moving, frozen, n that ancient, secret dance. Who could ave guessed how everything was answered efore the night ended? At the hotel a room or each of us, windowless and sealed, private cell for sleep or prayer, nd seven more for those who never came— dozen tiny rooms in all, circling low-ceilinged common room that held ne great round table with attendant chairs, quitably, as they never are in this life. eside the table and below the portrait f God, the iron stove a boy  lled with twigs, roken crates, garbage, while we watched. his, too, was answered. The grandfather, miling sideways at his audience, lit the blaze nd leaped back, laughing, for even here bove the world we would have all that night, ven unto the clear break of day, steam heat. M. DEGAS TEACHES ART & SCIENCE AT DURFEE INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL Detroit, 1942 He made a line on the blackboard, ne bold stroke from right to left iagonally downward and stood back o ask, looking as always at no one n particular, “What have I done?” rom the back of the room Freddie houted, “You’ve broken a piece f chalk.” M. Degas did not smile. What have I done?” he repeated. he most intellectual students ooked down to study their desks xcept for Gertrude Bimmler, who raised er hand before she spoke. “M. Degas, ou have created the hypotenuse f an isosceles triangle.” Degas mused. veryone knew that Gertrude could not e incorrect. “It is possible,” ouis Warshowsky added precisely, that you have begun to represent he roof of a barn.” I remember hat it was exactly twenty minutes ast eleven, and I thought at worst his would go on another forty minutes. It was early April, he snow had all but melted on he playgrounds, the elms and maples ordering the cracked walks shivered n the new winds, and I believed hat before I knew it I’d be waggering to the candy store or a Milky Way. M. Degas ursed his lips, and the room tilled until the long hand f the clock moved to twenty one s though in complicity with Gertrude, who added con dently, “You’ve begun o separate the dark from the dark.” looked back for help, but now he trees bucked and quaked, and I new this could go on forever. III BURNED have to go back into the forge room t Chevy where Lonnie still calls ut his commands to Sweet Pea and Packy nd stare into the  re ntil my eyes are also  re nd tear away some piece of my face ecause we’re all burning in the blood nd it’s too late. I have to walk he long road from here to Bessemer, Alabama, and arrive on a June night in ’48 fter work when the men have crowded round a stalled car and tell them here’s no place to go and et them take turns beating me with hands turned to pig iron. I have to limb the shaking ladder to the roof f the Nitro plant and tear o  my respirator and breathe the yellow air he Chaldeans called “the air you must not breathe,” nd sing in the voices f my fathers calling the children nto prayer while below the stubby canisters ass labelled, “Chicago,” “Amsterdam,” Belsen,” “Toronto.” I have to swim out nto the  at waters of the great sea t dawn when the small  shing boats re coming in and climb aboard the one with the face of a goddess and the tail f a goat and let my left cheek rush against the rough, unshaven cheek f the old man whose tears—mixed with wine— watered the beach twenty one years ago. And eep going past the last marker ntil I am lost forever, until the sea nd the sky are one, the waves have ceased, o tide pulls us toward he cries of the drowned. I have to climb he slag hills again, but this time not s a child, and look out over the river of iron, nd hold it all in my eyes, he river, the iron mountains, the factories where our brothers burned. I have to repeat he prayer that we will all go back o earth one day soon to become earth, hat our tears will run to the sea last time and open it, and our  res ght the way back home for someone. * n the fullness of a season someone ad to go  rst into the other kingdom. ummer in Detroit. The light scattered nto tiny  ares at the end of a day f hard work. Stanley walked his dog, alking as always to himself, Dorothy at on the front porch alone, excited y the knowledge of her changing body. locks away Leo read The Tempest slowly o himself, stopping now and then to announce line out loud—“Thy turfy mountains where live nibbling sheep”—, his skin hilled with the glory of language. have not brought them together o their hearts might stutter or stop with love they can’t bear. It is 1944, Moradian has landed on a Paci c atoll o become his life forever, Esther’s husband ees the Sherman twenty yards ahead o up in a  ash and knows his is next. ast midnight Bernard and Arthur vow o give themselves to music and to poetry. do not call out, I do not step forward ut of the chaos of my 16 years to ask o take their place. I’m too young, oo exhausted, too busy. In the kitchen stand at the counter slicing cheese, alami, rye bread, spreading mayonnaise, amping down the lettuce, wrapping he sandwiches carefully in waxed paper or tomorrow’s lunch the exact way my grandmother taught me years before, umming one of my grandfather’s tunes, ne he groans out when he sings himself o sleep, tapping his foot, swinging rom side to side as though he were burning. * A burned car left in a  eld f sassafras, the long green shoots hrough the windows and doors where no oors remain. The kids don’t come by fter school to carve their names n the dashboard or pull the steering wheel o avoid the inevitable. Rocks, tires, ases of empties, an old couch sagging nto weeds, the cushions blooming. lived here once, in a house ow gone. A friend visited me t dusk, and she brought a paper parcel f cookies tied with a ribbon. Even then we were scared of the silence that followed whatever we gave each other. I would walk her to the bus stop on Second Avenue, nd we’d wait in silence in the dense air f a March night as slow rain ell into the last snow. I’d come back lone, sober, singing to a starless sky, nging recklessly out of a boy’s hroat, past the darkened rows f sleeping two storey houses hat have all gone up in smoke. * om Kippur n the New World. os Angeles hums little tune— rucks down he coast road or Monday market acked with small faces linking in the dark. My mother dreams y the open window. On the drainboard he gray roast humps ntouched, the oven angs its iron jaws, ut it’s over. efore her on the table et for so many er glass of  re oes out. he childish photographs, he letters and cards catter at last. he dead burn alone oward dawn. * Why am I going away from the glass of wine rom the loaf of bread Why am I not mourning the tiny death f the sparrow who leaped on the lowest branches f the atlas cedar ntil one afternoon he was drawn nto tall burning grass What will I say when the nights grow onger and longer he dawn is barely visible, a grudging f yellow light he day dies into the violet halos f exhaust No one takes my hand and leads me to bed o the mouth to mouth agonies of darkness When this passes ow will I know I was and I was alive Who will take my hand melling of earth and urning now to autumnal rust Who will lead me to the ceremonies of sorrow who will lead me * I was burned, he said, and lifted her blouse to show me the curious pale mottling along he lines of her belly, still smooth. “He aid he adored my white skin, creamy. an a Jew imagine what a real white woman looks like all over? All our life you dream of someone like me, very night of your life.” Her green eyes n  re with her own memories f herself 40 years ago. She shakes her head wake and still goes on. “Not with cigarettes, ou moron, would a man like that, richer han God, burn his only beloved with igarettes? Cigars, imported Havanas, nothing ut the best!” And she’s gone, thank God, lamming the door on me, gone back o the one life she clings to. The room quiet, ashamed, the books gawk down rom their shelves, not one with a word to tell me what it is like o enter the  res of your own making, naked, ay after day, until the burning becomes sweetness. * The day you left I walked lone for hours down the crowded streets earing and seeing no one until I aught the cries of a drunken woman ehind me. She had lost her husband, eft him in a bar, was alone, frightened, alling for help. I kept walking with her behind me, calling. he houses along the canals were closing p, turning their eyes inward, stening to the rumbling of their  res r their human groans. This day will end, told myself, this pain will pass. will waken to my life. The evening pread from the great oaks hat lined the emptying boulevards r descended in bits of ashes and dust rom a deepening sky. I turned at last o behold the woman whose grief was louder than mine. There was nly a child, her right hand closed ght on a handkerchief, knotted at one end with some coins and a note, a little girl who seeing my eyes  lled with tears egan to cry as she smiled. * wo ten-inch phonograph records, Bluebirds, oing white, that won’t give up their music. My uncle’s perfect cloth bound book hat opened the secret of electric growth. My mother’s gap-toothed tortoise combs. My father’s Victoria Cross he brought back rom an automobile parts convention n Chicago. His white gold pocket watch, Howard, that runs and stops and runs o keep his time. His naturalization papers laiming he was born in 1898 in Poland, without a single mention of his years at war. My brother’s smeared grade school drawings f Spit res, Stukas, ME 109s, is “Withdrawal from Dunkirk,” the beach risscrossed with small black lines hat could be abandoned arms or the arms f boys hugging. My stillborn sister’s wish to walk with us on Sunday afternoons, o breathe the stained air that blows n at dusk from the parking lots, o mother a child. Your  nger prints n the  nal application for release. A bitten fountain pen, a dry stamp pad. wo clear drops of  uid that catch nd hold the arti cial light, that glow with their own light when that’s gone s eyes in stories are said to do. Now in the dark they could be you, hey could be me, they could be anyone. * stop at the borders of dreams. ask who you are, whispering n my ear all these years, you o whom I’ve said all I can say. hold my two hands upward oward the light now sifting rom the air. That is the shape f eternity:  ve long  ngers nd a palm broadened and carved y use. When I looked n my heart and found only uestions, when I walked eside the ditch at dusk nd asked the sun, he answer was curled uietly in my pocket. “Look at hem both,” you say, “turn them ver and place them on the table efore you. Don’t be afraid. hey are you, familiar, at times verlooked, despised. Now, o back the way you came, down he same old streets where you rew to a name and a single face. hat was home, you said, and today is nothing, not even a closet f unread books. Here is home. lose your eyes. You are on dark plain. The hot winds reathe in and out. You’re laughing! ou asked for a home, you crossed he earth, you sat speechless, ou questioned the closed door, Are you there?’ No one answered ecause all the time it was you.” * fI called you “my soul,” you’d augh in my face. If I went own on my knees to you as to god or a beloved, you’d turn o the window, shake your head, nd talk to the last of the garden. At the end of September I may sk the trees to hold still n the west wind. I may scold he  icker hiding in the shade f an orange tree. His feathers catter and settle in the trough f each wave. He is not religious object nor is he wind sacred, smelling s it does of cold salt nd sea life. I have been here o long the bleached hairs uivering on my hands remember he years before the  ood. he whites of my eyes, no longer white, stared into  re when  re was mine, and I am only o much salt, water, and stone melling of iron. I can talk o you and though my answers will scatter like feathers in wind, ou may write them down on paper hat burns even in sunlight. Get what you can, says the  icker; emorseless, he shoulders his way nto light and then into air. What does he care that the year winds down? That the west wind mells of ice? That what went out s lies and so much bad breath ame home as the  nal truth? * he outskirts of our least favorite city, he one bombed and burned from the inside y its own citizens—along the fence mall climbing roses bloom in April, he hardier ones hang on long ast the better days, and late autumn rings tiny crystals glistening n the cheeks of the blackened petals. pading the gray soil, I think f begonias and how their buds redden ven without rain and of the wild iris— ags we called them—that won’t live n the rich beds though they survive re and hail outbattling tough weeds o spring up where houses once were. oking among these ruins for rocks or the garden, I unearth bricks rom a familiar  replace or a slab f stone that crowned a hearth, remnants f my lost neighbors. Spilling he kernels of carrot seeds nto my palm and the black pips f radishes, I know something will come from this root and wood hickened ground. With a stick I scrape trough for planting. I remember he unloved lamb become a sheep I saw n his way to slaughter. Like me, he shook is lowered head as though he knew he way home, that head dirty with curls. * was small once, hardly bigger han the laughter of a lemon and like lemon I had come into a life o one would question, an oily rind, losed volumes of  esh, and seeds s smooth as pearls. Even then ou could talk, you were immense with the desire to touch each leaf, ach small animal that rose rom his lair. Later, ven you who could love rind, eeds, oil,  esh, let your name lip from your tongue to become onsense, let salt rain down nto the  elds and surrendered ll you’d seen, you who had aten the earth gave back ashes. o, it is time we left. ake the small, empty purse our mother carried across an ocean, ake the little book of songs he children taught you, take our teeth and your  ngernails nd the white scars on your belly nd meet me where the road anishes into the hillside. How will you know me? won’t be tall or dressed or dinner or carrying a dark bag, won’t be whistling like a bird r your father coming home from work, won’t be anyone you ever poke to or fell asleep beside r wakened to. I won’t be sorry or you, I won’t take your hand r come forward and touch our hair or kiss your cheek. here, between the two sullen elms without leaves, the ones that died ears ago, do you see a shadow? could be the birth we gave ack to the rain. It could be he silence after love or just pain without hope or the need to dance. looks alive, even in the darkness, looks as though it were growing maller and smaller, but it’s ot a patch of snow. It could be whisper, a secret never kept, verything your heart knew nd you forgot. Don’t ask. * Give me your hand, and I’ll count ach  nger twice and put them to sleep with a name more cold and remote han a star’s. They don’t move, ot even to breathe, not even o search for water or to embrace nother hand. This is the way hings become as we return closer nd closer to air that simply is, tained by a day not yet here. A woman gets out of bed and goes o the window to see if the birds ave wakened and sees the houses ave gone, the trees have turned nward to become so many pages nmarked by mistakes. She says othing to herself. She makes the bed nd washes the one plate, the cup, he little spoon and fork. She dries hem carefully and lets them fall ne by one into the garbage. * Here it comes. ’s been quiet. If you’d bothered ou’d have heard  nches in the trees nd the wind sighing out back and wires umming in the voices of wire, you ould have heard a country asleep xcept for the people down under toking the furnaces and the ones way up changing the light bulbs. No more. Because here it is, he big wave the moon’s been holding ack and the Rocky Mountains f ice water. Now the clouds of locusts waiting since Genesis sweep over Kansas nd eat wheat and carry o  the cows. And the constant hum? It’s California n its knees chanting to keep safe ur vintage wines and swimming pools, he false Gods of our movies nd the true dead ones in our hearts. os Angeles, Seattle, New York City, etroit, Washington, gone to sea. Now you can hear again,  nches n the golden voices of  nch, the wind aying it best as only the old wind an, blowing over the centuries of nothing, lowing every which way it wants, blowing. * Once in a park in Paris an old woman eized two coins nesting on my open palm. grabbed the o ending hand, closed ow like a tiny steel cage, and twisted while she gasped and tore at my hand with her nails. At last one dark tear ripped from her nose and the two coins fell nto the grass. When I put a shoe over them he cried to the low clouds scudding overhead hat all men were strangers and sons of whores. eaving the coins, I stood and walked away. did not have to turn to know that smile— d seen it on my own face, I’d known he same hump in my shoulders, the cold leaming in my eyes, and wanted not to see. What if grass were bread?” my son asked me week before when the plane broke through he dense rain and we beheld the green world. had no answer. When we landed bought money with money, forgetting hat each dollar spent was so much time taring into faces that answered nothing. ater, in the hotel, my kids played with the elevator until the old concierge issed at them in French, and they roared ut the laughter of boys and refused to stop. When he came to my door to complain answered that in the West grass was bread. He held his pudgy hands over his breast o deliver his truths of waste and use. How many years had he gone faithfully rom room to room turning out lights, earching for loose change? How many days ad he ended by reheating lunch and praying? consider the long  elds that blaze n early March across the lower hills f the great Sierras. I cannot answer. remember a warm bakery in winter north f the village of Lorca where I bought bread, he women smiling at me and giving me he  rst place in line. Bread so stale shattered into shards as sharp as glass when we tried to break it. My kids, my wife, and I howled with glee. he father had returned, his face full f trust, bearing the gifts of earth. was afternoon, cold, and we had hours to go, we had sour red wine and empty stomachs. * To enter the  re to be burned, said Leo Maryk, slumped n the loading dock behind Kelsey-Hayes. He’d read it somewhere, maybe the Epistles f Paul or one of the early Fathers, Augustine or Ambrose. On a night like this hey all ran together in his head. Some kind of priest I’ll make,” he laughed. ven in the cold I could see the sweat unning down the long, jagged nose, the steam sing from his enormous chest as from n oven as he clenched and unclenched is gloved hands. “A man the size f me terri ed of every little woman, fraid to live the life my father lived, even changed my name.” Marikowski asking me what was love if he couldn’t feel it with his body? what was it? Asking me, kid more ignorant than he. Above us a low sky, he slag heaps burning slowly toward a day hat never came, the others—men and women— assing in and out of the same  res hey never saw into the world. * Once I believed I lived these closed ows of tenements, the shotgunned houses unched uselessly against the coming f another day. Now the stars settle own, easing themselves into the river. hivering with delight, they almost o out, but a high wind fans the little eparate points of  ame. An ore boat asses upriver. Riding soundlessly he other way, another parts the waters oward seven oceans and an older world. * he slow windward motion of the stars. ate rain falling for hours etween the squat, closed houses. hen silence, the town asleep, the light ot yet arrived where a single shade is torn r a door leans ajar. A wagon pulled own the bricked alley, and there is milk, read in cold packages, white, untouched. magine the darkness drawn away, he new day falling equitably n the valleys of the living. Imagine ll the long morning fathers rising with their wives, children making way or children at sink and table on a day without work or school until dusk hatters the golden windows. magine it. * The  rst time we entered he city, it was late afternoon, Friday, ehind miles of trucks and old cars spewing verywhere. Past closed warehouses f gray cotton cloth, factories, low-built aboratories grinding out antibiotics nd corn plasters. Each time the tra c talled we sat in stunned silence. This would be home. Before long we ound a room and entered the darkness ogether, holding each other s long as we could in the hope we would be home. Morning. On the streets tiny man leans back planting is heels as six greyhounds tug him oward the single tree. Our old friends he sparrows busy in the gutters turning esterday’s papers for a hint of the truth. A blue sky enters from nowhere. A truck elivers oranges and red sacks of milk. Air so clear I can see all the way down he Ramblas to where the sea goes out n its one voyage, all the way up o the Holy Mountain from which the devil aid, “Behold, it shall be yours, all he kingdoms below,” and we made our choice. * ain falling into the dry canals ast of here. Old couches, magazines, inettes—their legs skyward—, car seats nstick slowly from the gray mud and drift pinning toward the little dams and weirs. A skirt, stained with wine or blood,  lls with water and swirls to the surface, carton of empty beer cans like trophies. A black setter comes toward me, springing asily along the bank, his long head ung low, his coat soaked and heavy, nd passes without a sign. Another day. he sun still up past six, the dark clouds one into the foothills or farther, he clear sky darkening. The water moves swiftly past islands of calm nd darkness. I glimpse a root, bare nd silvery, groping upward through air, n open hand of black branches breaks he surface for a moment and then urns under and closes up. Somewhere light comes on in a living room, omeone I don’t know pauses at he window before the last light goes nd speaks to me. One great room, the moon liding through the trailing wisps f clouds or dust clouds. The child one under in clear water years ago, he sad yelps of brothers and sisters hat went on and on until morning uiet at last. The earth’s own sighs, he day’s last breath going out, my own silent cry of denial. They’re ll asleep, all the windows from here o the end of the world are open, can hear the even breathing f all that is wordless and  nal. IV SOLOING My mother tells me she dreamed f John Coltrane, a young Trane laying his music with such joy nd contained energy and rage he could not hold back her tears. And sitting awake now, her hands rossed in her lap, the tears start n her blind eyes. The TV set ehind her is gray, expressionless. is late, the neighbors quiet, ven the city—Los Angeles—quiet. have driven for hours down 99, ver the Grapevine into heaven o be here. I place my left hand n her shoulder, and she smiles. What a world, a mother and son nding solace in California ust where we were told it would e, among the palm trees and all-night uper markets pushing orange ack-lighted oranges at 2 A.M. He was alone,” she says, and does ot say, just as I am, “soloing.” What a world, a great man half er age comes to my mother n sleep to give her the gift f song, which—shaking the tears way—she passes on to me, for now can hear the music of the world n the silence and that word: oloing. What a world—when I rrived the great bowl of mountains was hidden in a cloud of exhaust, he sea spread out like a carpet f oil, the roses I had brought rom Fresno browned on the seat eside me, and I could have urned back and lost the music. SCOUTING m the man who gets o  the bus t the bare junction of nothing with nothing, and then heads back o where we’ve been as though he future were stashed somewhere n that tangle of events we call Where I come from.” Where I ame from the fences ran right own to the road, and the lone woman eaning back on her front porch as she uietly smoked asked me what did want. Confused as always, I nswered, “Water,” and she came to me with a frosted bottle and a cup, hook my hand, and said, “Good luck.” hat was forty years ago, you say, when anything was possible. No, was yesterday, the gray icebox at on the front porch, the crop was tobacco and not yet in, you ould hear it sighing out back. he rocker gradually slowed as he came toward me but never topped and the two of us went on ving in time. One of her eyes ad a pale cast and looked nowhere r into the future where without egrets she would give up the power o grant life, and I would darken ke wood left in the rain and then ade into only a hint of the grain. went higher up the mountain ntil my breath came in gasps, my sight darkened, and I slept o the side of the road to waken hilled in the sudden July cold, lone and well. What is it like o come to, nowhere, in darkness, ot knowing who you are, not aring if the wind calms, the stars tall in their sudden orbits, he cities below go on without ou, screaming and singing? don’t have the answer. I’m couting, getting the feel f the land, the way the  elds tep down the mountainsides ugging their battered, sagging wire fences to themselves as though oth day and night they needed o know their limits. Almost still, he silent dogs wound into sleep, he gray cabins breathing steadily n moonlight, tomorrow wakening lowly in the clumps of mountain oak nd pine where streams once ran own the little white rock gullies. ou can feel the whole country wanting to waken into a child’s dream, ou can feel the moment reaching ack to contain your life and forward o whatever the dawn brings you to. n the dark you can love this place. COMING OF AGE IN MICHIGAN New Year’s Eve, 1947, the old one’s ending r the new beginning on a familiar note. His name is McDonald, his father owns a dairy own the block from Brass Craft where I polish exible plumbing tubes by the hour. “Sol and Abie,” e says, “Fe’re not open yet for bizniz,” then holds is nose against that awful smell, the “Abie” smell o one asked for. Noel Baker begins to cry. How did the night end? I can’t remember it ending. can remember counting the house, an even dozen f them and two of us. My brother threw his drink gainst the wall, and no one moved on him, no one aid a thing. McDonald was dragged o  laughing o a bedroom in his fancy suite we’d been invited nto by some genuine innocent who didn’t know Jew from Commodore Vanderbilt without his yacht. remember my joy at seeing Noel Baker for the  rst time nce the 8th grade, a skinny whiz at math and English n penny loafers and monogrammed sweaters. (I saw her nly once after that in a liquor store in early June ears later, she was talking too much and too loudly, ut he didn’t mind, he’d left the motor running— white LaSalle convertible they  oated o  in while we waited in line.) I forget all the rest. * Have I taken something away from you? Noel Baker id not become a famous woman: it was too late o enter the  ction of F. Scott Fitzgerald, too early or her to become the governor of Michigan, which hardly makes you famous. My brother and I id not throw McDonald from a 7th story window f the Book Cadillac and into The Detroit Free Press, we did not even have the good taste to have our teeth nocked loose, to come home with our best white shirts lood smeared, our ties torn to shreds, cigarettes angling from swollen lips. Don’t blame us. he Book Cadillac is still going, though it smells ke a steam bath, and the rooms are tiny and gray. Down the boulevard the Statler, boarded over and serene, id not compromise, the Fox Theatre around the corner— rip-o  of the great mosque of Cordoba—became car park, and even the bus station got up one morning nd moved to the suburbs.) No one that night turned nto literature, nothing that we did or didn’t ntered the mythology of boys growing into men r girls  ghting to be people. Everyone went home ecause that was how the world was before God uned to prime-time TV and kids still rose early o catch the bus for school and everyone was innocent. THE RIGHT CROSS he sun rising over the mountains ound me awake, found an entire valley f sleepers awake, dreaming of a few hours more of sleep. Though the Great Central Valley home for the homeless, the fruit pickers f creation, for runaway housewives ored by their husbands, and bored husbands, he rising sun does not dip back behind he Sierras until we’re ready. The Valley sun ust comes on. We rise, drop our faces n cold water, and face the prospects f a day like the last one from which we ave not recovered. All this month I’ve one in search of the right cross, the punch which had I mastered it forty years ago might have saved me from the worst. The heavy bag till hangs from the rafters of the garage, urning in no wind, where my youngest son eft it when he went o  ten years ago bandoning his childish pursuits to me. After tea, dry toast, and some toe-touching, m ready to work. I pull on the salty ag gloves, bow my head, dip one shoulder nto the great sullen weight, and begin with a series of quick jabs. I’m up n my toes, moving clockwise, grunting s the blows crumple, the air going out nd coming back in little hot benedictions. m remembering Nate Coleman barking ll those years ago, “Straight from the shoulder, evine,” as though describing his own nature. he gentlest man I ever knew, perfect with his  sts, our master and mentor, who fought only for the love of it, ving secretly by day in suit and tie, ending copper cookware from the back seat f his black Plymouth. The dust rises rom the sour bag, and I feel how fragile my left wrist has become, how meek the bones f my shoulders as the shocks come home, he bag barely moving. “Let it go!” Nate would call, urging the right hand out gainst the big light heavies, Marvin with his sudden feints and blunt Becker, is face grim and closed behind cocked  sts. ater, the gym gone silent in the half-dark, Nate would stand beside me, left hand n my shoulder, and take my right wrist oosely in his right hand, and push it out oward an imagined foe, his right knee ressed behind my right knee until my leg ame forward. I could feel his words —“like this”—falling softly on my cheek nd smell the milky sweetness of his breath —“you just let it go”—, the dark lashes f his mysterious green eyes unmoving. he bag is going now, swinging easily with the force of jabs and hooks. The garage moans as though this dance at its center hreatened to bring it down. I throw a right, nother, and another before I take my rest n the cleared space amid the detritus f  ve lives: boxes of unanswered letters, chool papers, report cards, scattered parts f lawn mowers and motorcycles gone to ground. he sky is coming through the mismatched boards f the roof, pure blue and distant, the day sing from the oily cement of the  oor s again I circle the heavy bag throwing out more punches until I can’t. If my sons were here they’d cheer me on, and I’d eep going into the impossible heat nd before I quit I might throw, just once, or the  rst time, the perfect right cross. hey say it’s magic. When it lands ou feel the force of your whole body, ven the deeper organs, the dark  uids hat go untapped for decades, the tiny ale microbes haunting the bone marrow, he intricate patterns that devised he bones of the feet, you feel them nally coming together like so many toms of salt and water as they form n ocean or a tear, for just an instant efore the hand comes back under the chin n its ordinary defensive posture. he boys, the grown men dreaming f the squared circle into which the light alls evenly as they move without e ort our after hour, breathing easily, oiled with their own sweat,  ght for nothing xcept the beauty of their own balance, he precision of each punch. hated to  ght. I saw each blow n a sequence of events leading nally to a winner and a loser. et I fought as boys were told to do, nd won and lost as men must. That’s over. ix months from my sixtieth year, doused n my own juices, I call it quits or the day, having earned the rituals— he long bath, the shave, the laundered clothes, he afternoon muse as the little clots f sti ness break up and travel down he channels of the blood. After dinner nd before sleep, I walk behind the garage mong grape vines and swelling tomatoes o where the morning glories close down n the rising darkness and the cosmos are their brilliant whites a last time efore the moon comes out. From under he orange trees the click and chuckle f quail; the tiny chicks dart out or a last look and scurry back again efore the earth goes gray. A dove moans, nother answers from a distant yard as though hey called each other home, called each of us ack to our beds for the day’s last work. THE SWEETNESS OF BOBBY HEFKA What do you make of little Bobby Hefka n the 11th grade admitting to Mr. Jaslow hat he was a racist and if Mr. Jaslow was so tolerant how come he couldn’t olerate Bobby? The class was stunned. How do you feel about the Jews?” sked my brother Eddie, menacingly. Oh, come on, Eddie,” Bobby said, I thought we were friends.” Mr. Jaslow anged the desk to regain control. What is it about Negroes you do not like?” e asked in his most rational voice, which always failed to hide the fact e was crazy as a bed bug, claiming apek’s RUR was far greater than Macbeth. obby was silent for a long minute, thinking. Negroes frighten me,” he  nally said, they frighten my mother and father who never aw them in Finland, they scare my brother who’s much bigger than me.” Then he added he one name, Joe Louis, who had been usy cutting down black and white men o matter what their size. Mr. Jaslow ghed with compassion. We knew that efore the class ended he’d be telling us great era for men and women was imminent fonly we could cross the threshold nto humanitarianism, into the ideals f G. B. Shaw, Karel Capek, and Mr. Jaslow. looked across the room to where Bobby at in the back row next to the windows. He was still awake, his blue eyes wide. eyond him the dark clouds of 1945 were clustering over Linwood, the smokestack f the power plant gave its worst o a low sky. Lacking the patience to wait or combat, Johnny Mooradian had quit school year before, and Johnny was dead on an atoll without a name. Bobby Hefka had told the truth —to his own shame and pride—and the rains ame on. Nothing had changed for a roomful f 17 year olds more scared of life than death. he last time I saw Bobby Hefka he was driving milk truck for Dairy Cream, he was married, e had a little girl, he still dreamed f going to medical school. He listened n sorrow to what had become of me. He handed me an icy quart bottle of milk, a gift we both held on to for a silent moment while the great city roared around us, the trucks onking and racing their engines to make him move. His eyes were wide open. Bobby Hefka loved me. ON THE RIVER My brother has an old row boat moored to a dock at the foot f Je erson Avenue, Detroit. Once a week in decent weather e rows out to get a better ook at the opposite shore s though Canada truly were foreign country. It isn’t easy what with the ore boats’ lazy rawl toward salt water, the launches f tourists and cops, the lunchers pread out on barges, docks, rafts, waiting for the oiled clouds to lift moment and unveil the sun, waiting for the fumes of exhaustion o blow o  in the poor gusts f our making—collective breaths, assing trucks, running dogs loath o return to their chains. On schedule he comes at noon r not at all—his only free time— o he can see with a painter’s eye he hulking shapes of warehouses de ne hemselves, the sad rusts and grays ake hold and shimmer a moment n the blur of air until the stones arken like wounds and become nothing. He does this for our father who parked each week exactly here o stare at that distant shore s though it were home, and then assed quietly to a farther one. He does this for me, who long ago topped seeing beneath the shadows f concrete and burned brick towers he  ickering hints of life, the colors we made of fresh earth and  owers oming through the wet smells of houses allen in upon themselves. I suppose e does this also so that somewhere n the face of the black waters e can turn, feathering one oar lowly, to behold his own life ome into view brick by dark brick, ending his back for all it’s worth, s the whole thing goes up in smoke. THE SEVENTH SUMMER How could I not know God had a son? he biggest kid asked. I considered. No one told me. Did I ever go to church? es, but they spoke a language I didn’t ctually understand. The three stared at me. could have answered that it was possible God did not have a son and that this picture ver what was to be my bed was a fake— or one thing it wasn’t a photograph, or another it looked like an ad from Life, ut I was already sorry I’d said, “Who he?” referring to the  gure displayed ehind glass in a plain wooden frame. What I truly wanted to know was why God ad let anyone do such a thing to his son, ail his hands and feet to a huge wooden cross rom which he sagged in what appeared o be less discomfort than I would have felt. The Jews done it,” the biggest one said, as though eading my mind. I felt a chill run through me, ure that once more I was going to be blamed or what I had not done or what I’d done ut done without meaning to do, but the boys —the oldest was sixteen, over twice my age—left me to myself, for it was early to bed for everyone. lay awhile in the silent dark of the farmhouse wondering if it could be so, that God had son he had let die, and if this were so why o one had told me so that I might understand why life could be so puzzling for all of us. ays passed before Lars, the fourteen year old, old me that it was OK, this Jesus had died o that all of us could be saved, in the end hings turned out for the best. That was Sunday, fter the boys had returned from church— o which I did not go—, and before we walked nto town to swim in the big public place. remember best how sweet was the lake water we swam in, how I could even swallow ttle gulps of it and not feel ill and how large he bodies around me were, Lars and Sven thrashing fter the girls in their dark wool suits, the girls quealing with mock hurt when they would catch hem up in their pale arms, for though their faces were deeply browned their bodies were ghostly. ven, Lars, and Thomas, three boys as big as men, who let me climb to their secret room beside he hay loft, where they smoked and spoke of women, he laughter rushing out of their great throats, he strange words I had never heard before coughed ut in sudden spasms, and such hopes uttered s they moved about the room in a half-dance, alf-sword- ght, calling out the magic names f the absent girls as they stroked their own bodies t chest and crotch or rolled on the  oor n mock death agony. August in Michigan, he world spinning around me, my mother gone n the grief of  nal loss, from which one day he would awaken in daylight, one year efore the wars in Ethiopia, Spain, and China ould give my growing up its particular name, nd yet I sat at their table that night, head bowed n the grace I did not say, thankful for corn, eans, and poisonous pork, and understood it all. A NOTE ABOUT THE AUTHOR Philip Levine was born in 1928 in Detroit and was formally educated there, at the public schools and at Wayne University (now Wayne State University). After a succession of industrial jobs he left the city for good and lived in various parts of the country before settling in Fresno, California. He currently teaches in the creative writing program at New York University. Three of his books have been nominated for the National Book Critics Circle Award, and two of them, Ashes and 7 Years from Somewhere, have received it. Ashes also received the American Book Award in 1980. In 1987 he received the Ruth Lilly Poetry Prize “for distinguished poetic achievements,” awarded by Poetry magazine and the American Council for the Arts. His New Selected Poems was published simultaneously with What Work Is, which won the National Book Award for Poetry in 1991. The Simple Truth (1994), received the Pulitzer Prize for poetry. His latest book of poems is The Mercy, and two earlier titles, They Feed They Lion and The Names of the Lost have been recently reissued in a combined volume. BOOKS BY PHILIP LEVINE THE MERCY 1999 THEY FEED THEY LION and THE NAMES OF THE LOST (reissue) 1999 THE SIMPLE TRUTH 1994 WHAT WORK IS 1991 NEW SELECTED POEMS 1991 A WALK WITH TOM JEFFERSON 1988 SWEET WILL 1985 SELECTED POEMS 1984 ONE FOR THE ROSE 1981 7 YEARS FROM SOMEWHERE 1979 ASHES: POEMS NEW AND OLD 1979 THE NAMES OF THE LOST 1976 1988 1974 THEY FEED THEY LION 1972 RED DUST 1971 PILI’S WALL 1971 NOT THIS PIG 1968 ON THE EDGE 1963 KENNETHKOCH SELECTEDPOEMS 4 FIT $17.95 Thisvoliiiiie,whichl)riiigstogetherfortliefirsttimeKennethKoch'searlyworkwitlihismorerecentpoems,makesitpossibletoseethewholeextraordinaryrangeofhispoetry:fromtheexcite-mentandthesensnoiisconcretenessofThank)(mtotheenergetic,passionatespeculationsandreconstructionsof77icMysteryofAnnaandDay'sandNights—from‘‘‘FreshAir,"asavageandwittyattackonacademicpoetryinthe1950s,to‘‘TheArtofPoetry";fromtheexcitedlyricismof''InIjovewithYou"tothemovinginvocationsofformerlovesin‘^ToMarina"and‘'WithJanice,"and,withthese,liisshocking,funny,andaffecting''ArtofIjOvc."Thepureinventionandahnostcomic-stripsimplicityofhisearlypoem‘"TheCircus"ishere,togetherwiththepoemofthesametitlewrittentwentyyearslater,fulloftimeandexperienceandregret,butwiththesameastonish-ingclarity.Serious,deep,andpassionatebeneathitsbrilhantandchangingsurfaces,KennethKoch’sworkbelongstothebestAmericanpoetryofourtime. “[An]enormouslyanimatedconceptionofthings....ApparentlyKochisdeterminedtoputtherealitybackintoJoyce’s‘’realityofexperience,’torestorethenewnesstoPound’s‘makeitnew.’’’—V.W.Dupee,IheNewYorkRevieivofBooks(onThankYou) “IKochhas]theabilitytomovethereader,plainbutbeautifullanguage...ageneralgraciousnessofspirit...and,lastbutnotleast,outrightwisdom."—AramSaroyan,IheNewYorkTinwsHookReview(onTheArtofL(we) ‘‘Virtuositytakesverve.Koch’spoems...maintain[)owerbyrarelychoosingtoexertit."—DenisDonoghue,TheNenvYorkRevieteojHooks(onTheBurningMysteryofAnnain1951) BOSTONPUBLICLIBRARY DigitizedbytheInternetArchivein2017withfundingfromChina-AmericaDigitalAcademicLibrary(CADAL) https://archive.org/details/selectedpoems19500koch I I i BOOKSBYKENNETHKOCH PoemsKo,orASeasononEarthPermanentlyThankYouandOtherPoemsBerthaandOtherPlaysWhentheSunTriestoGoOnThePleasuresofPeaceWishes,LiesandDreams:TeachingChildrentoWritePoetryAChangeofHearts:Plays,Films,andOtherDramaticWorksRose,WhereDidYouGetThatRed?TeachingGreatPoetrytoChildrenTheArtofLoveTheRedRobins—anovelTheDuplicationsINeverToldAnybody:TeachingPoetryWritinginaNursingHomeLesCouleursdesVoyellesTheRedRobins—aplayTheBurningMysteryofAnnainigpSleepingontheWing:AnAnthologyofModernPoetrywithEssaysonReadingandWriting(withKateFarrell)DaysandNightsSelectedPoems,igso-1982 SelectedPoems1950-1982 V SelectedPoems1950-1982KennethKoch RandomHouseNewYork Copyright©1985byKennethKoch AllrightsreservedunderInternationalandPan-AmericanCopyrightConventions.PublishedintheUnitedStatesbyRandomHouse,Inc.,NewYork,andsimultaneouslyinCanadabyRandomHouseofCanadaLimited,Toronto. Gratefulacknowledgmetjtismadetothefollowingforpermissiontoreprintpreuiouslypublishedmaterial:GrovePress,Inc.:PoemsfromThankYouandOtherPoems,byKennethKoch,GrovePress,Inc.,1962.Copyright©1962byKennethKoch.PoemsfromThePleasuresofPeace,byKennethKoch,GrovePress,Inc.,1969.Copyright©1969byKennethKoch.ReprintedwithpermissionofGrovePress,Inc.RandomHouse,Inc.:PoemsfromTheArtofLove,byKennethKoch.Copyright©1972,1974,1975byKennethKoch.PoemsfromDaysandNights,byKennethKoch.Copyright©1982byKennethKoch.PoemsfromTheBurningMysteryofAnnainig^i , byKennethKoch.Copyright©1977,1978,1979byKennethKoch.ReprintedbypermissionofRandomHouse,Inc. LibraryofCongressCataloginginPublicationDataKoch,Kenneth.Selectedpoems,1950—1982. 1.Title.PS3521.0270519858ii'.5484-17851ISBN0-394-54391-2ManufacturedintheUnitedStatesofAmerica98765432FIRSTEDITION Author’sNote Thesepoemswerewrittenbetween1950and1982andpublished(infivecollections)between1962and1982.Theyareinroughlychronologicalorder,exceptforafewpoemsinThePleasuresofPeacethatwerewritten,oraleastbegun,atthesametimeasthoseinThankYou.Twobook-lengthnarrativepoems,Ko,orASeasononEarthandTheDuplications , seemedtomebetterintheirentiretythaninexcerptsandsoarenotincludedhere;nor,forthesamereason,isanearlierlongpoemcalledWhentheSunTriestoGoOn. K.K.1985 % i InmemoryofJanice i I f Contents FROMThankYouOntheGreatAtlanticRainwayjSummeryWeather4TheBrassiereFactory5TheBricks6DesireforSpring7ToYou8AuseinerKindheit9Spring11InLovewithYouijGeography75TheCircusigCollectedPoems24TheArtist28FreshAirj/Thanksgiving44Permanently46DownattheDocks47YouWereWearing48Locks4gVariationsonaThemebyWilliamCarlosWilliamsThankYou52Lunch53TakingaWalkwithYou60TheRailwayStationery64TheDeparturefromHydra67 FROMThePleasuresofPeaceWestWind77Hearing78Poem/Thethingtodo...80MaProvence81SleepingwithWomen82ThePleasuresofPeace87 FROMTheArtofLoveTheCircusggTheMagicofNumberslO}AliveforanInstant/05SomeGeneralInstructions106TheArtofPoetry113OnBeauty123TheArtofLove138 FROMTheBurningMysteryofAnnainig3iOurHearts167Fate172TheSimplicityoftheUnknownPastTheBurningMysteryofAnnain1951IntheMorning182TheBoilingWater184ToMarinai8g FROMDaysandNightsInBed203GirlandBabyFloristSidewalkPramNineteenSeventySomething217WithJanice218DaysandNights224 IndexofTitles239 fromThankYou 4 OntheGreatAtlanticRainway IsetforthonemistedwhitedayofJuneBeneaththegreatAtlanticrainway,andheard:“Honestlyyousmiteworldsoftruth,butLoseyourowntrainsofthought,likeapigeon.DidyouoncerideinKenneth’smachine?”“Yes,Irodethere,anoldmaninshorts,blind.Whohadlosthiswayinthefillingstation;Kennethwaskind.”“Didhefillyourmotionlessearswithresonanceandstain?”“No,hespokenotasacritic,butasaman.”“Tellme,whatdidhesay?”“Hesaid,‘Myeyesarethewhitesky,thegravelonthegroundwaymysadlament.’”“Andyethedrivesbetweenthetwo....”“Exactly,Jane,Andthatisthemodernideaoffittingness.To,alwaysinmotion,losenothing,althoughbeneaththeRainwaytheymoveinthreesandtwoscompletelyRuinedforthemselves,likemovingpictures.”“Buthowother?”“Formulalessness,togofromthesunIntolove’ssweetdisrepair.Hewouldfondlyexpress‘Raintrees’—whichisnotapoem,‘raintrees....’”“Still,itismysterioustohaveanengineThatfloatsbouquets!andonedayintherear-visionMirrorofhiscarwevoweddelight.Theinsufficiencyofthesilverwareinthesunlight.Thedreamshestealsfromandsmiles,losinggain.”“YetalwaysbeneaththerainwayunsyntacticalBeautymightleapup!”“ThatwemightsingFromsmiles’ravines,‘Rose,thereverseofeverything.Maybeprofanedortalkedatlikeahat.’”“Ohthatwassweetandshort,liketheminuetOfstars,whichwouldpermitustoseemourbestfriendsBysilver’seminentlights!Fornatureissosmall,endsFalselyreign,distendingthetimewedidBehindourhopeforbody-work,ridingwithKenneth.”Theirvoicingceased,thenstartedagain,tocomplainThatweareofferednothingwhenitstartstorainInthesameway,thoughwearedyingforthetruth. 3 SummeryWeather Oneearring’ssmileNearthedrawerAndatnightwegamblingAtthatnighttheyachtonVeniceGlorioustoo,ohmyheavensSeehowherblousewasstarchedup.“Thestarsremindedmeofyouse.”“Hislipsticksout.Hiseyeissailing. Idon’tcarewhathappensNow,”shesays,“AfterthosewintersinFlorida!”AsforapuredanceWithoranges,“AllmyfactoriesNeedrefilling,”Thecorpsesaid,fallingdownbetweenthem.“OkayHere’sabananaandabandanaThelightonabrightnight.Withwhich,tofinish,mypersonalchallenge.”Ohhowsheadmiredhim!Lovelyarefireworks;Given,theshirtshaveasaleTothemselves;butThewindisblowing,blowing! 4 TheBrassiereFactory IsthegovernorfallingFromagreatheight?Arminarmwefledthebrassierefactory,Themotion-boatstayedontheshore! IsawhowrounditsbottomwasAsyouwalkedintosouthernFrance — UponthelighthairofanarmCigarbandslay! Ikissedyouthen.OhismybarTheinsectofyourwill?Thewaterrose,ButwillthebuffaloonThenickelyetbestill?ForhowcanwindowsholdoutthelightInyoureyes!Darling,wefledthebrassierefactoryInforty-eightstates.Arminarm.WhenhumanbeingshungonusAndyouhadbeenarrestedbytheclothsWereusedinmaking,andIsaid,“TheGothsKnowsuchdelight,”butstillwefled,awayIntoadinneratmosphereFromallweknew,andfallasleepthisday.0maintenancemen,withcrueleyes.Thenarminarmwefledthelistlessfactory!Themusicchangedyourfingers’endstopearl, 1punchedyou,youfoolishgirl.Forthankstothemetronomewegotoutalive,intheairWherethesunfilleduswithcruelty!There’swhattodoExceptdespair,likepages!andlaughLikeprawns,aboutthesea!OharminarmwefledtheindustryIntoanearthofbanksAndfoolishtanks,forwhatbarebreastsmightbe. 5 TheBricks ThebricksinawallSangthissong:“WeshallnotfallThewholedaylongButwhiteandsmallLieinabandon.” ThenthefairmaidPassedwithherloveAndshetohimsaid,“TherearestarsaboveWheretheyhavebeenlaidLetuslieinabandon.” ThenthewolfcameWithhisteethinabandonAndthelioncameWithhisteethinabandonAndtheyravagedandhecameTothewhitestone Andhekissedthefield’sgrassAndhelayinabandon.“IforgetifshewasOrhewasthestoneOrifitwastheanimals,”And,“Everythingcomessoon.” 6 DesireforSpring Calciumdays,dayswhenwcfeedourbones!Irondays,whichenrichourblood!Saltwaterdays,whichgiveusvaluableiodine!Whenwilltherebeaperfectlyordinaryspringday?Formyheartneedstobefed,notmyurineOrmybrain,andIwishtoleaptoPittsburghFromTuskegee,Indiana,ifnecessary,spreadinglikeaflowerInthespringlight,andgrowinglikeasilverstair.Nothingelsewillsatisfyme,notevendeath!Notevenbrokenlifeinsurancepolicies,cancer,lossofhealth.Ruinedfurniture,prostatedisease,headaches,melancholia.No,notevenaravagingwolfeatingupmyflesh! Iwantspring,IwanttoturnlikeamobileInanewfreshair!Idon’twanttohibernateBetweenwalls,betweenhalls!IwanttobearMyshareoftheanguishofbeingsuccinctlyhere!NotevenmothsinthespelloftheflameCanwantittobewarmersomuchasIdo!NoteventhepilotslippingintothegreatgreenseaInflamescanwantlesstobeturnedtoanicicle!Thoughadmiringtheicicle’scunning,howshallIbesatisfiedWithartificialdaisiesandroses,andwaxpears?Obreeze,mylovely,comein,thatImayn’tbestultified!Dearcoolnessofheaven,comeswiftlyandsitinmychairs! 7 ToYou IloveyouasasheriffsearchesforawalnutThatwillsolveamurdercaseunsolvedforyearsBecausethemurdererleftitinthesnowbesideawindowThroughwhichhesawherhead,connectingwithHershouldersbyaneck,andlaidaredRoofinherheart.Forthisweliveathousandyears;Forthiswelove,andwelivebecausewelove,wearenotInsideabottle,thankgoodness!IloveyouasaKidsearchesforagoat;IamcrazierthanshirttailsInthewind,whenyou’renear,awindthatblowsfromThebigbluesea,soshinysodeepandsounlikeus; IthinkIambicyclingacrossanAfricaofgreenandwhitefieldsAlways,tobenearyou,eveninmyheartWhenI’mawake,whichswims,andalsoIbelievethatyouAretrustworthyasthesidewalkwhichleadsmetoTheplacewhereIagainthinkofyou,anewHarmonyofthoughts!IloveyouasthesunlightleadstheprowOfashipwhichsailsFromHartfordtoMiami,andIloveyouBestatdawn,whenevenbeforeIamawakethesunReceivesmeinthequestionswhichyoualwayspose. 8 AuseinerKindheit Isthebasketballcoachahomosexuallemonmanufacturer?ItissuspectedbyO’Ryaninhissubmarine.WhenIwasachildwealwayscriedtobedrivenforarideinthatsubmarine.DaddywouldsayYes!MommywouldsayNo!ThemaidreadAnnaKareninaandtoldussecrets.SomesuspectedherofaliaisonwithO’Ryan.NothingbutsquirrelsSeemedtobeherinterest,atthewindows,exceptonholidays,likeEasterandThanksgiving,whenShewouldleavethebasementandraveamongtheleaves,shouting,IamtheSpiritofSoftball!Cometome!Daddywouldalwaysleavetown.AndachorusofspidersWouldhangfrommybedroomwall.Mommyhadahatmadeoutofpastyhooks.Shegaveapartytolimburgercheese.WeallwereafraidthatO’Ryanwouldcome!Hecame,hecame!asthefallwindcomes,wavingandrazingandswirlingtheleavesWithhisbags,hismoustache,hiscigar,hisgolfball,hispencils,hisAprilcompasses,andoverhiswholeBodywechildrensawsignsoflifebeneaththewater!Oh!Willhedancethehornpipe?wewondered.Willhesmokeacigarunderneatheleveninchesofocean?WillhebeatthepavementOutsideourdoorwithhislightfeet,forbeingsofirm?IshealemonMemnon?O’RyanO’RyanO’Ryan!Themaidcameupfromthebasement,wewereallastonished.Andshesaid,“IsitThanksgiving?Christmas?I feltAforcewithinmestir.”AndthenshesawO’Ryan!Thebasketballcoachfollowedherupfromthecellar.HeandO’Ryanfight!Nooneishomosexualthen!happilyIswimthroughthebathtubswithmyscarlet-hairedsisterZ.(“OwomenIloveyou!”O’Ryancried.)Andweparkedunderwater.Then,lookingoutthewindow.Wesawthatsnowhadbeguntofall,uponthegreengrass,andbothshylyenteredthenewworldofourbleachedunderwear.Rome!Rome!Wasourmaidentertainingthatlimburgercheese,ormymother?hasthe 9 passagewayfallenasleep?andcanone’sactionsforsixyearsbecalledi4>improper? Ihopenot.Ihopethesea.Ihopecigarswillbesmoked.IhopeitfromNewYorktoCalifornia.FromTallahasseetoSt.Paul. Ihopetheorangepunchingbagwillbesocked,andthatyou’llbesatisfied,sweetfriend.Ihopeinternationalmatrimony,lambentskies,and“Ship,ahoy!”Forwe’reduetobedawnedon,Iguess. 10 Spring Let’stakeawalkInthecityTillourshoesgetwet(It’sbeenrainingAllnight)andwhenWeseethetrafficLightsandthemoonLet’stakeasmileOfftheashcan,let’swalkIntotown(ImeanAlemonpeel) Let’smakemusic(IhearthecatsPurplybeautifulLikehallwaysinsummerMadeofsnowingrubberValencepiccalillianddiamonds)OhseethearchrubyOfthislateMarchskyAreyoulessintelligentThanthepirateoflemonsLet’stakeawalk IknowyoutonightAsIhaveneverknownAbookofwhitestonesOrabookcaseoforangegroansOrsymbolismIthinkI’minloveWiththoseimaginaryracetracksOfredtracedgreyinTheskyandthegimcracksOfallyouknowandloveWhoonceloathedfirecrackersAndlicenseplatesandDiamondsbutnowyoulovethemall AndjustformysakeLet’stakeawalkIntotheriver(IcanevendothatTonight)whereIfIkissyoupleaseRememberwithyourshoesoffYou’resobeautifullikeAliftedumbrellaorangeAndwhitewemayneverDiscovertheblueover-CoatmaybeneverneverOblindWiththis(love)let’swalkIntothefirstRiversofmorningasyouareseenTobebathedinalightwhitelightComeon 12 InLovewithYou I OwhataphysicaleffectithasonmeTodiveforeverintothelightblueseaOfyouracquaintance!Ah,butdearestfriends,Likeforms,arefinished,aslifehasends!Still,Itisbeautiful,whenOctoberIsover,andFebruaryisover.Tositinthestarchofmyshirt,andtodreamofyoursweetWays!Asiftheworldwereataxi,youenterit,thenReply(tonoone),“Let’sgofiveorsixblocks.”Isn’tthebluestreamthatrunspastyouatranslationfromtheRussian?Aren’tmyeyesbiggerthanlove?Isn’tthishistory,andaren’tweacoupleofruins?IsCarthagePompeii?isthepillowthebed?isthesunWhatgluesourheadstogether?Omidnight!Omidnight!Islovewhatweare.OrhashappinesscometomeinaprivatecarThat’ssoverysmallI’mamazedtoseeitthere? 2 Wewalkthroughtheparkinthesun,andyousay,“There’saspiderOfshadowtouchingthebench,whenmorning’sbegun.”Iloveyou. IloveyoufameIloveyourainingsunIloveyoucigarettesIloveyoulove IloveyoudaggersIlovesmilesdaggersandsymbolism. 3 Insidethesymposiumofyoursweetestlook’sSunflowerawningbythenurse-facedchrysanthemumschildhoodAgainrepresentsasummerspentstickingknivesintoporcelainraspberries,whenChina’sStillacountry!Oh,KingEdwardabdicatedyearslater,that’s 13 Exactlywhen.Ifyouwereseventythousandyearsold,andIwereapill, IknowIcouldcureyourheadache,likeplayingbaseballindrinkingwater,asbasketsOftowelssweetlytouchthebathroomfloor!ObenchesofnothingAppearandreappear—electricity!I’dlovetobehowYouare,asifTheworldwerenew,andtheselveswereblueWhichwedonWhenit’sdawn.UntileveningputsonThegrayhoodedselvesandthelightbrownselvesof... Water!yourtear-colorednailpolishKissesme!andthelumberyardseemsnewAsacalmOnthesea,where,likepigeons,Ifeelsomutated,sad,sobreezed,sorevivified,andstillsounabdicated — Notlikeanedgeoflandcomingoverthesea! 14 Geography I Inthebluehubbubofthesame-through-wealthskyAmbagrewtohealthandfifteenthyearamongthejunglescrubbery.Thehate-birdsangonalowerwingofthebirch-nuttreeAndAmbaheardhimsing,andinhishealthhetooBegantosing,butthenstopped.AlongthelowerCongoTherearesuchhighplantsofwhatthereisthere,whenAtmorningAmbaheardtheirpinkmusicasgentlemanlyAsifhehadbeenincivilization.WhenmorningstankOvertheridgeofcoconutsandbaldfronds,withagilityAmbaclimbedthepermanentnuttrees,andwilloftensingTotheshiningbirds,andthepetsintheirstealthAreeachotheramong,also,whetheritbeblue(thhhh)feathersOrgreenslumber.AfricainAmba’smindwasthosewhitemorningshesang(thhhh)hightralatothenougatbirds,andafterThetrencheshadallbeendugfortheday,AmbaWoulddreamattheedgeofsomestainedandstinkingpondOftheafternightmusic,asbluepetscametohiminhisdreams;Fromtheorangecoconutshewouldextractsomestainedmilk.Underneathhisfeetroots,tangledandfilthygreen.AtnightThemoon(zzzzzz)shiningdownonAmba’ssweetmockedsleep. InChicagoLouiswalkedthemorning’sroundswithagility.Aboyofseventeenandalreadyrecognizedasafastmilkman!ThewhizzandburrofdeadchimesoppressedtheHolocausticunisonofFrank’sbrain,ayoungoutlawDestinedtomeetdishonorandtruthinasameinstant.CrossingLouis’pathgentlyinthestreet,thegreatsecretunknown. 15 3 TheturrhubarbdidnotpleaseDaisy.“Freddie,”shecalled,“Ourfruit’sgangmouldy.”Daisy,whitecheekswithaspotofredInthem,likeapplesgrowninpaperbags,smiledGentlyatthefreshnewkitchen;and,then,depressed.Shebegantocovertherhubarbwithherhands. 4 InthecrushygreeniceandsnowBabaranupandaroundwithexuberance!Today,nodoubt.FatherandUncleDadwouldcome,andtogethertheythreewouldchasethewhale!BabastareddownthroughthegreencrustyiceattheworldoffishAndclosedhiseyesandbegantoimaginethesweettripOverthemuskywaters,whenDaddywouldspearthewhale,andthewindBlow“Crad,crad!”throughUncleDad’sfur,andthesweetendOfthedaywheretheywouldsmileatoneanotheroverthesmokingblubberAndUncleDadwouldtelltalesofhisadventurespasttheshadowbarChasingthewhitesnow-eagle.BabaranIntotheperfectiglooscreamingwithimpatience,andMalmal,Hismother,kissedhimanddressedhimwithlovingcarefortheicytrip. 5 TenKosprintedoverthericepaddies.Slush,slosh,sloosh!Hisbrother.WanKai,wouldsoonbereturnedfromthevillageWherehehadgone...(Bluedesire!...) 1 6 6 RoonstartledherparentsbyappearingperfectlydressedInalittlewhitecollarandgown.Angeborliftedhimselfupsohemightstareinthewindowattheprettygirl.Hislittlehandsunclenchedanddroppedthecoinshehadsavedfortheoona.Heopenedwidehiseyes,thenblinkedattheprettygirl.Hehadneverseenanythinglikethat.Thatevening,whenitwhitenedinthesky,andagreenClearnesswasthere,MaggiaandAngeborhadnooona.ButAngebortalkedwithexcitementofwhathehadseen,andMaggiadrankzee’th. 7 Thelittleprisonerweptandwailed,tellingofhislifeinthesandAndtheburningsunoverthedesert.AndonenightitwascoolAnddark,andhestoleawayoverthegreensandtosearchforhisparents.Andhewenttotheirtent,andtheykissedhimandcoveredhimwithloving-kindness.Andthenewmorningsunshonelikeapinkroseintheheavens.Andthefamilyprayed,thedesertwindscorchingtheircoolskin. 8 Ambaarose.Thhhhhhh!wentthebirds,andclinkclankdeckwentTheleavesunderthemonkeys’feet,andAmbawenttosearchforwaterSpeakingquietlywithhisfreshvoiceashewenttowardGorillaLakeToallthebeasts.WanKailiftedhisbodyfromthericematWhenhisbrotherTenKocamerunningin.“Theyhaveagreedinthevillage,”Hesaid.WinTeibroughtthemtea.Outsidetherain 17 Fell.Plop,plop.Daisyfeltsomethingstirinsideher.Shewenttothewindowandlookedoutatthesnow.LouiscameupthestairsWiththemilk.“Roonhasbronchitis,”saidtheAmericandoctor,“Shewillhavetostayinsidefortendaysduringthisrain.”AmbaSneakedaway,andwantedtogothereagain,butMaggiasaidhecouldnotgoagaininthisrainAndwouldbesuretolosethemoneyfortheootia.BabastaredAtthegreenandblacksea.UncleDadstoodupintheboat,whileBabaWatchedFatherplungehisharpoonthreetimesinthewhale.DaisyturnedDreamilyaround,herhandonhercheek.Frank’sbootKickedinthedoor.Ambawept;Ahnathedeerwasdead;shelayamidherpuzzledyoung.ThesweetformsoftheappleblossomsbentdowntoWehtukai.Theboatsplit.Sunstreamedintotheapartment.Amba,Amba!Thelakewascoveredwithgloom.Ennaplungedintoitscreaming. i8 TheCircus I Wewillhavetogoaway,saidthegirlsinthecircusAndnevercomebackanymore.ThereisnotenoughofanaudienceInthislittletown.Waitingagainsttheblack,blueskyThebigcircuschariotstookthemintotheirentrances.Thelightrangoutoverthehillwherethecircuswagonsdimmedaway.Underneaththeirdressesthecircusgirlsweresweating.Butthen,anorangetightstickingtoher,onespokewithBlueeyes,shewasyoungandpretty,blondeWithbrighteyes,andshespokewithhermouthopenwhenshesneezedLightlyagainstthebacksoftheothergirlswaitinginlineToclocktherope,orcomespinningdownwithherteethontheline.Andshesaidthatthecircusmightleave—andredpostersStucktotheoutsideofthewagon,itwasbeginningtoRain—shesaidmightleavebutnotherheartwouldeverleaveNotthattownbutjustanyonewheretheyhadbeen,riskingtheirlives.AndthateachplacetheywereshouldbecelebratedbybluerosemaryInapatch,inthetown.ButtheylaughedandsaidSentimentalBlonde,andshelaughed,andtheyall,circusgirls,clingingToeachotherasthecircuswagonsrushedthroughthenight. 2 Inthenextwagon,theoneforwardoftheirs,thenextwagonWastheelephants’wagon.Agreytrunkdraggedonthefloor... 3 OrvilletheMidgettrampedupanddown.PaultheSeparatedManLeapedforward.Itrainedandrained.SomepeopleinthecitiesWheretheypassedthroughweresittingbehindthickglassWindows,talkingabouttheirbratsanddrinkingchocolatesyrup. 19 4 MinnietheRabbitfingeredhermachinegun.Thebrightdaywasgolden.SheaimedtheimmensepineneedleatthefoxesThinkingNowtheywillneverhurtmytribeanymore. 5 ThecircuswagonsstoppedduringthenightForeighteenminutesinalittletowncalledRosebud,Nebraska.ItwasafterdinneritwasafterbedtimeitwasafternauseaitwasAfterlunchroom.ThegirlscameoutandtouchedeachotherandhadfunAndjusthadtimetogetabreathofthefreshairofthenightinBeforetheungodlyprocessionbeganoncemoredownthepurplehighway. 6 Withwhatpompandceremonythecircusarrivedorangeandredinthedawn!Itwasexhausted,carsandwagons,anditlaydownandleapedForwardalittlebit,likeafox.MinnietheRabbitshotalittlewoolenbulletatit.Andjustthentheelephantmancametohisdoorwayinthesunlightandstoodstill. 7 Thesnoringcircusmasterwakesup,hetakesitonhimselftoarrangethecircus.Soonthebigtentfloatshigh.Birdssingonthetent.Theparadegirlsandthelivingstatuegirlsandthetrapezegirls 20 Covertheirsweetyoungbodieswithphosphorescentpaint.Someofthecircusgirlsareolderwomen,buteachisbeautiful.Theystand,waitingfortheircues,atthedoorwayofthetent.Thesky-blueliontamercomesin,andtheredgiraffemanager.Theyareverybraveandwistful,andtheylookatthegirls.Someofthecircusgirlsfeelahotsweetlongingintheirbodies.Butnowisittimefortheelephants!Slowlythegiantbeastsmarchin.Someoftheirlegsareclothedinbluepapier-macheruffles.Onehasaredeye.Theelephantmanisatthepeakofhappiness.Hespeaks,giddily,toeveryoneofthecircuspeoplehepasses.Hedoesnotknowwhatheissaying,hedoesnotcare — Hiselephantsareondisplay!Theywalkintothesandyring... 8 Suddenlyagreatscreambreaksoutinthecircustent!ItisAileenthetrapezeartist,shehasfallenintothedustanddirtFromsohigh!Shemustbedead!Thestretcherbearersrushout.Theyseeherlovelyhumanformclothedinredandwhiteandorangewirynet.Andtheyseethatshedoesnotbreatheanymore.Thecircusdoctorleaveshistent,herunsouttocareforAileen.Hetraversesthecircusgroundsandthedustyfloorofthecircusentrance,andhecomesWheresheis,nowshehasbeguntomoveagain,sheisnotdead.Butthedoctortellsherhedoesnotknowifshewilleverbeabletoperformonthetrapezeagain.Andheseesthebeautifulorangeandredandwhiteformshakenwithsobs.Andheputshishandonherforeheadandtellshershemustliestill. 9 Thecircusgirlsformacortege,theystandinfileintheyellowandwhitesunlight. 21 “whatisdeathinthecircus?Thatdependsonifitisspring.Then,ifelephantsarethere,monpere,wearenotcompletelylost.Ohthesweetstrongodorofbeastswhichlaughsatdecay!Decay!decay!Weareliketheelementsinakaleidoscope.Butsuchpassionswefeel!biggerthanbeachesandRustierthanharpoons.”Afterhisspeechthecircuspractitionersatdown. 10 MinnietheRabbitfeltthebloodleavingherlittlebodyAsshelayinthesnow,orangeandredandwhite,Abeautifuldesign.Thedoglaughs,histonguehangsout,helooksatthesky.Itiswhite.Themastercomes.Helaughs.HepicksupMinnietheRabbitAndtieshertoapinetreebough,andleaves. II Soonthroughtheforestcametheimpassionedbumblebee.Hesawthewhiteformonthebough.“Likerosebudswhenyouarethirteen,”saidElmer.Irisnoticedthathedidn’thaveanycapon.“Youmustbepolitewhenmothercomes,”shesaid.Theskybegantogetgrey,thenthesnowcame.Thetwototspressedtogether.Elmeropenedhismouthandletthesnowfallinit.Irisfeltwarmandhappy. 12 Bang!wenttheflyswatter.Mr.Watkins,thecircusmanager,lookedaroundtheroom.“Damnit,damntheseflies!”hesaid.Mr.Loftus,thecircusclerk,staredattheflyinteriorhehadjustexposed. 22 Thecircusdoctorstoodbesidethelake.Inhishandhehadablackbriefcase.Awindruffledthesurfaceofthelakeandslightlyrockedtheboats. Redandgreenfishswambeneaththesurfaceofthewater.Thedoctorwentintothelunchroomandsatdown.No,hesaid,hedidn’tcareforanythingtoeat.Thesoftwindofsummerblewinthelightgreentrees. 23 CollectedPoemsBUFFALODAYS Iwasasleepwhenyouwakedupthebuffalo. THEORANGEWIVESAmountainoffunnyfoamwentpast. GREATHUMANVOICESThestarlitvoicesdrip. COLORFULHOURAfewgreenpencilsinabornpocket. EXPRESSIONNewlittletray. SLEEPThebantamhenfrayeditspassagethroughthesoftclouds. AMINERALWICKTownsoda. SOMEWHEREBetweenislandsandenvy. CECELIALook,acat. THESILVERWORLDExpands. JEWELRYSEVENTHSMinorwonders. 24 ANESKIMOCOCACOLAThree-fifths. THEEXCEPTIONPROVESTHERULEEight-fifths.Nine-fifths.Three-fifths.Six-fifths. THEWATERHOSEISONFIREGrapeline. THELINGERINGMATADORSEskimoCity. EGYPTPassiveness. ISTHEREAHOUSEINSIDETHATFUELENGINE?Extraagingwillbringyourcraftoveragainsttherosyskies. WHYWEREN’TTHEYMORECAREFUL?Actions. PEANUTBUTTERCANDYIchthious. THEBRINDLECOWSDairyfarm,dairyfarm,H-O-TH-E-A-D. 25 INTHEMERRYFOAMAskthemforthebluepatienceoflovers. MYMIXUPThecherriesafterashower. MILKWEEDEMBLEMSThechamberednautilusisweak. SUPPOSERedandwhiteridinghoods. THEGREENMEDDLERAgedinthefire. AHOUSEINMISSISSIPPIWhostoleallmynewsandersupplies? WICKEDOBJECTSAeroliths. FRESHLIMESAcouple’sbedroomslippers. THEWINDOWThechimney. PAINTEDFORAROSETheexactingpilgrimsweredelightedwithyellowfatigue. NOONSBubbles. 26 ROOMSSimplexbumblebees. INTHERANCHHOUSEATDAWNOcorpuscle!Owaxtown!THEOUTSIDESOFTHINGSTheskyfold,andthenthebusstartedup. THEBLACKLIONNeverstoprevealingyourself. INTHECOALMUDAtbreakfastwecouldsob. THEHAND-PAINTEDEARSOFDEATHOhlookinsideme. ALABAMAAlabama! 27 TheArtist Ah,well,Iabandonyou,cherrywoodsmokestack.Neartheentrancetothisoldgreenpark!... * * * Cherrywoodavalanche,mystatueofyouIsstillstandinginToledo,Ohio.0places,summer,boredom,thestaticofanacrobaticblue! AndImadeanamazingzincairlinerItisstandingtothisdayintheMinneapoliszoo... Oldtimesarenotsolongago,plasterofParishaircut! * * * 1oftenthinkPlaywasmybestwork.Itisanopenfieldwithafewboardsinit. ChildrenareallowedtocomeandplayinPlayBypermissionoftheClevelandMuseum. Ilookupatthewhiteclouds,IwonderwhatIshalldo,andsmile. PerhapssomebodywillgrowuphavingbeeninfluencedbyPlay, Ithink—butwhatgoodwillthatdo?MeanwhileIaminterestedinsteelcigarettes... * * * Theordersarecominginthickandfastforsteelcigarettes,steelcigars.TheIndianapolisMuseumhasrequestedsixdozenpackages. IwonderifI’dstillhavethecouragetodoathinglikePlay? IthinkImaygotoCleveland... * * 28 Well,hereIam!Pardonme,canyoutellmehowtogettotheClevelandMuseum’smonumentalarea.Play?“Mister,thatwastorndownalongtimeago.Yououghttogoandseethenewthingtheyhavenow — Gun.”What?Playtorndown?“Yes,Mister,andIlovedtoclimbinittoo,whenIwasakid!’’AndheshakeshisheadSadly...ButIamthrilledbeyondexpectation!Helikedmywork!AndIguesstheremustbeotherslikethatmaninClevelandtoo... Soyousee.Playhasreallyhaditseffect!NowIamontheoutskirtsoftownAnd...hereitis!Butithaschanged!TherearesomebluemerdslyinginthefieldAndit’snotmarkedPlayanymore—andhere’sacalf!I’msohappy,Ican’ttellwhy!WasthishowIoriginallyimaginedPlay,butlackedthecourage? Itwouldbehardnow,though,tosellittoanothermuseum. IwonderifthemanImet’schildrenwillcomeandplayinit?Howdoesone’saudiencesurvive? * * * Pittsburgh,Mayi6th.Ihaveabandonedthesteelcigarettes.IamworkingonBee.Beewillbeasixty-yards-longcoveringfortheelevatorshaftopeninginthefoundrysub-basementNearmyhome.Sofarit’swhitesailclothwithstreamsofgoldenpaintevenlyspacedoutWithasmallbluepondatoneend,andarounditorangeandgreenflowers.MyexperienceinClevelandaffectedmesoThatmythroatacheswheneverIamnotworkingatfullspeed.IhaveneverbeensohappyandinspiredandPlayseemstomenowlikeajuvenileexperience! 29 * * June8th.Beeisstillnotfinished.Ihaveintroducedahugenumberofredballoonsintoit.Howwillitwork?YesterdayX.said,“AreyoustillworkingonBee?What’shappenedtoyourinterestinsteelcigarettes?”Y.said,“Hehasn’tbeendoinganyworkatallonthemsincehewenttoCleveland.”Ashrewdguess!Buthowmuchcantheypossiblyknow? * * * November19th.Disaster!Beewasalmostcompleted,andnowtheimmensecentralpieceofsailclothhastorn.Impossibletorepairit! December4th.I’vegonebacktoworkonBee!Isuddenlythought(afterweeksofdespair!),“Icanplacetheballoonsoverthetearinthecanvas!”SothatiswhatIamdoing.Allpromisestobewell! December6th.Theforemanofthefoundrywantstolookatmywork.Itseemsthathetooisan“artist”—doessketchesandwatercolorsandsuch...WhatwillhethinkofBee? * Cherrywood!IhadleftyoufarfrommyhomeAndtheforemancametolookatBeeAndthezincairlinerflewintoPlay! Thepinkballoonsaren’theavy,buttheyellowonesbreak.Theforemansays,“It’sthegreatestthingIeversaw!”ClevelandheardtooandwantsmetocomebackandreinauguratePlay IdreamofgoingtoClevelandbutneverwillBeehasobsessedmymind. * 30 March14th.Acoldspringday.Itissnowing.Beeiscompleted. * 0BeeIthinkyouaremybestworkInthebluesnow-filledair 1feelmyheartbreak IliedowninthesnowTheycomefromthefoundryandtakeBeeawayOhwhatcanIcreatenow,Earth, GreenEarthonwhicheverythingblossomsanew?“AbathroomfloorcardboardtrolleylineTheshapeandsizeofalemonseedwithontheinsideApassengerthesizeofapomegranateseedWhoisaninvalidandhastoleanonthecardboardsideOfthelemon-seed-sizedtrolleylinesothathewon’tfalloffthetrain.” * * Ijustfoundthesenoteswrittenmanyyearsago.HowseriouslyIalwaystakemyselP.Letitbealessontome.Tobringthingsuptodate:IhaveJustfinishedCampaign,whichisatremendouspieceofcharcoal.Itsshapeisdifficulttodescribe;butitisextremelylargeandwouldreachtothesixthflooroftheEmpireStateBuilding.Ihavebeenverysuccessfulinthepastfourteenorfifteenyears. * * * SummerNight,shallIneversucceedinfinishingyou?Ohyouaretheabsoluteendofallmycreation!Theetherealbeautyofthatpracticallyinfinitenumberofwhitestoneslabsstretchingintothebluesecrecyofink!Ostabsinmyheart! ....WhynotaworkStabsinMyHeart?ButSummerNight? 31 January....Atroubledsleep.CanImaketwothingsatonce?WhatwayistheretobesurethattheimpulsetoworkonStabsinMyHeartisserious?ItseemsoccasionedonlybymyproblemaboutfinishingSummerNight...? * * * TheMagicianofCincinnatiisnowreadyforhumanuse.Theyaretwenty-fivetremendousstonestaircases,eachoversixhundredfeethigh,whichwillbeplacedintheOhioRiverbetweenCincinnatiandLouisville,Kentucky.AlltheboatscomingdowntheOhioRiverwillpresumablybesmashedupagainsttheimmensestatues,whicharethemostrecentworkofthecreatorofFlowers,Bee,Play,AgainandHumanUse.FivethousandcitizensarethrongedonthebanksoftheOhiowaitingtoseetheinstallationofthework,andthecrowdisexpectedtobemorethanfifteentimesitspresentnumberbeforemorning.Therewillbeagameofwaterbaseballintheearlyafternoon,beforethebeginningoftheceremonies,betweentheCincinnatiRedlegsandthePittsburghPirates.TheMagicianofCincinnati,incidentally,issaidtobeabsolutelyimpregnabletodestructionofanykind,andwillthereforepresumablyalwaysbeafeatureofthispartoftheOhio.... * * * Mayi6th.WithwhatanintensejoyIwatchedtheinstallationoftheMagicianofCincinnatitoday,intheOhioRiver,whereitbelongs,andwhichissomuchapartofmyoriginalscheme.... May17th.Ifeelsuddenlyfreedfromlife—notsomuchasifmyworkweregoingtochange,butasthoughIhadatlastseenwhatIhadsolongbeenprevented(perhapsIpreventedmyself!)fromseeing:thatthereistoomuchformetodo.Somehowthisenablesmetorelax,tobreatheeasily.... * * There’stheMagicianofCincinnati 32 InthedistanceHereIaminthegreentreesofPennsylvania HowstrangeIfeltwhentheyhadinstalledTheMagician!...Nowabluebirdtrills,IambusymakingmypolishedstonesForDresser. Thestreamthestonethebirdsthereddish-pinkPennsylvaniahillsAllgotomakeupDresserWhyamIcampingout? IamwaitingforthethousandsoftonsofembalmingfluidThathavetocomeandwithwhichIcanmakethesehills. * * * GREATESTARTISTICEVENTHINTEDBYGOVERNORReading,June4.Greatestartisticeventwashintedtodaybygovernor.Animalsconvergeonmeadowwhereartistworking. CONVERGEONMEADOWWHEREWORKINGARTISTHINTED,SAMEMAN ...theMagicianofCincinnati THREEYEARSOctober14th.Iwantthesehillstobestriated!HownaivetheMagicianofCincinnatiwas!Thoughitmakesmehappytothinkofit.... Here,Iamplungedintosuchrealearth!Striate,hills!Whatisthisdeer’sheadofgreenstone?Ican’tfabricateanythinglessthanwhatI thinkshouldgirdletheearth.... PHOTOGRAPHPHOTOGRAPH 33 PHOTOGRAPH ArtistwhocreatedtheMagicianofCincinnati;NowatworkinPennsylvania;TheProject — Dresser—SoFar. * * Ah!... * * * TONSSILICON,GRASSANDDEER-HEADRANGEPhiladelphia.YourvoiceaswellasminewillbeappreciatedtoexpresstheappreciationofDresser,whichmakesofPennsylvaniathesilicon,grassandstone-deer-headcenteroftheworld....Artistsayshemaychangehismindaboutthecentralbridges.Fountainstogiveforthrealtar-water.Mountainlakeincenter.Realchalkcliffs.Alsocliffsofclay.Deepdeclivitiesnearby.“Wantedforestatmosphere,yettobeopen.”Gas... * * * PHOTOGRAPHSKETCHDEDICATIONCEREMONYGOESSWIMMINGINOWNSTREAMSHAKINGHANDSWITHGOVERNORCOLORPICTURETHEHEADOFTHEARTIST 34 THEARTIST’SHANDSTACKOFACTUALBILLSNEEDEDTOPAYFORPROJECT StoryofDresser PENNSYLVANIA’SPRIDE:DRESSER CreatorofDresser * * * STILLSMILINGATFORGEBeverly,SouthDakota,Aprili8.Stillsmilingatforge,artistofDressersays,“No,ofcourseIhaven’tforgottenDresser.ThoughhowquicklytheyearshavegonebysinceIhavebeendoingToo!”Weglancedupattheskyandsawalargewhitebird,somewhatsimilartoanimmenseseagull,whichwasasiffixedaboveourheads.Itseyeswerebluesapphires,anditswingswereformedbyaningeniousarrangementofwhiteneddaffodil-blossomparts.Itsbodyseemedmainlycharcoal,onthewhole,withagooddealofsandmixedin.Aswewatchedit,thecreatureactuallyseemedtomove.... August4th...Threefourfive,andit’sfinished!IcanseeitinBeverly... * * BEVERLYHONORSARTIST.CALLED“FOUNDINGFATHER” Beverly,SouthDakota,August14... MISSISSIPPICLAIMSBIRTHPLACEHONORSBIRTHPLACEBIRTHPLACEHONORSHELD 35 * * * INDIANSANDSAVANTSMEETTOPRAISEWESTWINDPATHONOREDPATANDWESTWINDHONORED * * June3rcl.Itdoesn’tseempossible—thePacificOcean!Ihaveorderedsixteenmilliontonsofbluepaint.Waitinganxiouslyforittoarrive.Howwouldgrassbeasasubstitute?cement? * * * 36 FreshAir I AtthePoemSocietyablack-hairedmanstandsuptosay“Youmakemesickwithallyourtalkaboutrestraintandmaturetalent!Haven’tyoueverlookedoutthewindowatapaintingbyMatisse,Ordidyoualwaysstayinhotelswherethereweretoomanyspiderscrawlingonyourvisages?Didyoueverglanceinsideabottleofsparklingpop,Orseeacitizensplitintwobythelightning? IamafraidyouhaveneversmiledatthehibernationOfbearcubsexceptthatyousawinitsomedeeprelationTohumansufferingandwishes,ohwhatabunchofcrackpots!”Theblack-hairedmansitsdown,andtheothersshootarrowsathim.Ablondmanstandsupandsays,“Heisright!WhyshouldwebeorganizedtodefendthekingdomOfdullness?Therearesomanyslimypeopleconnectedwithpoetry.Too,andpeoplewhoknownothingaboutit! Iamnotrecommendingthatpoetslikeeachotherandorganizetofightthem.Butsimplythatlightningshouldstrikethem.”Thentheassembledmediocritiesshotarrowsattheblond-hairedman.Thechairmanstoodupontheplatform,ohhewasphysicallyugly!Hewassmall-limbedand-bonedandthoughthewasquiteseductive.Buthewasbaldwithcertainhideousblackhairs.Andhisvoicehadthesoundofwaterleavingavaselinebathtub.Andhesaid,“Thesubjectforthisevening’sdiscussionispoetryOnthesubjectoflovebetweenswans.”AndeveryonethrewcandyheartsAtthedisgustingman,andtheystucktohisbibandtucker.AndhedancedupanddownontheplatforminterrificgleeAndrecitedthepoetryofhislittlefriends—buttheblondmanstuckhisheadOutofacloudandrecitedpoemsabouttheeastandthunder.Andtheblack-hairedmanmovedthroughthestratospherechantingPoemsoftherelationshipsbetweenterrificprehistoriccharcoalwhales.AndtheslimymanwithcandyheartsstickingalloverhimWiltedawaylikeacigarettepaperonwhichthebumblebeeshaveurinated. 37 Andalltheprofessorslefttheroomtogobacktotheirduty,AndallthatwereleftintheroomwerefiveorsixpoetsAndtogethertheysangthenewpoemofthetwentiethcenturyWhich,thoughinfluencedbyMallarme,Shelley,Byron,andWhitman,Plusamillionotherpoets,isstillentirelyoriginalAndissoexcitingthatitcannotbehererepeated.YoumustgotothePoemSocietyandwaitforittohappen.Onceyouhaveheardthispoemyouwillnotloveanyother.Onceyouhavedreamedthisdreamyouwillbeinconsolable.Onceyouhavelovedthisdreamyouwillbeasonedead.Onceyouhavevisitedthepassagesofthistime’sgreatart! 2 “OhtobeseventeenyearsoldOnceagain,”sangthered-hairedman,“andnotknowthatpoetryIsruledwiththesceptreofthedumb,thedeaf,andthecreepy!”AndtheshoutingpersonsbatteredhisimmortalbodywithstonesAndthrewhisprimitivecomedyintotheseaFromwhichitsangforthpoemsirrevocablyblue. Whoarethegreatpoetsofourtime,andwhataretheirnames?Yeatsofthebalefulinfluence,Audenofthebalefulinfluence,Eliotofthebalefulinfluence(IsEliotagreatpoet?nooneknows).Hardy,Stevens,Williams(isHardyofourtime?),Hopkins(isHopkinsofourtime?),Rilke(isRilkeofourtime?),Lorca(isLorcaofourtime?),whoisstillofourtime?Mallarme,Valery,Apollinaire,Eluard,Reverdy,Frenchpoetsarestillofourtime,PasternakandMayakovsky,isJouveofourtime? WhereareyoungpoetsinAmerica,theyaretremblinginpublishinghousesanduniversities.Abovealltheyaretremblinginuniversities,theyarebathingthelibrarystepswiththeirspit. 38 Theyaregarglingoutinnocuous(towhom?)poemsaboutmapletreesandtheirchildren,SometimestheybraveasubjectliketheVillad’EsteoralighthouseinRhodeIsland,Ohwhatwormstheyare!Theywishtoperfecttheirform. Yetcouldnottheseyoungmen,putinanotherprofession.Succeedadmirably,sayatsailingaship?Idonotdoubtit.Sir,andI wishwecouldtrythem.(Aplanefliesovertheshipholdingabombbutperhapsitwillnotdropthebomb.Theyoungpoetsfromtheuniversitiesarestaringanxiouslyattheskies.Ohtheyarerememberingtheirdaysonthecampuswhentheylookeduptowatchbirdsexcrete.Theyarerememberingthedaystheyspentmakingtheirelegantpoems.) Istherenovoicetocryoutfromthewindandsaywhatitisliketobethewind.ToberoughedupbythetreesandtobringmusicfromthescatteredhousesAndthestones,andtobeinsuchintimaterelationshipwiththeseaThatyoucannotunderstandit?Istherenoonewhofeelslikeapairofpants? 3 Summerinthetrees!“Itistimetostrangleseveralbadpoets.”Theyellowhobbyhorserockstoandfro,andfromthechimneyDropstheStrangler!Thewhiteandpinkrosesareslightlyagitatedbythestruggle.Butafterwardsbesidethedead“poet”theycuddleupcomfortinglyagainsttheirvase.Theyaresafernow,noonewillcomparethemtothesea. Hereontherailroadtrain,onemoretime,istheStrangler.Heisgoingtogetthatonethere,whoisonhiswaytoapoetryreading. 39 Agh!Biff!Abodyfallstothemovingfloor. InthefootballstadiumIalsoseehim,HeleapsthroughthefrostyairatthemakerofcomparisonsBetweenfootballandlifeandsilently,silentlystrangleshim! HereistheStranglerdressedinacowboysuitLeapingfromhishorsetoannihilatethestudentsofmyth!TheStrangler’searisalertforthenamesofOrpheus,Cuchulain,Gawain,andOdysseus,AndforpoemsaddressedtoJaneAusten,F.ScottFitzgerald,ToEzraPound,andtopersonagesnolongerlivingEveninanyone’sthoughts—OStranglertheStrangler! HeliesonhisbackinthewavesofthePacificOcean. 4 SupposingthatonewalksoutintotheairOnafreshspringdayandhasthemisfortuneToencounteranarticleonmodernpoetryInNewWorldWriting,orhasthemisfortuneToseesomeexamplesofsomeofthepoetryWrittenbythemenwiththeireyesonthemythAndtheMissusandthemidterms,intheHudsonReview,Or,ifoneisabroad,inBottegheOscure,OrindeedinEncounter,whatisonetodoWiththerestofone’sdaythatliesblastedtoruinsAllbluelyaboutone,whatisonetodo?OhsurelyonecannotcomplaintothePresident,NoreventothedeansofColumbiaCollege,NortoT.S.Eliot,nortoEzraPound,AndsupposingonewritestothePrincessCaetani,“Yourpoetsareawful!”whatgoodwoulditdo?AndsupposingonegoestotheHudsonReview 40 Withapackageofmatchesandsetsfiretothebuilding?OneendsupinprisonwithtrialsubscriptionsTothePartisan,Sewanee,andKenyonReview! 5 Sunout!perhapsthereisareasonforthelackofpoetryIntheseill-contentedsouls,perhapstheyneedair! Blueair,freshair,comein,Iwelcomeyou,youareanartstudent,Takeoffyourcapandgownandsitdownonthechair.Togetherweshallpaintthepoets—butno,air!perhapsyoushouldgotothem,quickly,Givethemalittleinspiration,theyneedit,perhapstheyareoutofbreath.GivethemalittleinhumancompanybeforetheyfreezetheEnglishlanguagetodeath!(Andrusttheirtypewritersalittle,beseaair!benoxious!killthem,ifyoumust,butstoptheirpoetry! IrememberIsawyoudancingonthesurfontheCoted’Azur,AndIstopped,takingmyhatoff,butyoudidnotrememberme.ThenafterwardsyoucametomyroombearingahandfuloforangeflowersAndweweretogetherallthroughthesummernight!) Thatwemightgoawaytogether,itissobeautifulonthesea,thereareafewwhitecloudsinthesky! Butno,air!youmustgo...Ah,stay! Butshehasdepartedand...Ugh!whatpoisonousfumesandclouds!whatasuffocatingatmosphere!Cough!whosearethesehideousfacesIsee,whatisthisrigorInfectingthemind?wherearethegreenAzores,Fondmemoriesofchildhood,andthepleasantorangetrolleys,Agirl’sface,red-white,andherbreastsandcalves,blueeyes,browneyes,greeneyes,Fahrenheit 41 Temperatures,dandelions,andtrains,Oblue?!Wind,wind,whatishappening?Wind!Ican’tseeanybirdbutthegull,andIfeelitshouldsymbolize... Oh,pardonme,there’saswan,onetwothreeswans,agreatwhiteswan,hahahahowprettytheyare!Smack!Oh!stop!help!yes,Isee—disrespectformysuperiors—forgiveme,dearZeus,niceZeus,parabolicbird,Ofeatheredexcellence!white!ThereisAchillestoo,andthere’sUlysses,I’vealwayswantedtoseethem.AndthereisHelenofTroy,IsupposesheisZeustoo,she’ssoterriblypretty—hello,Zeus,myyouarebeautiful.Bang!OnemoremistakeandIgetthrownoutoftheModernPoetryAssociation,help!Whyaren’tthereanyadjectivesaround?Ohthereare,there’spracticallynothingelse—look,here’sgrey,utter,agonized,total,phenomenal,gracile,invidious,sundered,srndfused.Elegant,absolute,pyramidal,and...ScreamdbutwhatcanIdescribewiththesewords?States!Statessymbolizedanddividedbytwo,complexstates,magicstates,statesofconsciousnessgovernedbyanarousedsincerity,cockadoodledoo!Anotherbird!isitmorning?Help!whereamI?amIinthebarnyard?oinkoink,scratch,moo!Splash!Myfirstlesson.“Lookaroundyou.Whatdoyouthinkandfeel?”Uhhh ...“Quickly!”ThisConnecticutlandscapewouldhavepleasedVermeer.Wham!A-Plus.“Congratulations!”Iampromoted.OOOhhhhhIwishIweredead,whataheadache!Mysecondlesson:“Rewriteyourfirstlessonlinesixhundredtimes.Trytomakeitintoamagneticfield.”Icandoittoo.Butmypoorline!Whatanightmare!Herecomesatremendoushorse.Trojan,Ipresume.No,it’smythirdlesson.“Look,look!Watchhim,seewhathe’sdoing?That’swhatwewantyoutodo.Ofcourseitwon’tbethesameashisatfirst,but...”Idemur.Istherenootherwaytofertilizeminds?Bang!Igivein...AlreadyIseemynameintwoorthreeanthologies,aservinggirlcomesintothebarnbringingmetheanthologies.SheisveryprettyandIsmileatheralittlesadly,perhapsitismylastsmile!Perhapsshewillhitme!Butno,shesmilesinreturn,andshetakesmyhand. 42 Myhand,myhand!whatisthisstrangethingIfeelinmyhand,onmyarm,onmychest,myface—canitbe...?itis!AIR!Air,air,you’vecomeback!Didyouhaveanysuccess?“Whatdoyouthink?”Idon’tknow,air.Youaresostrong,air.Andshebreaksmychainsofstraw,andwewalkdowntheroad,behindusthehideousfumes!Soonwereachtheseaside,sheisayoungartstudentwhoplacesherheadonmyshoulder, Ikissherwarmredlips,andhereistheStrangler,readingtheKenyonReview!Goodlucktoyou.Strangler!Goodbye,Helen!goodbye,fumes!goodbye,abstracteddried-upboys!goodbye,deadtrees!goodbye,skunks!Goodbye,manure!goodbye,criticalmanicure!goodbye,youbigfatmenstandingontheeastcoastaswellasthewestgivingpoemsthetest!farewell,Valery’ssterndictum!Untiltomorrow,then,scumfloatingonthesurfaceofpoetry!goodbyeforamoment,refusethathappenstolandinpoetry’sboundaries!adieu,staleeggsteachingimbecilespoetrytobolsterupyouregos!adios,boringanomaliesofthesesamestaleeggs!Ah,butthescumisdeep!Come,letmehelpyou!andsoonwepassintotheclearbluewater.OhGOODBYE,castratiofpoetry!farewell,stalepaleskunkypentameters(theonlyhonestEnglishmeter,gloopgloop!)!untiltomorrow,horrors!oh,farewell! Hello,sea!goodmorning,sea!hello,clarityandexcitement,yougreatexpanseofgreen — Ogreen,beneathwhichallofthemshalldrown! 43 Thanksgiving what’ssweeterthanattheendofasummer’sdayTosuddenlydriftawayFromthegreenmatch-wrappersinanopenedpocketbookAndbepartoftheboardsinatavern? Atavernmadeofnewwood.There’sanorange-redsunintheskyAndaredskinishuntingforyouunderneathladdersoftimber. Iwillbuythistavern.Willyoubuythistavern?Ido. IntheIndiancampthere’sawfuldismay.DotheyknowusasweknowtheyKnowusorwillknowus,Imeana — Imeanahostileforce,themonthofMay.Howwhitelythespringtimeisblossoming.Ugh!allaroundus!ItisthebrilliantIndiantimeofyearWhenthesweetestIndiansmatewiththesweetestothers. ButIfearthewhitemen,IfearTherentappleblossomsanddiscardedfeathersAndthescalplyingsecretlyonthegroundLikeanunoffendingnose! Butwe’vedestroyedallthat.Withshockingguns.PeterStuyvesant,JohnnyAppleseed,We’vedestroyedallthat.Come,Doyoubelieverightwasoneitherside? HowwouldyouliketobelivinginanIndianAmerica,Withfeathersdressingeveryhead?We’deatbuffalohumpForThanksgivingdinner.Everyoneisinatribe.AgirlfromtheBepTribecan’tmarryabravefromtheBapTribe.Isthatdemocracy?Andthenthosedrearyeveningsaroundthecampfires 44 ListeningtotheChief!IftherewereaNewYorkItwouldbeacityoftents,andwhatdoyousupposeOurartandpoetrywouldbelike?Forthecommunity!thetribe!Nobeautifulmodernabstractpictures,nomadincomprehensibleFreelovablepoems!Andourmoralsense!tribal.IfyouwouldliketobelivinginanIndianAmericaWhynotsubscribetothisnewspaper,IndianAmerica? InWisconsin,Ben,Istand,Iwalkupanddownandtrytodecide. Isthiscountrygettinganybetterorhasitgotten?IftheIndianNewYorkisbad,whataboutourwhiteNewYork?Dirty,unwholesome,thefilthyappendagetoavastammunitionworks,I hateit!Disgustingrectangulargarbagedumpsendingitsfumesuptosuffocatethesky — Foo,whatfumes!andthescalywhitecomplexionofhercitizens.There’shellineveryfirmhandshake,andstifledrageineverylook.Ifyoudofindsomewheretoliedown,it’sadirtyinspectedcorner.AndtherearenewspapersandforumsandthestinkingbreathofBroadwayToinvestigatewhatitfeelsliketobeasourceofstenchAndnothingelse.Andifonedoesgoaway.Itisalwayshere,waiting,foronetocomeback.Andonedoescomeback.Asonecomesbacktothebathroom,andtoatimeofsuffering. WhereelsewouldIfindsuchardentandgracefulspiritsInspiredandwastedandusingandusedbythishorriblecity.NewYork,NewYork?CanthePilgrims’Thanksgivingdinnerreallycomparetoit?AndthePuritans?Andthesingle-mindedankle-dividedIndians?No,nothingcancomparetoit!Soit’sherewespeakfromtheheart.Andit’srottingsofastthatwhatwesayFadeslikethelastofasummer’sday,Rotwhichmakesusprolificasthesunonwhiteunfastenedclouds. 45 Permanently OnedaytheNounswereclusteredinthestreet.AnAdjectivewalkedby,withherdarkbeauty.TheNounswerestruck,moved,changed.ThenextdayaVerbdroveup,andcreatedtheSentence. EachSentencesaysonething—forexample,“AlthoughitwasadarkrainydaywhentheAdjectivewalkedby,IshallrememberthepureandsweetexpressiononherfaceuntilthedayIperishfromthegreen,effectiveearth.”Or,“Willyoupleaseclosethewindow',Andrew?”Or,forexample,“Thankyou,thepinkpotofflowersonthewindowsillhaschangedcolorrecentlytoalightyellow,duetotheheatfromtheboilerfactorywhichexistsnearby.” InthespringtimetheSentencesandtheNounslaysilentlyonthegrass.AlonelyConjunctionhereandtherewouldcall,“And!But!”ButtheAdjectivedidnotemerge. Astheadjectiveislostinthesentence.SoIamlostinyoureyes,ears,nose,andthroat — YouhaveenchantedmewithasinglekissWhichcanneverbeundoneUntilthedestructionoflanguage. 46 DownattheDocks DownatthedocksWhereeverythingissweetandinclinesAtnightTothesoundofcanoes IplantedamapletreeAndeverynightBeneathitIstudiedthecosmosDownatthedocks. Sweetladies,listentome.ThedockismadeofwoodThemapletree’snotmadeofwoodItiswoodWoodcomesfromitAsmusiccomesfrommeAndfromthismandolinI’vemadeOutofthemapletree. Jealousgentlemen,studyhowWoodcomesfromthemapleThendeviseyourloveSothatitseemsTocomefromwhereAllisityetsomethingmoreWhitespringflowersandleafyboughJealousgentlemen. ArrogantlittlewavesKnockingatthedockIt’sforyouI’vemadethischansonForyouandthatbigdarkblue. 47 YouWereWearing YouwerewearingyourEdgarAllanPoeprintedcottonblouse.IneachdividedupsquareoftheblousewasapictureofEdgarAllanPoe.Yourhairwasblondeandyouwerecute.Youaskedme,“Domostboysthinkthatmostgirlsarebad?” IsmelledthemouldofyourseasideresorthotelbedroomonyourhairheldinplacebyaJohnGreenleafWhittierclip.“No,”Isaid,“it’sgirlswhothinkthatboysarcbad.”ThenwereadSnowboundtogetherAndranaroundinanattic,sothatalittleoftheblueenamelwasscrapedoffmyGeorgeWashington,FatherofHisCountry,shoes. Motherwaswalkinginthelivingroom,herStraussWaltzescombinherhair.Wewaitedforatimeandthenjoinedher,onlytobeservedteaincupspaintedwithpicturesofHermanMelvilleAswellaswithillustrationsfromhisbookMobyDickandfromhisnovella,BenitoCereno.FathercameinwearinghisDickTracynecktie:“Howaboutadrink,everyone?” Isaid,“Let’sgooutsideawhile.”ThenwewentontotheporchandsatontheAbrahamLincolnswing.Yousatontheeyes,mouth,andbeardpart,andIsatontheknees.IntheyardacrossthestreetwesawasnowmanholdingagarbagecanlidsmashedintoalikenessofthemadEnglishking,GeorgetheThird. 48 Locks Theselocksondoorshavebroughtmehappiness:ThelockonthedoorofthesewingmachineinthelivingroomOfatinyhutinwhichIwaslivingwithamadseamstress;ThelockonthefillingstationonenightwhenIwasdrunkAndhadtheideaofenjoyinganipofpetroleum;Thelockonthefamilyofseals,which,whenreleased,wouldhavebitten;ThelockontheliferaftwhenIwastakingabathinsteadofdrowning;Thelockinsidethenoseofthecontemporarycomposerwhowasplayingthepianoandwouldhaveruinedhisconcertbysneezing,whileIwasturningpages;ThelockonthesecondhumpofacamelwhileIwasnotrunningoutofwaterinthedesert;ThelockonthefishhatcherythenightwecameupfromthebeachAndweretryingtofindaplacetospendthenight—itwasfullof•contagiousfish;ThelockonmynewnecktiewhenIwaswalkingthroughastiffwindOnmywaytoanappointmentatwhichIhadtolookneatandsimple;Thelockonthefoghornthenightofthelipstickparade — Ifthefoghornhadsounded,everyonewouldhaveruninsidebeforethemostbeautifulcontestantappeared;ThelockinmyhatwhenIsawherandwhichkeptmefromtippingit.Whichshewouldnothaveliked,becauseshebelievedthatnaturalnesswasthemostfriendly;Thelockonthecityinwhichwewouldnothavemetanyoneweknew;ThelockontheairplanewhichwasflyingwithoutapilotAboveMiamiBeachonthenightwhenIunlockedmybonesTothewind,andletthegalesofsweetnessblowthroughmetillI shudderedandshookLikeakeyinafreezinghand,andranupintotheMiaminightairlikeastone;Thelockonthehayfield,whichkeptmefromgettingoutofbedTomeetthehayfieldcommitteethere;thelockonthebarn,thatkeptthepiled-uphayawayfromme;ThelockonthemailboatthatkeptitfrombecomingaraincoatOnthenightofthethunderstorm;thelockonthesailboat 49 ThatkeepsitfromtakingmeawayfromyouwhenIamasleepwithyou,And,whenIamnot,thelockonmysleep,thatkeepsmefromwakingandfindingyouarenotthere. 50 VariationsonaThemebyWilliamCarlosWilliams I Ichoppeddownthehousethatyouhadbeensavingtoliveinnextsummer. Iamsorry,butitwasmorning,andIhadnothingtodoanditswoodenbeamsweresoinviting. 2 WelaughedatthehollyhockstogetherandthenIsprayedthemwithlye.Forgiveme.IsimplydonotknowwhatIamdoing. 3 Igaveawaythemoneythatyouhadbeensavingtoliveonforthenexttenyears.ThemanwhoaskedforitwasshabbyandthefirmMarchwindontheporchwassojuicyandcold. 4 LasteveningwewentdancingandIbrokeyourleg.Forgiveme.Iwasclumsy,and Iwantedyouhereinthewards,whereIamthedoctor! 51 ThankYou ohthankyouforgivingmethechanceOfbeingship’sdoctor!IamsorrythatIshallhavetorefuse — But,yousee,themostIknowofmedicineisorangeflowersTiltedintheeveninglightagainstacashmereredInsidewhichbreastsinventthelawsoflightAndofnight,wherecashmeremoorsitselfacrossthesea.AndthankyouforgivingmethesequintupletsTorearandmakehappy...Mymindwasonsomethingelse. Thankyouforgivingmethisbattleshiptowash.ButIhavearashonmyhandsandmyeyeshurt.AndIknowsolittleaboutcleaningashipThatIwouldrathercleananisland.Thereoneknowswhatoneisabout—spongethosepalmtrees,sweepupthesandalittle,polishthosecoconuts;Thentakearestforawhileandit’stimetotrimthegrassaswellasseparateitfromeachotherwheregummysubstanceshavemadeindividualbladessticktogether,forminganuglybunch;Andthentakethedeadbarkoffthetrees,andperfumetheseislandsabitwithasong....That’seasy—butabattleship!Wheredoesonebeginandhowdoesonedo?tobattenthehatches?I wouldrathercleanamillionpalmtrees. NowherecomesanofferofajobforsettingupaleveeInMississippi.Nothanks.HereitsaysRapeorWorse.Ithinktheymustwantmetopublicizethisbook.Onthejacketitsays“PublishedinBoothbayHarbor,Maine”—whatafunnyplacetopublishabook! IsupposeitissomeprovincialpublishinghouseWhoseprovincialpagesemittheodorofsailsAndthefreshnessoftheseaBreeze....Butpublicity! TheonlythingIcouldpublicizewellwouldbemytooth.WhichIcouldsaycamewithmymouthandinamostengagingmannerWithmywholeself,mybodyandincludingmymind. 52 Spirits,emotions,spiritualessences,emotionalsubstances,poetry,dreams,andlordsOfmylife,everything,allembraceletedwithmytoothInawaythatmakesonewishtoopenthewindowsandscream“Hi!”totheheavens.And“Oh,comeandtakemeawaybeforeIdieinaminute!” Itispossiblethatthedentistissmiling,thathedreamsofextractionBecausehebelievesthatthephysicaltoothandthespiritualtoothareone. Hereisanotherletter,thisonefromatextbookadvertiser;Hewantsmetoadvertiseabookonchoppingdowntrees.ButhowcouldI?Ilovetrees!andIhaven’ttheslightestsympathywithchoppingthemdown,eventhoughIknowWeneedtheirproductsforwood-fires,somehouses,andmaplesyrup — StillIliketreesbetterIntheirstandingcondition,whentheyswayatthebeginningofevening... Andthankyouforthepileofdriftwood.AmIwantedatthesea? AndthankyouforthechancetorunasmallhotelInanelephantstopoverinZambezi,ButIdonotknowhowtotakecareofguests,certainlytheywouldallleavesoonAfterseeingbluelightsoutthewindowsandrustontheirironbeds — I’dratherownabird-houseinJamaica:Thosepeoplecomein,thebirds,theydonotcarehowthingsarekeptup... It’struethatZambeziproprietorshipwouldbeexciting,withpeoplegettingoffelephantsandcomingintomyhotel.ButastemptingasitisIcannotagree.AndthankyouforthisofferofthepostofrefereeFortheDanishwrestlingchampionship—Isimplydonotfeelqualified... 53 ButthefreshspringairhasbeenswabbingmymentaldecksUntil,althoughpreparedforfight,stillIsleeponland.Thankyoufortheostriches.Ihavenotyethadtimetopluckthem.ButIamsuretheywillbedelicious,adorningmyplateatsunset.Mytremendousplate,andtheplateOftheofferstoallmydays.ButIcannotfastenmyexhilarationtothesun. AndthankyoufortheeveningofthenightonwhichIfelloffmyhorseintheshadows.Thatwasreallyuseful. 54 Lunch ThelanternslidesgrindingoutB-flatminorChordstotheearsofthedeafyoungsterwhospraysinHicksvilleThesidesofacarwiththedream-splittingpaintOfpianos(hedreamtofonedaycuttingtheConservatoryIntwowithhistalent),theselanternslides,Isay.Theyare—Theoldwomanhesitated.Alifesaverwasshoveddownherthroat;thenshecontinued:Theyaresomeverygoodlanternslidesinthatbunch.ThenshefaintedAndwerevivedherwithflowers.Shesmiledsleepilyatthesun.Heismyownboy,shesaid,withherglasshandfallingthroughthesparklingredAmericaoflunch. Thatoldboilermakershehasinherbackyard,Olafsaid,usedtobehersweetheartyearsback.Oneday,though,atrainpassed,andpressedherhard.Andshedesertedlifeandloveforliberty.WecarriedOlafsoftlyintothebackyardAndlaidhimdownwithhisheadunderthesteamroller.ThenJilltookthewheelandItinkeredwiththeengine.Tillwerolledhimunder,rolledhimundertheearth.Whenpeopleaskuswhat’sinourbackyardNow,wedon’tliketotellthem,Jillsays,layinghersilverbandannaedheadonmygreenedbronzeshoulder.Thenwebothdazzleourselveswiththeredwhitenessoflunch. ThatoldwomannamedTessieRunnHadatrampboyfriendwhotoastedabun.TheywenttoFlorida,butMaxineSchweitzerwashardofHearingandthedayafterwardsthejudgeadjournedthetrial.WhenitfinallycameforjudgmenttocomeupOfdeliciouscourtyardsnearthePantheon,Atlastwehadtoletthemspeak,thechildrenwhomflowershadmadestatuesFortheriversofwaterwhichcamefromtheirfunnel;AndwestoodthereinthemiddleofexistenceDazzledbythewhiteparaffinoflunch. 55 MusicinParisandwatercomingoutfromtheflannelOfthepuristpersongallopingdowntheMadeleineTowardacertainwafer.Hey!justaminute!thesunlightisbeingrifledBythegreenarchitectureoftheflowers.ButtheboulevardturnedabigbluedeafearOfcinemaplacardstothedetonatedtraveler.Hehadforgottenthebluedefiladeoflunch! Genoa!astone’sthrowfromAcapulcoIfanenginewerebuiltstrongenough,Anddownwherethehullsandscungilli,Glisteninglyunconscious,agree, IthrowagameofshoeswithHoraceSturnbulAndforgettoeatlunch. 0launch,lunch,youdazzlinghoarytunnelToparadise!DoyouseethatsnowmantackledoverthereBysummerandthesea?AboardwalkwenttoIstanbulAndbackunderhislefteye.WesawtheMoslemsprayingInRhodes.Onehadaredfez,anotherhadablackcap.Andintheextendedheatofafternoon.Asanice-coldgradualsweatcoveredmywholebody, 1realized,andthecarpetswamlikearedworldatmyfeetInwhichnothingwasgreen,andtheMoslemswentonpraying.Thatwehadmissedlunch,andaperpetualtorrentroaredintotheseaOfmyunderstanding.Anoldwomangaveusbreadandrollsonthestreet. Thedancingwagonhascome!hereisthedancingwagon!Comeupandgetlessons—hereislemonadeandgrammar!Hereisdrugstoreandcowboy—allthatisAmerica—plussex,perfumes,andshimmers—alltheOldWorld;Comeandgetit—andhereisyourreadingmatterFortwenty-ninecenturies,andherefinallyislunch — TobeservedinthegreendefiladeundertheroaringtowerWherePortugalmeetsSpaininsideafloweredmadeleine. 56 Mygingerdresshasnothingon,butyoursHasonapictureofQueenAnneBoleynSurroundedbyhercourtierseatinglunchAndonthebackaoneofHenrytheEighthSummoningallhiscourtiersinforlunch. AndthelunchboathasarrivedFromSpain.Everyonegettingsickisonit;Theboldpeopleandthesadistsareonit; IamgladIamnotonit, Iamhavingabigclawofgarlicforlunch — Butitplucksmeupintheair.Andthere,abovetheship,onacloud Iseetheangelseatinglunch.Onehasabeard,anotheramoustache.Andonehassomemustardsmearedonhisears.AcoupleofthemaskmeifIwanttogotoHonolulu,AndIaccept—it’sallright — Anothertimezone:we’llbeabletohavelunch.Theyareverybeautifulandtransparent.Mytwotravelingcompanions.AndtheywillgoverywellwithHawaii Irealizeaswelandthere.Thatdazzlingredwhiteness—itisourdesire... Forwhom?Theangelsoflunch. OnIsatoveraglassofredwineAndyoucameoutdressedinapapercup.Anant-flywaseatinghay-mireinthechair-raftersAndlargewhitebirdsflewinanddroppededibleanimalstotheground.IftheyhadbeengullsitwouldhavebeengarbageOrfish.Wehavetobefairtotheanimalkingdom.ButifIdonotwishtobefair,ifIwishtoeatlunchUndisturbed—?Thelightofdayshinesdown.Theworldcontinues. WestoodinthelittlehutmentinBiarritz 57 Waitingforlunch,andyourhandclaspedmineAndIfeltitwassweaty;Andthenlunchwasserved,Likethebouquetofanenchantress.OhthegreenwhitesandredyellowsAndpurplewhitesoflunch! Thebacheloreatshislunch.Themarriedmaneatshislunch.AndoldUncleJorisbelchesTheseascapeinwhichachildappearsEatingawatermelonandholdingastrawhat.HemoveshislipsasiftospeakButonlyseaairemanatesfromthischildishbeak.Itisthemomentofsorrows.Andontheshoresofhistory.Whichstretchinbothdirections,therearenohappytomorrows.ButUncleJorisholdshisappleupandbeginstospeakTothechild.Redwavesfanmyuniversewiththegreenmacawoflunch. Thisstreetisdeserted; Ithinkmyeyesareempty;LetusleaveQuickly.Daybangsonthedoorandisgone. Thentheypickedhimupandcarriedhimawayfromthatcompany.Whenheawokehewasinthefiredepartment,andsleepybutnottired.TheygavehimahosefulofblueSpaintoeatforlunch.AndPortugalwaswaitingforhimatthedoor,likearainstormofeveningraspberries. Itistimetogivelunchtomythroatandnotmychest.What?eitherthestingrayhaseatenmylunchOrelse—andshesearchestheskyforsomethingelse;ButIamfaraway,seemingblue-eyed,empirical... 58 Letusgivelunchtothelunch — Buthowshallwedoit?Theheadwaitersexpandandconfer;Willlittlepiecesofcardboardboxdoit?Andwhataboutsilverandgoldpellets?Theheadwaitersexpandandconfer:Andwhatifthelunchshouldrefusetoeatanythingatall?Whythenwe’dsaybedamnedtoit,AndthereddoorwaywouldopenonagreenrailwayAndthelunchwouldbeputinabluecarAnditwouldgoawaytoWhippoorwillValleyWhereitwouldmeetandmarrySamuelDogfoot,andbringforthsevenoffspring,Allofwhomwouldbehalfhuman,halflunch;Andwhenwesawthem,sometimes,inthegloaming.WewouldtakeoffourmininghatsandwhistleTweettwee-oo.Withwateringmouthsstaringatthegirlsinpinkorgandyfrocks.Notrealizingtheyreallywerehalfedible.Andwewoulddiestillwithoutknowingit;SotopreventanythinghappeningthatterribleLet’sgiveeverybodyweseeandlikeagoodhardbiterightnow.Toseewhattheyare,becauseit’stimeforlunch! 59 TakingaWalkwithYouMymisunderstandings:foryearsIthought“musohello”meant“BellMuse,”IthoughtitwasakindofExtrarewardontheslotmachineofmyshynessinthesnowwhenFebruarywasonlyabouncingballbeforetheHospitaloftheTwoSistersoftheLastHamburgerBeforeIGotoSleep.IthoughtAxel’sCastlewasagarage;AndIhadbeautifuldreamsaboutit,too—sensual,mysteriousmechanisms;hornshonking,wheelsturning... Mymisunderstandingswere:1)thinkingPinocchiocouldreallychangefromapuppetintoarealboy,andbackagain!2)thinkingitdependedonwhetherhewasgoodorbad!3)identifyinghimwithmyself!4)andthereforeeverytimeIwasbadbeingafraidIwouldturnintowood... 5)Imisunderstoodchildhood.IusuallylikedtheageIwas.However,nowIregardtwenty-nineasanoptimumage(forme).6)IdislikedShelleybetweentwentyandtwenty-five.AllofthesethingsIsupposeareunderstandable,butWhenyouwerewearingyourbodiceIdidnotunderstandthatyouhadnothingonbeneathit;WhenmyfatherturnedthecornerImisunderstoodthelightverymuchOnFifty-fifthStreet;andImisunderstood(likeanoldChineserestaurant)whathewasdoingthere. ImisunderstoodgenerallyOklahomaandArkansas,thoughIthinkI understandNewMexico; IunderstandthePaintedDesert,cowboyhats,andvastspaces;IdoNotunderstandhillbillylife—IamsureImisunderstandit. IdidnotunderstandthatyouhadnothingonbeneathyourbodiceNor,hadIunderstoodthis,wouldIhaveunderstoodwhatitmeant;evennowI (MerryChristmas!Here,Father,takeyourpackage)misunderstandit!MerryChristmas,UncleLeon!yes,hereisyourpackagetoo. ImisunderstandRenaissancelife;Imisunderstand:TheRenaissance;AncientChina; 60 TheMiddleAtlanticStatesandwhattheyarelike;ThetubesofLondonandwhattheymean;Titian,Michelangelo,Vermeer;Theoriginsofwords;Whatothersaretalkingabout;Musicfromthebeginningstothepresenttime;Laughter;andtears,evenmoreso;Value(economicandesthetic);Snow(andweatherinthecountry);ThemeaningofthesymbolsandmythsofChristmas. Imisunderstandyou, Imisunderstandthedaywewalkeddownthestreettogetherfortenhours — Wherewerewegoing?Ihadthoughtweweregoingsomewhere.I believeImisunderstandmanyoftheplaceswepassedandthingsyousaid... Imisunderstand“SonsofBurgundy,” Imisunderstandthatyouhadnothingpaintedbeneathyourbodice, Imisunderstand“NotificationofArrivalorDeparturetoBeEradicatedBeforeAffectionofDeceasedTenant.” IunderstandthatThesmokeandthecloudsarcbothapartoftheday,but Imisunderstandthewords“AfterDeparture,” Imisunderstandnothingness; Imisunderstandtheattitudeofpeopleinpharmacies,onthedecksofships,inmybedroom,amidthepineneedles,onmountainsofcotton,everywhere — WhentheysayparalyticIhearparasite,andwhentheysaycoffeeI thinkmusic... WhatiswrongwithmefromheadtotoeThatImisinterpreteverythingIhear?Imisunderstand:French:often;Italian:sometimes,almostalways—forexample,ifsomeonesays,“Fortunateones!”Iamlikelytothinkheisreferringtothefountainwithblueandredwater(IamlikelytomakethismistakealsoinEnglish). 6i ImisunderstandGreekentirely; IfindancientGreeceveryhardtounderstand:Iprobablymisunderstandit; ImisunderstandspokenGermanabout98%ofthetime,likethecathedralinthemiddleofatown; Imisunderstand“BeautifulAdventures”;IalsothinkIprobablymisunderstandLaNauseebyJean-PaulSartre... Iprobablymisunderstandmisunderstandingitself—ImisunderstandtheViaMarguttainRome,orViadellaVite,nomatterwhatstreet,allofthem. Imisunderstandwoodinthesenseofitsrelationshiptothetree;I misunderstandpeoplewhotakeoneattitudeoranotheraboutit... SpringIwouldliketosayIunderstand,butImostprobablydon’t — autumn,winter,andsummerareallinthesameboat(Ruinedancientcitiesbythesea). Imisunderstandvacationandumbrella, Imisunderstandmotionandweekly(ThoughIthinkIunderstand“DaytimePissarros”Andtheoctagon—Idonotunderstandthepublicgarden)... OhIamsurethereisauseforallofthem,butwhatisit?MymisunderstandingsconfuseRomeandIreland,andcanyouBringthatbeautifulsextobearuponit?ImisunderstandwhatIamsaying,thoughnottoyou;Imisunderstandalargeboat:thatisaship.WhatyouarefeelingformeImisunderstandtotally;IthinkI misunderstandtheverypossibilitiesoffeeling.EspeciallyhereinRome,whereIsomehowthinkIam. Iseethesky,andsails.(Imisunderstandthemustardandthebottle)Ohthatwecouldgosailinginthatsky! Whattunecamewiththerefreshments? Iamunabletocomprehendwhytheywereplayingoffkey.IsitbecausetheywantedustojumpoverthecliffOrwasoneofthemabadoruntrainedmusician 62 Orthewholelotofthem?AtanyrateSanGiovanniinLateranoAlsoresistedmyquestioningAndturnedadeafbluedometomeFartoosuccessfully. Icannotunderstandwhyyouwalkforwardsandbackwardswithme. Ithinkitisbecauseyouwanttotryoutyourshoesfortheirtoes.ItisCausationthatismygreatestproblemAndafterthatthereallyattentivestudyofmillionsofdetails. Iloveyou,butitisdifficulttostopwriting.AsafleacouldwritetheDivineComedyofawaterjug.NowIrishmistscloseinuponus.Peatsailsthroughtheair,andgreennessbecomesbright.Areyoutheoceanortheisland?AmIonIrishsoil,orareyourwavescoveringme?St.Peter’sbellsareringing:“Earthquake,inundation,andsleeptotheunderstanding!”(AmericanExpress!flowervendors!yourbeautifulstraightnose!thatdelightfultrattoriainSantaMariainTrastevere!)LetushavesupperatSantaMariainTrastevereWherebyanabsoluteandtotalmisunderstanding(butnotfatal)IonceatebeforeImetyou. Iamprobablymisinterpretingyouranswer,sinceIhearnothing,andIbelieveIamalone. 63 TheRailwayStationery TherailwaystationerylayuponThedeskoftherailwayclerk,fromwherehecouldsecThespringtimeandthetracks.EngraveduponEachpagewasaninch-and-a-half-highTAndafterthatanHandthenanEAndthen,slightlybelowittotheright.TherewasCOLUMBUSRAILWAYCOMPANYIndarkerinkastheabovewaslight.Theprintwasblue.AndjustbeneathitallTherewasanetching—notinblue,butblack — Ofarealrailwayenginehalf-an-inchtallWhich,ifyouturnedthepaperonitsback.Youcouldseeshowingthrough,asifitranTooneedgeofthesheetthenbackagain. Tooneedgeofthesheetthenbackagain!Thespringtimecomeswhilewe’restilldrenchedinsnowAnd,whistlingnow,snow-spottedNumberTenComesupthetrackandstops,andwemustgoOutsidetogetitscargo,withourhandsColdasthesteeltheytouch.InsideoncemoreOncewehaveshutthesplinterywoodendoorOftherailwayshack,thestationerydemandsSomefurthernotice.Forthefirsttimethelight.Reflectedfromthesnowbythebrightspringsun.ShowsthattheenginewheelupontherightIsslightlydarkerthantheleft-sideoneAndslightlylighterthantheoneinthecenter.Whichmayhavebeenanerroroftheprinter. ShufflingthroughmanysheetsofittoestablishWhetherthisdifferenceisconsistentwillProvethatitisnot.Probablyover-lavishAtthebeginningwiththeink,hestill(Theprinter)hadthepresenceofmindtochangeHisoperatingprocesswhenhenoticedThatonthewheelstheinkhadcomeoutstrange. 64 BecausethewindowsoftheshackarelatticedThelightthatfallsuponthestationeryIsofteninterruptedbystraightlinesWhichshadetheetching.Nowthewords“DearMary”AppearbelowtheengineononesheetFollowedbyanumberofotherconventionalsigns,Amongwhichare“ourlove,”“onekiss,”and“sweet.” Theclerkthensignshisname—hisnameisJohnson,ButallhesignsisBill,withalargeBWhichoverflowsitsboundarieslikeaRonsonWithtoomuchfluidinit,whichyouseeOften,anditcanburnyou,thoughthe/ Wasverysmallandhadatinydot.The/’sweredifferent—thefirstwashigh.Thesecondfairlylow.AndtherewasaspotOfinkattheendofthesignaturewhichservedToemphasizethattheletterwascomplete.Onthewhole,onecouldsayhiswritingswervedMorethantheaverage,althoughitwasneat.He’dusedablue-blackink,astandingpen.Whichnowhestuckbackinitsstandagain. Smilingandsighing,heopenedupadrawerAndtookanenvelopeout,whichthenhesealedAfterhe’dreadtheletterthreetimesmoreAndfoldeditandputitin.AfieldCoveredwithsnow,untouchedbyman,iswhatTheenveloperesembled,tillheplacedAsquarewithperforatededgesthatPicturedawhite-hairedPresident,whofacedTheviewer,initscorner,whereitstuckAfterhe’dkisseditsbackandheldithardAgainsttheenvelope.NowcamethetruckOfthepostman“Hello,Jim.”“Hellothere.Bill.’“I’vegotthis—canyoutakeit?”“Sure,Iwill!” « 65 Nowthesnowfelldowngentlyfromthesky.Strangewonder—snowinspring!BillwalkedintoTheshackagainandwrotetheletter/Idlyuponasheetofpaper.NewIdeasforwritingMaryfilledhismind,Butheresisted—therewasworktodo.ForinthedistancehecouldhearthegrindOftheSeventy-Eight,whoseenginewashalfblue;So,puttingonacap,hewentoutsideOnthetracksside,towaitforittocome.ItwastheSeventy-EightwhichnowsuppliedThecitywithmostofitsproduce,althoughsomeCameinbytruckandsomewasgrownintown.Nowitscreamscloser,andheflagsitdown. 66 TheDeparturefromHydra AsIwaswalkinghomejustnow,fromseeingMargaretandNorrisoff(thoughPeter,AnEnglishmanwhomNorrishadmetyesterday.Wentbacktochangehisclothes,andmissedtheboat)AsIcamehomealongthelittlestreetWithoutanameonwhichtheonlytheatre.Themovietheatre,onHydrais.Called“TheGardenia”orJustplain“Gardenia,”ThestreetwhichtheytodayaretearingupAndcarryingnewstonesintoreplaceTheonesthey’retearingup,thoughitmaybeTheyarethesamestones,putindifferentorderOrinadifferentway,asIwaswalking.WiththeheatofthedayJustover,atfive-thirty, Ifeltquitegood,butthenfeltanawarenessOfsomethinginmylegsthatmightbepainfulAndthenofsomeslighttensioninmyJawsAndslightpainsinmyhead;insteadofdespairingAndgivingallthoughtofpleasureup,IfeltThatifIcouldwritedownallthatIfeltAsIcamewalkingthere,thatthatwouldbeApleasurealso,andwithsolidity. Ipassedamule—somemenwereloadingupHisfellow-mulewithpackets—andIstaredAthiswideeyesandhislonghardflatnoseOrface,atwhichheturnedawayhiseyesAndstampedhisrighthoofnervously.IfeltGuilty,amemberofahigherspeciesDeliberatelyusingmypoweragainstAnaturalinferiorbecauseReallyIwasafraidthathemightkickWhenIcamepast;butwhenheseemedupsetThenIfeltguilty.ThenIlookedaheadAndsawaviewofhousesonthehill.ParticularlynoticingoneredoneAndthinking.Yes,thatisapartofwhat Ifeel,ofthevarietyofthiswalk; 67 Thenmymindblurredsomewhat,IturnedandcameDownthissmallnarrowalleytomyhome.AsIcamein,reviewingtheideasWhichhadoccurredtomethroughoutmywalk.ItsuddenlycametomethatmaybePeterHadmissedtheAthensboatdeliberately;Afterall,MargaretwasnotsurethatsheWantedtoaccompanyhimandNorrisOnawalkingtriponPoros,andNorrishadsaidHewantedtostaywithMargaret,sothatPeterWasdisappointed,sinceheandNorrishadplannedThatverymorningtotakesuchawalkingtrip.Andhe,Peter,hadbeenthemostexcitedOfall,aboutit.ButnowsinceMargaretandNorrisWeregoingintoAthens,whatwasthereforPeterTodo,whyshouldhetaketheboatatall.Eventhoughhe’dplannedto,tostopatPoros?Except,ofcourse,toactonsomemarginalchanceThatNorrismightgetoffwithhimandwalk.Oronthestrengthofpreviousexpectations.Emotionalimpetuslingering.Ifnot.PerhapshisgoingtochangewasjustanexcuseToavoidanactualconfrontationwithNorrisInwhichhewouldhavetosay.No,I’mnotgoingUnlessyou’llcomeonthewalkingtrip!”butheknew,Peter,thatNorriswantedtostaywithMargaretAndthatthereforespeakingtohimwouldonlyresultInalittlepainandconfusion,sincebothwerequitedrunk.HavingplannedtheirtriptoPorosoverbeerallmorning;Andalso,ofcourse,itmightresultinhisgetting.Inspiteofhimself,ontheboat,bythetalkconfusedAndnotthinkingclearly(whereasifhewalkedawayHehadonly,really,towaittilltheboathadleft — Thenhecouldcomebackdownandthinkitover.Surelytofindhedidn’tregrettoomuchNotgettingtheboat,becauseafterallthereasonHe’dwantedtotaketheboathadlongbeengone). 68 ForahumansituationoftenleadsPeopletodothingsthattheydon’tdesireAtall,buttheyfindthatwhattheydiddesireHassomehowledthemtothissituationInwhichnottodothatwhichisproposedSeemsinconsistent,hostile,orinsane.Thoughmuchmoreoftenveryunfriendly;thentooSometimesitchieflyisalackoftimeToexplainhowthingshavechangedthatleadsone,wavingOne’shands,aboardashipthatbodesoneill.TowalkawayasPeterdidisonewayOfavoidingsuchsituations—anotherwayIsnevertodeceiveorhavehighhopesForfoolishthings;tobestraightwithoneself.Withone’sownbody,nature,andsociety.TocastoffeverythingthatisnotclearAnddefinite,andmovetowardonedesireAfteranother,withnoafterthoughts.LivinginthiswayoneavoidsthesuddenTransportsofexcitementPeterfeltWhenNorrismentionedaPoroswalkingtour.ForsurelyifPeter’snaturaldesiresHadallbeensatisfied,ifhislifewererunningSmoothlysexually,andifhishealthWereexcellentandhisworkgoingwell.HescarcelywouldhavegottensoexcitedAtthemerethoughtofwalkingaroundPoros;Thissortofthing,however,oftenhappensTopeoplefromNortherncountries,notjustPeter,AndperhapsifoneisEnglish,Norse,orSwedish,Danish,Finnish,Swiss,orNorthAmerican,Onecannotavoidacertainamountoftension,AcertainquaveringinthehandwhichreachesForaripepeachortheshoulderofagirl.Onewhom,asonewalksbackfromgoingswimming.Onethinksthatonecouldeat,she’ssodelicious.Butonlythinksitforalittlewhile 69 (ThisthoughtitselfissuchaNorthernone!ASouthernerwouldthinkaboutaplaceWherehecouldgoandjumpontopofher) — Inanycase,then,NorthernersfindithardToavoidsuchsuddenexcitements,buttheEnglish,Andespeciallytheupperclass,areworstofall.Becausebesidestheirclimatethat’soppressedthemThere’salsobeenarestrictiveupbringing.MannersaroundthehouseperhapstoosevereForchildren—IamspeakingofthoseEnglishWhoescapefrom“class”andbecomebrightorartistic.Theonesoneseesonplaceslikethisisland.(Thesesuddenoutburstsofenthusiasm,ofcourse.Areoftenmuchadmiredbyotherpeople.Particularlysomenotverysmartones.Whothinkhoweverthey’reverysensitiveAndwhattheymostadmireis“vitality”Whichtheythinkthingslikeoutburstsareasignof.AndtheycanboreyoufarintothenightWithtellingyouhowwonderfulsomeDaneOrNorskyis,whenyoucouldbeasleepDreamingofsatisfyingyourdesiresWithpersonswhoarealwaysverywarm.Tender,andexciting—but,awake!They’retalkingstill,andthoughyoursicklysmileGetssickliereverymoment,theygoon:“HanssuddenlygottheideatoInundateDenmark.Heiswonderful!”“Oh,marvelous!Wheredoesonegotomeethim?”“I’llgiveyouhisaddress.HehasafarmWherehestaysinthesummer;helovesanimals.ButsometimeswhenhedrinksalothebeatsthemAndsaysthathecanunderstandtheirlanguage.”“Howmarvelous!”“Andhere’shiscityaddress:BeschtungenaberBassGehundenweiss996.”“Goodnight.”ButPeterisNotanexaggeratedcaselikethat. 70 AndnotanaggingborewhotalksofsuchPeople,buthehas“outbursts”allthesame.Itistrue,inasensetheseoutburstsareDifficulttodiscriminatefromrealVitality,whicheveryoneesteemsThesedaysbecauseofman’soppressedpositionInmodernsociety,whichsapshisstrengthAndmakeshimwanttodowhateveryoneelsedoes.Whereassomemanwhosays,“Let’spitchtheglassesAgainstthelamppost”islikelytobepraisedBysomelow-IQpersonwhoisthereAsbeingreallyvital,ahhe’swonderful.Vitality,however,usuallyAppealstoanansweringvitalforceinothersAndbringsaboutmakingloveorgreatevents.Oritatleastgivespleasure—Ican’tjudgeVitalityinanywaybutthewayItgivesmepleasure,forifIdonotgetPleasurefromlife,ofwhichvitalityIsJusttheliquidform,thenwhatamI AndwhocareswhatIsay?Iforonedon’t.ThereforeIJudgevitalitythatway.)ButPeter,afterhavingthisideaOfawalkingtriponPoros,musthavefeltThatinwalkingaroundinthesunalldayonanislandAboutwhichheknewnothing,theremightcomeSomeinsighttohimorsomerelaxation.SomefeelingthewayanItalianfeelsallthetime.Orperhapsnot,perhapsheneverdoes;PeteratanyratewasprobablynotConsciousofanItalianatthetimeHethoughtwithpleasureaboutthewalkonPoros,Buttherehewas,facedwithNorrisandMargaretAnhourbeforetheboatcamein,andNorrisWassaying“Maybenot.”OnemistakeofPeter,Or,rather,difficulty,acommononeInsuchenthusiasms,isthatsince One’senthusiasmismotivatedbysubmergedFeelingsandsoitsobjectisn’tclearToanyone,itismostlikelythatThoughtheyrespondexcitedlyatfirst,Partlybecauseexcitementissocommunicable.Others,whentheythinkoverwhatyou’veplanned.Willseeitinagreyerlight,unlessofcourseTheyhavethesameneurosesthatyouhave.InwhichcaseawholelifetimemightbebuiltUpononeoftheseoutbursts.Norris,probably.IndrinkingwithPeter,wantedmorethananythingTobeagreeable,whereasPeterwantedTo“do”somethingunusual,notnecessarilyPleasingtoNorris,notnecessarilydispleasing;Norris,Ishouldimagine,then,onceheWasoutofPeter’scompany,sincehe’dknownhimAveryshorttime,waslackingthechiefimpulseThatmotivatedhimwhenheagreedTotakeatourwithPeter;thereforeMargaret,SpeakingtoNorriswhenhewasaloneAndsayingshedidnotwanttotakethetrip.Foundheimmediatelyagreedwithher.Expressedsomedoubtsatleast,andsaidallright.Thetripwasoffthen,he’dexplaintoPeter;Peter,ofcourse,wasverysurprisedbythis.ButstillhemusthavebeenusedtoitbecauseThewaythatNorrisandMargaretactedwasbasedOnlawsofhumanconductwhichendure;Andsincethatoutburstsurelywasnothisfirst,PeterwasprobablyaccustomedtoThatsortofoutcomeofhisimpulsesAndsaidtohimself,“Ah,theydon’tunderstand,”ButprobablyknewinsidethattherewassomethingSeriouslythematterwithhim.SowhenheleftThetableandsaid,“I’mgoingtogetmythings,”Itwaswithacertaintensionthatheleft.Indicativeofthefacthe’dnotcomeback. 72 AndofthefactthatheknewhewouldnotavoidSelf-doubtsbecauseheavoidedtheuselessboattrip;Ofcoursehewouldn’tthinkheshouldhavegoneButwonderwhythingshadbeenthewaytheywere.Itwasthesedeeperworriesinhismind, Ithink,thatkepthimfromleavingevensoonerWiththesameexcuse,ratherthanahopethatNorrisWouldchangehismindagain.DeepthoughtsmakehelplessMenforsmallundertakings.Well,perhapsThelastisspeculation,buttherestSeemssurelytrue.Ismiled,andclosedthedoor. 73 V fromThePleasuresofPeace t ••rik » ^ f » IVestWind It’stheoceanofwesternsteelBuglesthatmakesmewanttolistenTothepartingofthetreesLikeintemperatesmiles,inaStormcoatevangelisticallygroundOutofspunglassandsilverthreadsWhenstarsareinmyhead,andweAreapartandtogether,friendofmyyouthWhomI’vesorecentlymet—afragmentoftheuniverseInourcoats,abelievabledoublingOfthefreshcurrentsofdoubtandThought!awinterclimateFoundintheSouthernHemisphereandwhere Iamwhooffersyoutowear.Andinthisstorm,alongthetoothofthestreet.Theintemperateclimateofthisdoubleframeoftheuniverse. 77 Hearing HearthebeautifultinnyvoicesofthetrumpetsBesidetherushingsoundofthegreatbluewaterfall;Seethegunsfire,thenheartheleavesdroptotheground;Liebackinyourchair—andnowthereistheclatterofpennies!Thefamiliarscrapingnoiseofthechairfeetontheground,Asifawormhadgrownsixfeettall!Andhereistheworm.Andhearhissoftlyscrapingnoiseattheforestgate.IntheBoursethediamondsclinkandclankagainsteachother.AndthevioletairplanespeakstothefarmlandwithitsbuzzFromhighintheair,butyouhearthesliceOIshearsandwatchthehappygardener’sfacewhitenAshehearsthefinalthrobsofhisfailingheart.Allisnotstillness—farfromit.ThetinnyTrumpetsrenewtheirsongamongtheeglantine’sToospeciouslygraciousbrilliance,andahendropsAnegg,withinfinitegentleness,intothestraw. WhoisthisyoungmanwiththetremendousFrenchhorninthegardenWithaladyinlilacbendingherheadtocatcheachnoteThatflows,sereneandunbidden,fromthesilverythroat?Ithinktheyarestrangershere.Stonesfallinthepool.Shesmiles,sheisverywitty,shebendstoofar,andnowwehearThesoundofherlilacdressrippinginthesoftsummerair.Foritissummer!HearthecoolrushofthestreamandtheheavyblackVocalismofleavesinthewind.Anotethencomes,arisesIntheair,itisaglassinwhichafewwarmdropsofrainMakemusic;thereareroarsandmeows,turkeysandspanielsComerunningtothegreatpiano,which,coveredwithpearls.Givesextra,clinkingsoundstoyourdelightedears;Andthedogsbark,andthereisthelittlethrilledsilenceofsnails.... AboveallelseyouhearthedaisiesbeingtornapartBytremendousbumblebeeswhohavecomeherefromanotherDepartment!“Wisteriatappingthehouse,socomesyourblood....” Nowrain,nowthisearthstreamswithwater!HearthetootingofTritonamongtheclouds 78 Andontheearth!SeethetrumpetsofheavenfloatingtowardusBlaringamongthewetmassesofcitronandvermilionwings!Theyplay“Putdownthecushiononthechair,Putdownthecushiononthechair,putdownThecushion,putitdown,putthecushiondownonthechair,Ratata.,. Theyoungman’sFrenchhorniswet,itmakesadifferentnoise.Thegirlturnsherfacetowardhimandhehearsstrings(itisanothertearinherdress!).InthekitchenthesoundofraspberriesbeingmashedinthecreamRemindsyouofyourchildhoodandallthefantasiesyouhadthen!InthehighestpartofanoaktreeisabluebirdTrilling.AdryingfriendreadsOrlandoFuriosoSittingonabeachchair;thenyouhearawningsbeingstretchedout!Abassosings,andasopranoanswershim.Thenthereisthunderinaclearbluesky.And,fromtheearth,asigh:“Thissongisfinished.” 79 Poem ThethingTodoIsorganizeTheseaSoboatswillAutomaticallyfloatTotheirdestinations.Ah,theGreeksThoughtofthat!Well,whatifTheyDid?WehavenoGodsOfthewinds!AndthereforeMustuseScience! 8o MaProvence EnmaProvencelebleesttoujoursvertEtlesfillessontjoliesEliesnemeurentpasellesvousaimentalafolie—enmaProvence. BillsbreakthebreakfastteacupsandthesunShinesdarklyoverthebill-wareShewritesitoutinenervatingprose“InmyProvence,myrose.” « 8i sleepingwithWomen Caruso:avoice.Naples:sleepingwithwomen.Women:sleepinginthedark.Voices:amusic.Pompeii:aruin.Pompeii:sleepingwithwomen.Mensleepingwithwomen,womensleepingwithwomen,sheepsleepingwithwomen,everythingsleepingwithwomen.Theguard:askingyouforalight.Women:asleep.Yourself:asleep.EverythingsouthofNaples:asleepandsleepingwiththem.Sleepingwithwomen:asinthepoemsofPascoli.Sleepingwithwomen:asintherain,asinthesnow.Sleepingwithwomen:bystarlight,asifwewereangels,sleepingonthetrain.Onthestarryfoam,asleepandsleepingwiththem—sleepingwithwomen.Mediterranean:avoice.Mediterranean:asea.Asleepandsleeping.StreetcarinOslo,sleepingwithwomen,ToonervilleTrolleyInStockholmasleepandsleepingwiththem,inSkansenAlone,alonewithwomen.Therainsleepingwithwomen,thebrainofthedog-eyedgeniusAlone,sleepingwithwomen,allhehaswanted.Thedog-eyedfearlessman.Sleepingwiththem:asinThePerilsofPaulineAsleepwiththem:asinToscaSleepingwithwomenandcausingallthattroubleAsinRoumania,asinYugoslaviaAsleepandsleepingwiththemAnti-Semitic,andsleepingwithwomen.Pro-canary,Rashomon,Shakespeare,tonight,sleepingwithwomenAbigguysleepingwithwomenAblackseacoast’ssleeve,asleepwiththemAndsleepingwithwomen,andsleepingwiththemTheGreekislandssleepingwithwomen 82 Themuddysky,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Sleepingwithwomen,asinascholarlydesignSleepingwithwomen,asifgreenpolaritywerealineIntothesea,sleepingwithwomenAsifwolverines,inastreetline,asifsheepharborsCouldcomealivefromsleepingwithwomen,wolverinesGreekislandssleepingwithwomen,Nassos,Naxos,Kos,Asleepwithwomen,Mykonos,miotis.Andmyositis,sleepingwithwomen,blue-eyedRed-eyed,green-eyed,yellowreputed,white-eyedwomenAsleepandsleepingwiththem,blue,sleepingwithwomenAsinlove,asatsea,therabbi,asleepandsleepingwiththemAsifthatcouldbe,thestones,therestaurant,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Sleepingwithwomen,asiftheywerekneeArmandthighasleepandsleepingwiththem,sleepingwithwomen.AndtheirispegoftheseaSleepingwithwomenAndthedietpillofthetreeSleepingwithwomenAndtheapologythegoonthecandlelightThegroan:askingyouforthenight,sleepingwithwomenAsleepandsleepingwiththem,thegreentreeTheiris,theswan:thebuildingwithitsmouthopenAsleepwithwomen,awakewithman.Thesunlight,asleepandsleepingwiththem,themovinggongTheabacus,thecrab,asleepandsleepingwiththemAndmoving,andthemovingvan,inLondon,asleepwithwomenAndintentions,inventionsforsleepingwiththemLandssleepingwithwomen,antssleepingwithwomen,Italo-GreekorAnglo-FrenchorchestrasAsleepwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Thefoamandthesleet,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Theschoolboy’spoem,thecrippledlegAsleepandsleepingwiththem,sleepingwithwomenSleepingwithwomen,asifyouwereapuristAsleepandsleepingwiththem. 83 sleepingwithwomen:thereisnoknownformforthefutureOfthisundreamed-ofview:sleepingwithachorusOfhighlytunedwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Bees,sleepingwithwomenAndtourists,sleepingwiththemSoap,sleepingwithwomen;beds,sleepingwithwomenTheuniverse:achoiceTheheadline:avoice,sleepingwithwomenAtdawn,sleepingwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Sleepingwithwomen:achoice,asofamuleAsofanisland,asleeporsleepingwiththem,asofaRussia,Asofanisland,asofadrum:achoiceofviews:asleepandsleepingwiththem,asofhighnoon,asofachoice,asofvariety,asofthesunlight,redstudent,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Aswithanorchid,aswithanoriole,atschool,sleepingwithwomen,andyouaretheoneTheonesleepingwithwomen,inMexico,sleepingwithwomenTheghostland,thevectors,sleepingwithwomenThemotelman,theviaduct,thesunTheuniverse:aquestionThemoat:acathexisWhathavewedone?OnRhodes,manOnSamos,dogSleepingwithwomenIntherainandinthesunThedoghasaredeye,itisNovemberAsleepandsleepingwiththem,sleepingwithwomenThisJune:aboyOctober:sleepingwithwomenThemotto:asign;thebridge:adefinition.Tothegoat:destroy;totherain:beasettee.Orainofjoy:sleepingwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Volcano,Naples,Caruso,asleepandsleeping,asleepandsleepingwiththemThewindow,thewindrow,thehedgerow,irretrievableblue.Sleepingwithwomen,thehaymow,asleepandsleepingwiththem,thecanal 84 Asleepandsleepingwiththem,theeagle’sfeather,thedock’sweather,andtheglue:Sleepingwithyou;asleepandsleepingwithyou:sleepingwithwomen.Sleepingwithwomen,charmingaspirin,asintherain,asinthesnow.Asleepandsleepingwithyou:asifthecrossbow,asofthemoonlightSleepingwithwomen:asifthetractate,asifd’AnnunzioAsleepandsleepingwithyou,asleepwithwomenAsleepandsleepingwithyou,asleepwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwithyou,sleepingwithwomenAsifthesun,asofVeniceandtheMiddleAges’“trueRenaissancehadjustbarelywalkedbytheyuccaForest’’asleepandsleepingwithyouInChina,onparade,sleepingwithwomenAndinthesun,asleepandsleepingwithyou,sleepingwithwomen.Asleepwithwomen,thedocks,thealley,andtheprudeSleepingwithwomen,asleepwiththem.Thedunegod:sleepingwithwomenThedove:asleepandsleepingwiththemDialssleepingwithwomen;cybernetictilesasleepandsleepingwiththemNaples:sleepingwithwomen;theshortofbreathAsleepandsleepingwithyou,sleepingwithwomenAsifIwereyou—moonidealismSleepingwithwomen,piecesofstageboard,sleepingwithwomenThesilentbusride,sleepingwithyou.Thechore:sleepingwithwomenTheforceofadisaster:sleepingwithyouTheorgangrinder’sdaughter:asleepwithbitumen,sunshine,sleepingwithwomen.Sleepingwithwomen:inGreece,inChina,inItaly,sleepingwithblueRedgreenorangeandwhitewomen,sleepingwithtwoThreefourandfivewomen,sleepingontheoutsideAndontheinsideofwomen,aviolin,likeavista,women,sleepingwithwomenInthemonthofMay,inJune,inJulySleepingwithwomen,“Iwatchedmylifegoby”sleepingwithwomenAdoorofpine,astormfilledvalentineasleepandsleepingwiththem 85 “ThisSundayheartofmine”profoundlydormoozedwiththemTheyrunningandlaughing,asleepandsleepingwiththem“Thisidleheartofmine”insanely“shlamoozed”asleepandsleepingwiththem,TheyrunninginlaughterTothenearesttime,ohdoorsofeternityOhyoungwomen’sdoorsofmyowntime!sleepingwithwomenAsleepandsleepingwiththem,allNaplesasleepandsleepingwiththem,Venicesleepingwithwomen,Burgossleepingwithwomen,Lausannesleepingwithwomen,haildepth-diversSleepingwithwomen,andthereisthebonfireofCreteCatchingdivorceinitsfingers,purplesleepingwithwomenAndtheredlightsofdawn,haveyoueverseenthem,greenportssleepingwithwomen,acrobatsandpawns.YouhadnotknownitereItoldityouasleepwithwomenTheViaAppiaAnticaasleepwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththemAllbeautifulobjects,eachuglyobject,theintelligentworld.Thearenaofthespirits,thedieteticwhisky,thestormsSleepingwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththem.Sleepingwithwomen.AndthechurchesinAntigua,sleepingwithwomenThestone:avowTheNereid:apromise—tosleepwithwomenThecold—aconvention:sleepingwithwomenThecarriage:sleepingwithwomenThetime:sometimesThecertainty:nowThesoapbox:sleepingwithwomenThetimeandagainnubileandtime,sleepingwithwomen,andthetimenowAsleepandsleepingwiththem,asleepandasleep,sleepingwithwomen,asleepandsleepingwiththem,sleepingwithwomen. 86 ThePleasuresofPeace AnotherribaldtaleofthegoodtimesatMadameLipsky’s.GiorgioFinoglehadcomeinwithanimitationofthelatestRussianpoet,Theonewhowrotethegreat“ComplaintAboutthePeanutFarm”whichIreadtoyoulastyearatMrs.Riley’s,Doyouremember?andthenofcourseGiorgiohadwrittenthisimitationSohecameinwithit....WherewasIandwhatw’asIsaying?ThebigbeerparlorwasfilledwithbarmaidsandmennamedStuartWhowerealltryingtobuyabigredpitcherofbeerforanartistenamedAlmaStuartWhomeachclaimedashisveryownbecauseofthesimilarityinnames — ThisinessencewasBuddy’sparody—OhGiorgio,youidiot,MarianStuartsnapped.Itallhassomethingtodowithme!Butno,Giorgioreplied.Bitinginamelancholywaytheedgeoffacigar-paper-patternedenvelopeInwhichhehadbeenkeepingthePoemformanydaysWaitingtoshowittohisfriends.Andactuallyit’snotaparodyatall, Ijustclaimeditwas,outofembarrassment.It’sapoeticpresentforyouall.AllofwhomIlove!Isitcapabletolovemorethanone—Iwonder!Almacried.Andwewentoutontothebicycle-shapeddockwhereamaliciousswarmofmosquitoesWereparlayingafterhavinginvadedtheoldbeerparlor.ThemennamedStuartwerenowinvolvedinafighttothedeathButthenearerislandslayfairinthewhitenightlight.Shallweembarktowardthem?Isaid,placingmyhandupononeexceedinglygentleAndfine.Apictureofhairnetsisbeingprojected.HereComessomeonewithAlmaStuart!Isitreal,thisnight?Orhaveweagentlefantasy?TheRussianpoetappears.Heseemstoconsideritrealallright.He’sQuiteangry.Where’stheCapitalistfairythatputmedown?hesquirts 87 Atournomadicsimplicity.“ComplaintAboutthePeanutFarm”isaterrificpoem.Yes,Inaway,yes.TheHairdresserofNightengulfsthemallinfoam. “Iloveyourwork.ThePleasuresojPeace,”theProfessorsaidtomenextday;“IthinkitadequatelyencompassesthehysteriaofoureraAndputscertainpeopleintheirrightfulplace.Chapeau!Bravo!”“Youdon’tgetit,”Isaid.“Ilikeallthis.IcalledthispoemPleasuresofPeacebecauseI’mnotsuretheywillbelasting! IwantedpeopletobeabletoseewhatthesepleasuresareThattheymaycomebacktothem.”“Buttheyareallsohysterical,so — sotransitory,”Thecriticreplied.“Imean,howcanyou—whatkindofpleasuresarethese?Theyseemmorelikepainstome—ifImaysaywhatImean.”“Well,Idon’tknow.Professor,”Isaid;“permanentjoysHavesofarbeendeniedthishystericalperson.ThoughIconfessFarotherJoysI’vehadandwilldescribeintime.Andthentoothere’sthepleasureofwritingthese—perhapstoexperienceisnotthesame.”TheProfessorpaused,lightly,uponthetemplestair.“Iwillmentionyouamongtheimmortals,Ken,”hesaid,“Becauseyouhavethecourageofwhatyoubelieve.ButthereIwillnevermentionthosesnivelingratsWhoonlyclaimtolikethesethingsbecausethey’refashionable.”“Professor!”Icried,“Mydarling!mydream!”Andshestripped,andI sawthereCreamyfemalemarble,thewaistandthighsofwhichIhadalwaysdreamed.“Professor!Lovedone!whythedisguise?”“Itwasatest,”shesaid,“Ofwhichyouhavenowonlypassedthefirstportion.YoumustwriteMore,andMore— ” “Andbeequallypersuasive?”Iquestioned,butSheHadvanishedthroughthePromontorydoor. SonowImustdevotemydaystoThePleasuresofPeace — TomycontemporariesI’llleavetheHorrorsofWar, 88 TheycandothembetterthanI—eachpoetsharesonlyaportionOfthevastTerritoryofRhyme.HereinPeaceshallIstakeoutMytemporalandpermanentclaim.ButsuchsilverasIfind IwillgivetotheUniverse—thegoldI’llputinotherpoems.Thusintimethere’llbeamountainrangeofgoldOfconsiderableinterest.OhmayyoucomebackintimeAndinm.ylifetimetoseeit,mostperfectandmostdelectablereader!Wepoetsinouryouthbeginwithfantasies,Butthenatleastwethinktheymayberealities — ThepoemswecreateinourageRequireyourhanduponourshoulder,youreyeonourpage. HerearelistedallthePleasuresofPeacethattherecouldpossiblybe.AmongthemarethepleasuresofMemory(whichDelmoreSchwartzcelebrated),thepleasuresofautonomy.ThepleasuresofagoraphobiaandthesuddenreleaseOftheagoraphobicpersonfromtheidentifiedmarketplace,thepleasuresofrovingoveryouAndrollingoverthebeach,ofbeinginacomplicatedcar,ofsleeping.Ofdrawingropeswithyou,ofplanningaderangedcomicstrip,ofshiftingkneesAttheacceleratorpump,ofblasphemy,ofcobrasettlementinadilapidatedskincountryWithoutclops,andthereforeeverypleasureisalsoincluded;which,afterthese — ChapterThirtySeven.OnthePlanisphereeveryonewashavinganutWhensuddenlymyLuluappeared.ShewasabigbroadaboutsixfeetsevenAndshehadaredstoneinherearWhichwasstringentinitsbeauty. IdemandedatoncetheremovalofpeoplefromthelobbySowecouldbegintodownABCtabletsandstarttofeelfunnyButMordecaiLaSchlompourLeaderrepliedthatwedidnotneedanyThatapersoncouldfeelgoodwithoutanyartificialmeans. 89 ohthePleasuresofPeaceareinfiniteandtheycannotbecounted — OnesinglepieceofpinkmintchewinggumcontainsmorepleasuresThanthewholerudegalleryofwar!AndthemoonpassesbyInanotherwiseundistinguishedlessononthegeographyofthisageWhichhashadfifty-sevengoodloversandninety-sixwars.ByGiorgioFinogle. Itturnsoutthatwe’recompetingforthePeaceAward,GiorgioFinogleandI.Wegointothehairparlor,thebarber — Wegettotalkingaboutwarandaboutpeace.ThebarberfeelsthatwearereallygoodpeopleatheartEventhoughhisownviewsturnouttobeconservative.“I’vereadFinogle’spiece,thepartofitthatwasinSmut,”heSays,“andIlikedit.Yours,Koch,Ihaven’tyetseen.ButAlyneandFrancietoldmethatyouwerethebetterpoet.”“Idon’tknow,”Isaid.“Giorgioisprettygood.”AndGiorgiocomesbackfromthebathroomNow,withagrinonhisface.“I’vegotanideaformyPleasuresofPeace,”hesays;“I’mgoingtomakeitincludeEachpersonintheuniversediscussingtheirownbag — Translation,theirmaininterest,andwhattheywanttobe— ” “You’llneverfinishit,Giorgio,”Isaid.“AtleastI’llGetstarted,”hereplied,andheranoutofthebarbershop. Inthequietnightwetaketurnsridinghorsebackandfallingasleep.Yourbreastsaremorebeautifulthanagoldmine. IthinkI’llbecomeaprofessionalman.Thereasonweareup-to-dateiswe’resomekindoffreaks. Idon’tknowwhattotelltheoldmanButheisconcernedwithtwokindsofphenomenaandIaminterestedinneither.Whatareyouinterestedin?Beingsomekindoffreaks,Ithink.Let’sgotoTransylvania. Idon’tunderstandyourbuddyallthetime.Who?TheonewithHANDLEBARwrittenacrosshishead.He’sagoodguy,hejustdoesn’tseethedifferencebetweenamanandabike.IfIloveyouIt’sbecauseyoubelongtoandhaveasublimetoleranceForsuchpeople.Yes,butinlaterlife,Imean — 90 ItisPresentLifewe’vegottokeepuponthescreen,Isn’tit.Wellyes,shesaid,but — Iamveryhappythatyouareinterestedinit.TheFrenchpoodlestoppedbeingIrishentirelyAndwearealloutoftheotherbreeds.Thesocietywomanpaused,daintily,uponthehotelstair.No,Imusthaveapoodle,saidshe;notanIrishsetterWouldsatisfymeinmymadpassionforthepoodlebreeds!Asusual,returningtothebedIfindthatyouareinsideitandsoundasleep.Ismilehappilyandlookatyourhead.Itisregular-sizeandhasbeautifulblondehairallaroundit.Someislyingacrossthepillow.ItouchitwithmyfeetThenleapoutthewindowintothepublicsquare.AndItunemyguitar. “OMistressMine,whereareyouroving?”That’smytune!roarsFinogle,andheComesragingoutoftheBeefsteak—IwasgoingtoputthatinMYPleasuresofPeace.Ohnormalcomportment!evenyoutooIshallincludeinthePleasuresofPeace,Andyou,relativehumidityfivehundredandsixty-twodegrees!Butwhatofyou,poorsadgloriousaqueductOfboorishashesmadebycigarettessmokedattheCupcakeAward—AndSueEllenMusgrovestepsononeofmyfeet.“Hello!”Shesays.“You’rethatfamousCOKE,aren’tyou.Thatnoonecandrink?WhenareyougoingtogiveusyourfamousIliadThateveryone’sbeentalkingof,ImeanyourPleasuresofPeace!” Lifechangesastheuniversechanges,buttheuniversechangesMoreslowly,asbedevilmentsincrease.SunlightcomesthroughaclotforexampleWhichZooManhasthrownonthefloor.ItistheNightofthePaintedPajamasAndtheLiberalsareweepingforpeace.TheConservativesareragingforit. 91 TheIndependentsarestagingaparade.AndwearecompletelynakedWalkingthroughthebedroomforpeace.IhavethisfriendwhohadmyopiaSohealwayshadtogetveryclosetopeopleAndgirlsthoughthewastryingtomakeout — Whydidn’thegetglasses?—HewasaPacifist!TheMoonshallovercome! OutsideinthebaryardtheGreciansarescreamingforpeaceAndtheAlsatians,theAlbanians,theAlesians,theRubans,theAleutians,AndtheIranians,all,allarescreamingforpeace.Theyshallwinit,theirpeace,becauseIamgoingtohelpthem!Andheleapedoutthewindowforpeace!Headline:GIORGIOFINOGLE,NOTEDPOET,LASTNIGHTLEAPEDOUTTHEWINDOWFORPEACE.ASIDEFROMHEADINJURIESHISCONDITIONISREPORTEDNORMAL.ButGiorgioneverwasnormal!Ohthehorrorsofpeace, Imeanofpeace-fighting!ButGiorgioisallright.Heisstillcompletelyhimself.“IamgoingtothrowthishospitalBedoutthewindowforpeace,”whenweseehim,hesays.And,“Well,Iguessyourpoemwillbegettingwayaheadofminenow,”hesaysSadly,rippingupanenvelopeforpeaceandweaklyholdingouthishandFormygirl,Ellen,tostrokeit;“IwillnolongerbethemostfamouspoetForpeace.Youwill,andyouknowit.”“ButyoujumpedouttheWindow,Finogle,”Isaid,“andyourdeedshalllivelongerInmen’simaginationsthananyverse.”ButhelookedattheskyThroughthewindow’sbeautifuleyeandhesaid,“Kenneth,IhavenotwrittenonewordOfmyPoemforPeaceforthreeweeks.I’vestruckasnarlAndthat’swhy(Ibelieve)IJumpedouttheWindow—purepoeticfrustration.Nowtellthemallthat,howThey’lldespiseme,ohsobsob—”“Giorgio,”Isaid,tryingtocalmhimdownbutlaughing 92 SohardIcouldbarelydigestthedinnerofimaginationInwhichyourbreastswerefeaturedasonaPopeyecardWhenwinterhaslightedthelanternsandthefallsareasleepWaitingfornextday’sshards,“Giorgio,”Isaid,“thepleasures— ” Buthysteriatransportedusall. WhenIawokeyouwereinastar-shapedmuffin,IwasinaloafofbreadShapedlikeacamera,andGiorgiowasstillinhishospitalbedButahugebakerloomedoverus.OnefalsemoofandIdieyou!hesaidInamurderousthroatyvoiceandIbelieveintheyellowleaves,theOrange,theredleavesofautumn,thetanleaves,andthepromotedonesOfgreen,ofgreenandblue.SometimeswalkingthroughanordinarygardenYouwillseeabird,andtheovercoatwillfallfromyourShoulders,slightly,exposingonebeautifulcurveOnwhichsunbeamsalightingforgettospeakasinglewordTotheirparentsunandarethuscutoffWithoutaheatingunit,butneednonebeingonyourbreastWhichIhavere-christened“Loaves”forthebeginningofthisyearInwhichIhopethegunswon’tfireanymore,thebakersangTohisbakerlady,andthenhehadtotallydisappeared.Itlooksasthougheveryoneweregoingtobeonourside!Andtheflowerscameout,andtheywereonourside.EventheyellowlittleonesthatgrowbesideyourdoorAndthehugeorangeoneswerebendingtoonesideAswewalkedpastthem,IlookedintoyourblueeyesAndIsaid,“IfwecomeoutofthisdoorAnymore,letitbetoenteronlythisnervousparadiseOfpeacefullivingconditions,andifGiorgioisropeddownLetthemuntiehim,sohecanthrowhishospitalbedoutthedoorForallweneedbesidespeace,whichisconsiderable,butfirstweneedthat— ” Daredevil,JulianandMaddalo,andJohnL.LewisArerunningdownthestairwaysforpeace,theyaregatheringtheiceAndthrowingitinbuckets,theyareraisingpurpleparasolsforpeace 93 Andontopoftheseoldsunlightsingshersong,“Newlights,oldlightsagain,bluelightsforpeace.Redlightsforthelow,insultedparasol,andafewcrutchesthrownaroundforpeace” — OhcontentmentisthekeyTocontinuingexplorationofthenationsandtheirfeet;Therefore,andiamo—thefootfalliswaitinginthecarAndpeacefularethemarketsandthesneaks;PeacefularetheGarfinkleping-pongballsAndpeacefularethebloomsbeneaththeseaPeacefularetheunreservedairplaneloopsandthepopularlyguidedblipsAlsotheRobertHerrickstonesingsapeacefulsongAndthebananafactoryisgettinghip,andthepigs’EasterpartytooisbeginningtojoininageneralcelebrationAndthewomenandmenofoldPeruandyoungHaifaandancientJapanandbeautifulyoungripplingLakeTahoeAndhairyoldBostonandyoungFreeportandyoungSantoDomingoandoldfatherCandelabratheChieftainofHoboesArerollingaroundtheparapetsforpeace,andnowthematadorsarethrowinginHugeblopsofcanvasandthepostgraduatesarefillinginAsgrocerydatesatpeanutdancesandthesunlightisfillinginEveryhumanworldcanvaswithhugeandluminouspleasuregobsofpeace — AndtheTintorettosarelookingverypurpleforpeaceAndtheoystercampusisbeginningitspeacefulsong — Ohletitbeconcluded,includingthemedals!PeacewillcomethrustingoutoftheskyTomorrowmorning,tobombusintoquietude.ForawhilewecanbidgoodbyeTothefrenesiesofthispoem.ThePleasuresofPeace.WhenthereispeacewewillnotneedanythingbutbreadStarsandplasterwithwhichtobegin.RoamingfromonebeardtoanotherweshalltakethetinFromtheminesandgiveittoroaringFidelCastro.WhereMaoTseTungliesburiedinoceanfieldsofsleepingcars 94 OurLorcaesquedecisionswillclonkhimoutAndresurrecthimtotherosebuddyskyOfearlyevening.Andthewhip-shapedgeneralsofHanoiShallbetakeninovercoatstovisittheskyAndtheearthwillbegaspingforjoy! “Awonder!”“Arout!”“Noneednowforanyfurtherpoems!”“ABanzaiforpeace!”“Hecanspeaktousall!”And“Great,man!”“Impressive!”“Somethingnewforyou,Ken!”“Astounding!”“ArealEpic!”“TheworstpoemIhaveeverread!”“Abominablytasteless!”“Toofunny!”“Dead,man!Acop-out!arealwhiteman’spoem!afolderolofhonkyblankspitzenburgersmuggleroutCaucasiangypOfphonybourgeoispeacepoetry,atotalshrig!”“Terrific!”“Iwillexpectyouatsix!”“Alovelystarrycatalogueforpeace!”“IsitShakespeareorByronwhobreathesInthelinesofhispoem?”“YouhavegivenusthePleasuresofPeace,Nowwhereistherealthing?”“Kochhasstudiedhishistory!”“Bold!”“Stunning!”“IttouchesuslikeleavesSparklinginApril—butisthatallthereisTohispeaceplea?”Well,youbetheoneToconcludeit,ifyouthinkitneedsmore—Iwanttoendit, IwanttoseerealPeaceagain!Ohpeacebams! Ineedyourassistance—andpeacedrams,distillingthroughtheworld!peacelamps,beshining!andpeacelambs,rumbleuptheshore!OGoddess,sweetMuse,I’mstopping—nowshowuswhereyouare! AndthebigboatscomesailingintotheharborforpeaceAndthelittleapesarerunningaroundtheJungleforpeaceAndtheday(thatis,thestarofday,thesun)isshiningforpeaceSomewhereamoustachioedstudentispuzzlingovertheworksofRaymondRousselforpeaceAndtheMediterraneanpeachtreesarefastasleepforpeaceWiththeirpinkarmsakimboandtheblueplumsofSwitzerlandforpeace 95 AndthemonkeysareclimbingforcoconutsandpeaceTheHawaiianpalmAndserpentsarewrithingforpeace—thosearesnakes — AndtheAlps,MountVesuvius,allthereallybigimportantmountainsArerisingforpeace,andthey’refilledwithrocks—surelyitwon’tbelong;AndLeonardodaVinci’sLastSupperismovingacrossthemonasterywallAfewmicrometersforpeace,andPaoloUccello’sredhorsesAreturningalittleredderforpeace,andtheAnglo-SaxondininghallBeginsglowinglikecrazy,andBeowulf,RobertE.Lee,SirBarbarossa,andBaronJeepAresleepingontherailwaysforpeaceanddartingaroundtheharborAndleapingintothesailboatsandthesailboatswillgoonAndunderneaththesailboatstheseawillgoonandwewillgoonAndthebirdswillgoonandthesnappywordswillgoonAndtheteaskyandtheslopedmarineskyAndthehustleofbeanswillgoonandtheunseriouscanoeItwillallbegoingoninconnectionwithyou,peace,andmypoem,likeaCadillacofwampumUnredeemedandflyingmadly,willgoexplodingthroughNewcitiessweetinflated,planispheres,ingenioushair,acamerasmashingBadinage,cerebralstandsofatmospheres,unequaled,dreamedofEmpeacements,candledpiers,fumisteries,emphaticmoods,terrestrialism’sCrackle,love’sflat,sun’ssweets,OPeace,toyou. 96 fromTheArtofLove TheCircus IrememberwhenIwroteTheCircus IwaslivinginParis,orratherwewerelivinginParisJanice,Frankwasalive,theWhitneyMuseumWasstillon8thStreet,orwasitstillsomethingelse?FernandLegerlivedinourbuildingWellitwasn’treallyourbuildingitwasthebuildingwelivedinNexttoaGrandGuignoltroupewhomadealotofnoiseSothatonedayIyelledthroughaholeinthewallOfourapartmentIdon’tknowwhytherewasaholethereShutup!Andthevoicecamebacktomesayingsomething Idon’tknowwhat.OnceIsawLegerwalkoutofthebuilding Ithink.StanleyKunitzcametodinner.IwroteTheCircusIntwotries,thefirstgettingmostofthefirststanza;ThatfallIalsowroteanoperalibrettocalledLouisaorMatilda.Jean-Claudecametodinner.Fiesaid(about“cocktailsauce”)Itshouldbegoodonsomethingbutnotonthese(oysters).BythattimeIthinkIhadalreadywrittenTheCircus.PartoftheinspirationcamewhilewalkingtothepostofficeonenightAndIwroteabigsegmentofTheCircusWhenIcameback,havingbeenannoyedtohavetogoIforgetwhatIwentthereaboutYouwerebackintheapartmentwhatadumpactuallywelikedit IthinkwithyourhairandyourwritingandthepansMovingstrumminglyaboutthekitchenandIwroteTheCircusItwasasummernightnoitwasanautumnonesummerwhen IrememberitbutactuallynoautumnthatblackdusktowardthepostofficeAndIwrotemanyotherpoemsthenbutTheCircuswasthebestMaybenotbyfarthebesttherewasalsoGeographyAndtheAirplaneBettypoems(inspiredbyyou)butTheCircuswasthebest. SometimesIfeelIactuallyamthepersonWhodidthis,whowrotethat,includingthatpoemTheCircusButsometimesontheotherhandIdon’t.Therearesomanyfactorsengagingourattention! 99 Ateverymomentthehappinessofothers,thehealthofthoseweknowandourown!Andthemillionsuponmillionsofpeoplewedon’tknowandtheirwell-beingtothinkaboutSoitseemsstrangeIfoundtimetowriteTheCircusAndevenspenttwoeveningsonit,andthatIhavealsothetimeTorememberthatIdidit,andrememberyouandmethen,andwritethispoemaboutit.AtthebeginningofTheCircusTheCircusgirlsarerushingthroughthenightInthecircuswagonsandtulipsandotherflowerswillbepickedAlongtimefromnowthispoemwantstogetoffonitsownSomeplacelikeapaintingnotheldtoadepictionofcomposingTheCircus. NoelLeewasinParisthenbutusuallyoutofitInGermanyorDenmarkgivingaconcertAspartofanendlessactivityWhichwaseitherhiscareerorhishappinessoracombinationofbothOrneitherIrememberhisdarkeyeslookinghewasnervousWithmeperhapsbecauseofourdaysatHarvard. Itisunderstandableenoughtobenervouswithanybody!HowsoftlyandeasilyonefeelswhenaloneLoveofone’sfriendswhenoneiscommandingthetimeandspacesyndromeIfthat’stherightwordwhichIdoubtbuttogetherhowcomeoneissonervous?OneisnotalwaysbutwhatwasIthenandwhatamInowattemptingtocreateIfcreateistherightwordOutofthiscombinationofexperienceandalonenessAndwhoareyoutellingmeitisorisnotapoem(notyou)?GobackwithmethoughTothosenightsIwaswritingTheCircus.Doyoulikethatpoem?haveyoureadit?ItisinmybookThankYou 100 whichGrovejustreprinted.IwonderhowlongIamgoingtoliveAndwhattherestwillbelikeImeantherestofmylife. JohnCagesaidtometheothernightHowoldareyou?andItoldhimforty-six(SincethenI’vebecomeforty-seven)hesaidOhthat’sagreatageIremember.JohnCageoncetoldmehedidn’tchargemuchforhismushroomidentificationcourse(attheNewSchool)Becausehedidn’twanttomakeaprofitfromnature. HewasaheadofhistimeIwasbehindmytimewewerebothintimeBrilliantgototheheadoftheclassand“timeisariver”Itdoesn’tseemlikearivertomeitseemslikeanunformedplanDaysgobyandstillnothingisdecidedaboutWhattodountilyouknowitneverwillbeandthenyousay“time”Butyoureallydon’tcaremuchaboutitanymoreTimemeanssomethingwhenyouhavethemajorpartofyoursaheadofyouAsIdidinAix-en-ProvencethatwasthreeyearsbeforeIwroteTheCircusThatyearIwroteBricksandTheGreatAtlanticRainwayIfelttimesurroundmelikeablanketendlessandsoft IcouldgotosleependlesslyandwakeupandstillbeinitButItreasuredsecretlythepartofmethatwasindividuallychangingLikeNoelLeeIwasinterestedinmycareerAndstillambutnowitislikeatownIdon’twanttoleaveNotatowerIamclimbingopposedbyferociousenemies. InevermentionedmyfriendsinmypoemsatthetimeIwroteTheCircusAlthoughtheymeantalmostmorethananythingtomeOfthisnowforsometimeI’vefeltanattenuationSoI’mmentioningthemmaybethiswillbringthembacktomeNotthemperhapsbutwhatIfeltaboutthemJohnAshberyJaneFreilicherLarryRiversFrankO’HaraTheirnamesalonebringtearstomyeyesAsseeingPollydidlastnight. lOI ItisbeautifulatanytimebuttheparadoxisleavingitInordertofeelitwhenyou’vecomebackthesunhasdeclinedAndthepeoplearemerrierorelsethey’vegonehomealtogetherAndyouareleftalonewellyouputupwiththatyoursurenessislikethesunWhileyouhaveitbutwhenyoudon’titslack’sablackandicynight.I camehomeAndwroteTheCircusthatnight,Janice.Ididn’tcomeandspeaktoyouAndputmyarmaroundyouandaskyouifyou’dliketotakeawalkOrgototheCirqueMedranothoughthat’swhatIwrotepoemsaboutAndamwritingaboutthatnow,andnowI’malone AndthisisnotasgoodapoemasTheCircusAndIwonderifanygoodwillcomeofeitherofthemallthesame. 102 TheMagicofNumbers THEMAGICOFNUMBERS1 HowStrangeitwastohearthefurniturebeingmovedaroundintheapartmentupstairs! Iwastwenty-six,andyouweretwenty-two. THEMAGICOFNUMBERS2 YouaskedmeifIwantedtorun,butIsaidnoandwalkedon. Iwasnineteen,andyouwereseven. THEMAGICOFNUMBERS3 Yes,butdoesXreallylikeus?Wewerebothtwenty-seven. THEMAGICOFNUMBERS4 YoulooklikeJerryLewis(1950). THEMAGICOFNUMBERS5 Grandfatherandgrandmotherwantyoutogoovertotheirhousefordinner.Theyweresixty-nine,andIwastwoandahalf. THEMAGICOFNUMBERS6 OnedaywhenIwastwenty-nineyearsoldImetyouandnothinghappened. 103 THEMAGICOFNUMBERS7 No,ofcourseitwasn’tIwhocametothelibrary!Browneyes,flushedcheeks,brownhair.Iwastwenty-nine,andyouweresixteen. THEMAGICOFNUMBERS8 AfterwemadeloveonenightinRockportIwentoutsideandkissedtheroad Ifeltsocarriedaway.Iwastwenty-three,andyouwerenineteen. THEMAGICOFNUMBERS9 Iwastwenty-nine,andsowereyou.Wehadaverypassionatetime.EverythingIreadturnedintoastoryaboutyouandme,andeverything Ididwasturnedintoapoem. 104 AliveforanInstant IhaveabirdinmyheadandapiginmystomachAndaflowerinmygenitalsandatigerinmygenitalsAndalioninmygenitalsandIamafteryoubutIhaveasonginmyheartAndmysongisadove IhaveamaninmyhandsIhaveawomaninmyshoes Ihavealandmarkdecisioninmyreason IhaveadeathrattleinmynoseIhavesummerinmybrainwater IhavedreamsinmytoesThisisthematterwithmeandthehammerofmymotherandfatherWhocreatedmewitheverythingButIlackcalmIlackroseThoughIdonotlackextremedelicacyofrosepetalWhoisitthatIwishtoastonish?InthebirdcallIfoundareminderofyouButitwasthinandbrittleandgoneinaninstantHasnaturesetouttobeagreatentertainer?ObviouslynotAgreatreproducer?AgreatNothing?WellIwillleavethatuptoyou IhaveaknockingwoodpeckerinmyheartandIthinkIhavethreesoulsOneforloveoneforpoetryandoneforactingoutmyinsaneselfNotinsanebutboringbutperpendicularbutuntruebuttrueThethreerarelysingtogethertakemyhandit’sactiveTheactiveingredientinitisatouch IamLordByronIamPercyShelleyIamAriosto IeatthebaconIwentdowntheslideIhaveathunderstorminmyinsideIwillneverhateyouButhowcanthismaelstrombeappealing?doyoulikemenageries?mygodMostpeoplewantaman!SohereIam IhaveapheasantinmyremindersIhaveagoshawkinmycloudsWhateverisitwhichhasledalltheseanimalstoyou?Aresurrection?ormaybeaninsurrection?aninspiration? IhaveababyinmylandscapeandIhaveawildratinmysecretsfromyou. 105 SomeGeneralInstructions DonotbakebreadinanoventhatisnotmadeofstoneOryouriskhavingimperfectbread.Byronwrote,“ThegreatestpleasureinlifeisdrinkinghockAndsodawaterthemorningafter,whenonehasAhangover,”orwordstothateffect.ItisaPleasure,forme,ofthepast.IdonotdrinksomuchAnymore.AndwhenIdo,IamnotinsufficientlygoodShapetoenjoythehockandseltzerinthemorning. IamenviousofthispleasureasIthinkofit.DonotYoubeenvious.InfactIcannottellenvyFromwishanddesireandsharingimperfectlyWhatothershavegotandnotgot.ButenvyisagoodwordTouse,ashateis,andlust,becausetheymaketheirpointIntheworstandmostdirectway,sothatasaResultoneisabletodealwiththemandgoonone’sway. IreadDonJuantwentyyearsago,andsixyearslater Iwroteapoeminemulationofit.IbeganSearchingforanotherstanzabutgaveinTotheottavarimaafterawhile,afterI’dtriedSomepracticestanzasinit;itworkedsowellItwastoolatetostop,itseemedtome.DonotBeintoomuchofahurrytoemulatewhatYouadmire.SometimesitmaytakeanumberofyearsBeforeyouareready,butthereitis,buildingInsideyou,aconstructingegg.Low-slungBuildingsaresometimesdangeroustowalkinandOutof.AbuildingshouldbeatleastonefootandahalfAboveone’sheight,sothatifoneleapsInsurpriseorJoyorfear,one’sheadwillnotbeinjured.VeryhighceilingssuchasthoseinGothicChurchesareexcellentforgivingaspiritualfeeling.Lowroofsmakeonefeellikeamoleingeneral.ButSmallishroomscanbecozy.ManytinypeopleInalittleroommakeanamusingsight.LargePersons,bothmaleandfemale,arebestseenoutofdoors.Shipssidedagainstacanal’ssidemaybetouchedandPatted,butsleepinganimalsshouldnotbe,for 106 Theymaybite,inangerandsurprise.OfallanimalsTheduckisseventeenthlowliest,theeaglenotashighOnthelistasonewouldimagine,ratingOnlyninety-fifth.TheelephantiseithertwoorfourDependingontheauthorofthelist,andthetigerIsseven.Thelionisthreeorsix.BlueistheFavoritecolorofmanypeoplebecausetheskyIsblueandtheseaisblueandmanypeople’seyesAreblue,butblueisnotpopularinthosecountriesWhereitisthecolorofmold.InSpainblueSymbolizescowardice.InAmericaitsymbolizes“Americanness.”TheracialmixtureinNorthAmericashouldNotbemisunderstood.TheEnglishcameherefirst.AndtheIrishandtheGermansandtheDutch.TherewereSomeFrenchherealso.TheRussians,theJews,andTheBlackscameafterwards.ThewomenareonlycomingnowToanewkindofprominenceinAmerica,whereLiberationIstheirbyword.Giraffes,whichpeopleordinarilyAssociatewithAfrica,canbeseeninmanyurbanzoosAllovertheworld.Theyareanadaptableanimal.AsGreekculturewasanadaptableculture.RomeSpreaditallovertheworld.Youshouldknow.Beforeitdid,Alexanderspreaditaswell.ReadAsmanybooksasyoucanwithoutreadinginterferingWithyourtimeforliving.BoxingwasformerlyillegalInEngland,andalso,Ibelieve,inAmerica.IfYoufeelalawisunjust,youmayworktochangeit.Itisnottrue,asmanypeoplesay,thatThatisJustthewaythingsare.Or,Thosearetherules.Immutably.Therulescanbechanged,althoughItmaybeaslowprocess.Whendecoratingawindow,youShouldtrytocatchtheeyeofthepasser-by,thenHoldit;heorsheshouldbecomeconstantlymoreAbsorbedinwhatisbeingseen.StuffedanimaltoysshouldbeFluffyandapleasuretoholdinthehands.TheyShouldnotbetooresistant,norshouldtheybemadeWithanypoisonousmaterials.Becarefulnottosetfire 107 Toafriend’shouse.WhencoveringoverAgasstovewithpaperorinflammableplasticSoyoucanpaintthekitchenwithoutinjuringthestove,Besurethereisnopilotlight,orthatitisout.DonottakepillstooquicklywhenyouthinkyouhaveacoldOrotherminorailment,butwaitandseeifitGoesawaybyitself,asmanyprocessesdoWhicharcreallypartofsomethingelse,notWhatwesuspected.Raphael’sartisnolongeraspopularAsitwasfiftyyearsago,butanauraStillhangsaboutit,partlyfromitsformerrenown.ThenumberssevenandelevenareimportanttorememberindiceAsaretheexpressions“hardeight,”“LittleJoe,”and“fever,”Whichmeansfive.GirlsinshortskirtswhentheyKneeltoplaydicearebeautiful,andeveniftheyArenotveryrichorgoodrollers,maybePleasantasapartofthegame.SaintUrsulaAndhereleventhousandvirginshasRecentlybeendiscoveredtobeaprinter’smistake;Therewereonlyelevenvirgins,noteleventhousand.ThismakesitnecessarytoappendabriefexplanationWhenspeakingofApollinaire’sparodyLesOnzeMilleVerges,whichmeanseleventhousandMalesexualorgans—orsticks,forbeating.Itisapornographicbook.SexualinformationshouldbeobtainedwhileoneisyoungEnoughtoenjoyit.TolearnofcunnilingusatfiftyArguesawastedlife.OnemaybetemptedtoRushoutintothestreetsofHongKongorWhereveroneisandtrytodotoomuchallinoneday.BirdsshouldneverbechasedoutofanaturesanctuaryAndshot.Donotbelievethebeautyofpeople’sfacesIsasureindicationofvirtue.ThedaysofAllegoryareover.TheDaysofIronyarehere.IronyandDeception.Butdonothardenyourheart.RemainKindandflexible.Travelalot.ByallmeansGotoGreece.MeetpersonsofvarioussocialOrders.Moroccoshouldbevisitedbyfoot, io8 Siberiabyplane.DonotbeputoffbyThinkingofmortality.Youlivelongenough.ThereWould,ifyoulivedlonger,neverbeanynewPeople.Enjoythenewpeopleyousee.PutyourhandoutAndtouchthatgirl’sarm.IfyouareAbleto,havechildren.Whentakingpills,besureYouknowwhattheyare.Avoidcholesterol.InconversationBeunderstandingandwitty,inorderthatyoumaygiveComfortandexcitementatthesametime.ThisisthehighroadtopopularityAndsocialsuccess,butitisalsogoodForyoursoulandforyoursenseofyourself.BesupportiveofothersAttheexpenseofyourwit,nototherwise.NoJokeisworthhurtingsomeonedeeply.Avoidcontagiousdiseases.Ifyoudonothavemoney,youmustprobablyearnsomeButdoitinawaythatispleasantanddoesNottaketoomuchtime.PaintingridiculouspicturesIsonegoodway,andgivinglecturesaboutyourselfisanother. IoncehadtheideaofimportingtropicalbirdsFromAfricatoAmerica,butthetestcageofbirdsAlldiedontheship,soIwasunabletobecomeRichthatway.AnotherschemeIhadwasTotranslatesomesongsfromFrenchintoEnglish,butNoonewantedtosingthem.LivingoutsideFlorenceInFebruary,March,andAprilwasanexcellentideaForme,andmaybeforyou,althoughIrecentlyrevisitedTheplacewhereIlived,anditisnowmore“builtup”;Still,alittlebitfurtherout,itisnot,andthefruittreesThereseemthemostbeautifulintheworld.EverydayAnewflowerwouldappearinthegarden,oreveryotherday.AndIwasabletoputallthisinwhatIwrote.IletTheweatherandthelandscapebenarrativeinme.TomakemoneyBywriting,though,wasdifficult.SoItaughtEnglishinauniversityinspiteofmyfearthat Iknewnothing.DonotletyourfearofignorancekeepyouFromteaching,ifthatwouldbegoodforyou,norShouldyouletyourneedforsuccessinterferewithwhatyoulove. 109 Infact,todo.ThingshaveawayofworkingoutWhichisnonsensical,andoneshouldtrytoseeHowthatprocessworks.Ifyoucanunderstandchance.Youwillbelucky,forluckiswhatchanceisaboutTobecome,inahumancontext,eitherGoodluckorbad.YoushouldvisitplacesthatHavealotofsavorforyou.YoushouldbegladTobealive.Youmusttrytobeasgoodasyoucan. Idonotknowwhatvirtueisinanabsoluteway.ButintheparticularitisexcellencewhichdoesnotharmThematerialbutennoblesandrefinesit.So,honestyEnnoblestheheartandharmsnotthepersonorthecoinsHerememberstogiveback.So,courageennoblestheheartAndthebearer’sbody;andtendernessrefinesthetouch.TheproblemofbeinggoodandalsodoingwhatonewishesIsnotasdifficultasitseems.Itis,however.Besttogetembarkedearlyonone’sdearestdesires.Beattentivetoyourdreams.Theyareusuallyaboutsex.ButtheydealwithotherthingsaswellinanindirectfashionAndcontaininformationthatyoushouldhave.Youshouldalsoreadpoetry.Donoteattoomanybananas.Inthespringtime,plant.Intheautumn,harvest.Inthesummerandwinter,exercise.DonotputYourfingerinsideaclamshellorItmaybesnappedoffbythelivingclam.DonotwearashirtMorethantwotimeswithoutsendingittothelaundry.Beabeefancieronlyifyouhaveafacenet.Avoidflies.Hornets,andwasps.Claspotherpeople’shandsfirmlyWhenyouareintroducedtothem.Say“Iamgladtomeetyou!”Beabletomakeamouthandcheekslikeafish.ItIsentertaining.SpeakinginaccentsCanalsoentertainpeople.ButdonotthinkMainlyofbeingentertaining.Thinkofyourdeath.Thinkofthedeathofthefishyoujustimitated.Beartistic,andbeunfamiliar.Thinkofthebluesky,howartistshaveImitatedit.Thinkofyoursecretestthoughts.no Howpoetshaveimitatedthem.ThinkofwhatyoufeelSecretly,andhowmusichasimitatedthat.Makeamoue.GetfaucetsforeverywateroutletinyourHouse.YoumayliketospendsomesummersonAnisland.BuywoolenmaterialinScotlandandhaveTheclothcutinLondon,lapelsmadeinFrance.BecomereligiouswhenyouaretiredofeverythingElse.Asalittleoldmanorwoman,dieInafineandoriginalspiritthatisyoursalone.Whenyouaredead,waste,andmakeroomforthefuture.Donotmaketeafromwaterwhichisalreadyboiling.Usethewaterjustasitstartstoboil.OtherwiseItwillnotsuccessfully“draw”thetea,orTheteawillnotsuccessfully“draw”it.ByronWrotethatnomanunderthirtyshouldeverseeAnuglywoman,suggestingdesireshouldbesostrongItaffectedtheprinceliestofsenses;andSchopenhauerSuggestedtheeliminationofthehumanspeciesAsthewaytoescapefromtheWill,whichhesawasamonstrousDemon-likeforcewhichdestroysus.WhenPleasureismild,youshouldenjoyit,andWhenitisviolent,permitit,asfarasYoucan,toenjoyyou.PainshouldbeDealtwithasefficientlyaspossible.To“cure”adeadoctopusYouholditbyonelegandbangitagainstarock.Thismakesanoiseheardallaroundtheharbor.Butitisnecessary,forotherwisethemeatwouldbetootough.Fowlarebestpluckedbyhumans,butmachinesAremorehumanitarian,sinceextendedchickenPluckingisanunpleasantjob.DonoteatunwashedbeetsOrrarepork,norshouldyougobbleuncookeddough.Fruits,vegetables,andcheesemakeanexcellentdiet.Youshouldunderstandsomescience.ElectricityIsfascinating.DonotbedefeatedbytheFeelingthatthereistoomuchforyoutoknow.ThatIsamythoftheoppressor.YouareCapableofunderstandinglife.Anditisyoursalone III Andonlythistime.SomeonewhoexcitesyouShouldbetoldso,andloved,ifyoucan,butnooneShouldbeabletoshakeyousomuchthatyouwishtoGiveup.ThesensationsyouteelarecausedbyoutsidePhenomenaandinsideimpulses.WhateveryouExperienceisboth“apersonoutthere”andadreamAswellasunwashedelectrons.ItisyourtasktoseethisthroughToaconclusionthatmakessensetoallconcerned.Nowgo.YoucannotcomebackuntiltheselessonsarelearnedAndyoucanshowthatyouhavelearnedthemforyourself. TheArtofPoetry Towriteapoem,perfectphysicalconditionIsdesirablebutnotnecessary.KeatswroteInpoorhealth,asdidD.H.Lawrence.AcombinationOfdiseaseandoldageisanimpedimenttowriting,butNeitheris,alone,unlessthereisarteriosclerosis—thatis.Hardeningotthearteries—butthatweshallcountasadiseaseAccompanyingoldageandthereforeanegativecondition.MentalhealthiscertainlynotanecessityfortheCreationofpoeticbeauty,butadegreeofitWouldseemtobe,exceptinrarecases.SchizophrenicpoetryTendstobeloose,disjointed,uncriticalofitself,insomewaysLikewhatisbestinourmodernpracticeofthepoeticartButunlikeitinothers,initslackofconcernForintensityandnuance.AfewgreatpoemsBypoetssupposedtobe“mad”areofcourseknowntousall.SuchasthoseofChristopherSmart,butIwonderhowcrazytheywere.Thesepoetswhowrotesuchcontraptionsofexigentart?AsforBlake’sbeing“crazy,”thatseemstomeveryunlikely. ButwhataboutWordsworth?Notcrazy,Imean,butwhatabouthislaterwork,boringTothepointofinanity,almost,andthedestructive“corrections”hemadeTohisPrelude,asitnosedalong,throughtheshallowsofart?Hewasreallyterribleafterhewrotethe“Ode:IntimationsofImmortalityfromRecollectionsofEarlyChildhood,”forthemostpart.Orsoitseemstome.WaltWhitman’s“corrections,”too,oftheLeavesofGrass,Andespecially“SongofMyself,”arealmostalwaysterrible. IstheresomewaytoridetooldageandtofameandacceptanceAndprideinoneselfandtheknowledgesocietyapprovesoneWithoutgettinglousierandlousieranddepletedoftalent?Yes,Yeatsshowsitcouldbe.AndSophocleswrotepoetryuntilhewasahundredandone.Orahundred,anyway,anddrankwineanddancedallnight. ButhewasanAncientGreekandsomaynothelpushere.OnTheotherhand,hemay.Thereis,itwouldseem,asenseInwhichonemustgrowanddevelop,andyetstayyoung — Notperoxide,notstupid,nottransplantinghairtolookpeppy.Butyounginone’sheart.AndforthisitisagoodideatohavesomeFriendswhowriteaswellasyoudo,whoknowwhatyouaredoing.Andknowwhenyouaredoingsomethingwrong.Theyshouldhavequalitiesthatyoucanneverhave.Tokeepyoucontinuallystrivingupanimpossiblehill.Thesefriendsshouldsupplysuchcompetitionaswillmakeyou,attimes,veryuncomfortable.AndyoushouldtakecareofyourphysicalbodyaswellAsofyourpoeticheart,sinceconsecutivehoursofadvancedconcentrationWillbeprecioustoyourwritingandmaynotbepossibleItyouareexhaustedandill.SometimesanabnormalorsickstateWillbeinspiring,andonecanallowoneselfacertainnumber.Buttheyshouldnotbetherule.DrinkingalcoholisallrightIfnotinexcess,andIwoulddoubtthatitwouldbebeneficialDuringcompositionitself.Asformarijuana,therearethosewhoClaimtobeabletowritewellunderitsinfluenceButIhaveyettoseethefirstevidenceforsuchclaims.Strongerdrugsareludicrouslyinappropriate,sincetheydestroyJudgmentAndtaste,andmakeoneeitherlikeordislikeeverythingonedoes.Orelseturnlifeintoadream.Onedoesnotwritewellinone’ssleep. Asforfollowingfashionableliterarymovements.Itisalmostirresistible,andforawhileIcanseenoharminit.Butthesooneryoufindyourownstylethebetteroffyouwillbe.Thenall“movements”fitintoit.Youhavean“exercycle”ofyourown.TryingoutallkindsofstylesandimitatingpoetsyoulikeAndincorporatinganythingvaluableyoumayfindthere.Thesearesoundprocedures,andinfactIthinkevenessentialTotheperfectionofanoriginalstylewhichisyoursalone.Anoriginalstylemaynotlastmorethanfouryears.Oreventhreeoreventwo,sometimesonrareoccasionsone.Andthenyoumustfindanother.ItisconceivableeventhatastyleForaveryexigentpoetwouldbeforoneworkonly. Afterwhichitwouldbeexhausted,limping,unabletosustainanywrongorright.By“exigent”Imeanextremelycareful,wantingeachpoemtobeaconclusionOfeverythinghesenses,feels,andknows.Theexigentpoethashissatisfactions,whicharerelativelyspecialButthatisnottheonlykindofpoetyoucanbe.ThereisapleasureinbeingVenus,Insendinglovetoeveryone,inbeingZeus,Insendingthundertoeveryone,inbeingApolloAndeverydaysendingoutlight.ItisapleasuretowritecontinuallyAndwell,andthatisaspecialpoeticdreamWhichyoumayhaveoryoumaynot.Notallwritershaveit.BrowningoncewroteapoemeverydayofoneyearAndfoundit“didn’tworkoutwell.”Butwhoknows?Hewentonforayear—somethingmusthavebeenworkingout.Andwhyonlyonepoemaday?Whynotseveral?Whynotoneeveryhourforeighttotenhoursaday?Thereseemsnoreasonnottotryitifyouhavetheinclination. Somepoetslike“savingup”forpoems,othersliketospendincessantlywhattheyhave.Inspending,ofcourse,yougetmore,thereisa“bottomlesspocket”Principleinvolved,sinceyourfeelingsarechangingeveryinstantAndthelanguagehasmillionsofwords,andthenumberofcombinationsisinfinite.True,onemayfeel,perhapsPuritanically,thatOnepersoncanonlyhavesomuchtosay,and,besides,tenthousandpoemsperannumPerpersonwouldfloodtheearthandperhapseventuallytheuniverse.Andonewouldnotwantsomanypoems—sothereisa“quotasystem”Secretly,ornotsosecretly,atwork.“IfIcanwriteonegoodpoemayear, Iamgrateful,”thenotedPoetsays,or“six”or“three.”Well,maybeforthatPoet,Butforyou,fellowpaddler,andforme,perhapsnot.Besides,IthinkpoemsAreesthetecologicallyharmlessandpsychodegradable Andneverwouldtheychokethespiritsoftheworld.ForapoemonlyaffectsusAnd“exists,”really,ifitisworthit,andtherecan’tbetoomanyofthose.Writingconstantly,inanycase,isthepoeticdreamDiametricallyopposedtothe“ultimatedistillation”Dream,whichisthatoftheexigentpoet.JusthowgoodapoemshouldbeBeforeonereleasesit,eitherfromone’sownworkorthenintothepurviewofothers.Maybedecidedbyapplyingthefollowingrules:aski)Isitastonishing?AmIpleasedeachtimeIreadit?DoesitsaysomethingIwasunawareofBeforeIsatdowntowriteit?and2)DoIstandupfromitabettermanOrawiser,orboth?orcanthetwonotbeseparated?3)IsitreallybymeOrhaveIstolenitfromsomewhereelse?(Thissometimeshappens.Thoughitiscomparativelyrare.)4)Doesitrevealsomethingaboutme Ineverwantanyonetoknow?5)Isitsufficiently“modern”?(Moreaboutthisalittlelater)6)Isitinmyown“voice”?Alongwith,ofcourse,themoreobviousquestions,suchas7)Isthereanyunwantedawkwardness,cheapeffects,askingillegitimatelyforattention,Show-offmess,cuteness,pseudo-profundity,oldhatchecks.Unassimilateddreamfragments,orother“literary,”“kiss-me-I’m-poetical”junk?Ismypoemfreeofthis?8)DoesitmovesmoothlyandswiftlyFromexcitementtodreamandthencomefloodingreasonWithpurityandsoundnessandJoy?9)Isthisthekindofpoem Iwouldenvyinanotherifhecouldwrite?10)WouldIbehappytogotoHeavenwiththispinnedontomyAngelicJacketasanentranceshow?Oh,wouldI?AndifyoucananswertoalltheseYesExceptforthe4thone,towhichtheanswershouldbeNo,Thenyoucanreleaseit,atleastforthetimebeing. Iwouldlookatitagain,though,perhapsintwohours,thenafteroneortwoweeks.Andthenamonthlater,atwhichtimeyoucanprobablybesure. TolookatapoemagainofcoursecausesanxietyInmanycases,butthatpainawritermustlearntoendure.ForwithoutithewillbelikeachickenwhichneverknowswhatitisdoingAndgoesfeatheringandflutteringthroughlife.WhenonefindsthepoemInadequate,thenonemustrevise,andthiscanbeveryhardgoingIndeed.Fortheoriginal“inspiration”isnotthere.SomepoetsnevermastertheArtofdoingthis,andremain“minor”oralmostnothingatall.Suchhavemysympathybutnotmypraise.MysympathybecauseSuchworkisdifficult,andmostpersonsaccomplishnothingwhatsoeverInthecourseoftheirlives;atleastthesepoetsarewriting“Firstversions,”buttheycanneverwinthepraiseOfadiscerningreaderuntiltheytakehard-heartedRevisiontobedAndbendhertotheirwillandcreatethroughher“second-time-around”poemsOreven“third-time-around”ones.ThereareseveralwaystowinThefavorsofthislady.Oneisunstintinglabor,butbecarefulYoudonotruinwhatisalreadytherebyunfeelingrewritingThatmakesitmore“logical”butcutsoutitsheart.Sometimesneglectingapoemforseveralweeksisbest.Asifyouhadforgottenyouwroteit,andchangingitthenAsswiftlyasyoucan—inthatway,youwillavoidatleastdry“re-detailing”Whichisfataltoanyart.SometimestheconfidenceyouhavefromasuccessfulpoemCanhelpyoutofindforanotheronethechangesyouwant.Actually,anight’ssleepandanewdayfilledwithconfidenceareverydesirable.And,onceyougetusedtotheordinarypainsthatgowithrevising.Youmaygrowtolikeitverymuch.ItgivesonethestrangefeelingThatoneis“workingon”something,asanengineerdoes,orapilot whensomethinggoeswrongwiththeplane;whereastheinspiredfirstversionofapoemIsmorelikesimplyalightningflashtotheheart.Revisinggivesonethefeelingofbeingabuilder.Andifitbringspain?Well,Itsometimesdoes,andwomenhavepaingivingbirthtochildrenYetoftenwishtodosoagain,andperhapsthegrizzlybearhaspainBurrowingdownintothegroundtosleepallwinter.InwritingThepainisrelativelyminor.WeneednotspeakofitagainExceptinthecaseofthefearthatonehas“lostone’stalent,”WhichIwillgointoimmediately.ThisfearIsaperfectlylogicalfearforpoetstohave.Andallofthem,fromtimetotime,haveit.ItisveryrareForwhatonedoesbestandthatonwhichone’shappinessdependsTosolargeanextent,tobeitselfdependentonfactorsSeeminglybeyondone’scontrol.ForwhencecomethInspiration?WillshestayinherBowerofBlissorcometomethisevening?HaveIgottentoooldforherkisses?Willshelikethatboythereratherthanme?AmIadried-upoldhog?Isthisthentheendofit?Haven’tI LostthatsweeteasyknackIhadlastweek.Lastmonth,lastyear,lastdecade,whichpleasedeveryoneAndespeciallypleasedme?Inolongercanfeelthewarmthofit — Oh,Ihaveindeedlostit!Etcetera.AndwhenyouwriteanewpoemYoulike,youforgetthisanguish,andsoontillyourdeath.Whichyou’llberememberedbeyond,notfor“keepingyourtalent,”Butforwhatyouwrote,inspiteofyourworriesandfears. Thetruthis,Ithink,thatonedoesnotloseone’stalent.Althoughonecanmisplaceit—inattemptstoremaininthepast.InprofitlessventuresintendedtopleasethosewhomCouldoneseethemclearlyonewouldnotwishtoplease.Inoperalibrettos,oreveninone’slifeSomewhere.Butyoucanalmostalwaysfindit,perhapsintryingnewformsOrnotinformatallbutinthe(seeming)lackofit — Write“streamofconsciousness.”Or,differentlyagain,dosometranslations. ii8 Renouncerepeatingthesuccessesoftheyearsbefore.SeekAsuccessofatypeundreamedof.Writeapoeticfishingmanual.TryanArtotLove.Whatever,beonthelookoutforwhatyoufearedyouhadlost,Thetalentyoumisplaced.TheonlywaysreallytoloseitAreseriousdamagetothebrainorbeingsoattractedTosomethingelse(suchasmoney,sex,repairingexpensiveengines)Thatyouforgetitcompletely.Inthatcase,howcarethatitislost?Inspiteofthetruthofallthis,however,IamawareThatfearoflosttalentisanaturalpartofapoet’sexistence.Sobepreparedforit,anddonotletitgetyoudown. JusthowmuchexperienceapoetshouldhaveTobesurehehasenoughtobesureheisanadequateknowerAndfeelerandthinkerofexperienceasitexistsinourtimeIsatoughonetoanswer,andtheonlysureruleIcanthinkofIsexperienceasmuchasyoucanandwriteasmuchasyoucan.Thesetwocanbecontradictory.AgreatmanyexperiencesareworthlessAtleastasfaraspoetryisconcerned.Whereastheleastpromising.Seemingly,willthrowawholeepicinone’slap.However,thatisSarajevoAndnotcause.Probably.IdonotknowwhattotellyouThatwouldapplytoallcases.IwouldsuggesttravelAndlearningatleastoneotherlanguage(fiveorsixCouldbeadistraction).AsforsexualityandotherSensualpleasures,youmustworkthatoutforyourself.Youshouldknowtheworld,men,women,space,wind,islands,governments.Thehistoryofart,newsofthelostcontinents,plants,evenings.Mornings,days.Butyoumustalsohavetimetowrite.Youneedenvironmentsforyourpoemsandalsopeople.Butyoualsoneedlife,youneedtocareaboutthesethingsAndthesepersons,andthatisthedifficulty,thatWhatyouwillfindbesttowriteaboutcannotbeexperiencedMerelyas“material.”TherearesomeartsonepicksupOf“livingsideways,”andforwardsandbackwardsatthesametime.Buttheyoftendonotwork—ordo,toone’sdisadvantage:Youfeel,“Ididnotexperiencethat.Thatcowdid 119 MorethanI.Orthat‘BlueMan’withoutathoughtintheworldBeyondexisting.Heistheonewhoreallyexists.Thatistruepoetry.Iamnothing.”IsuggestwaitingafewhoursBeforecomingtosucharashdecisionandgoingoffRidingonacamelyourself.ForyoucannotescapeyourmindAndyourstrangeinterestinwritingpoetry,whichwillmakeyou,Necessarily,anexperiencerandun-experiencerOflifeatthesametime,butyoushouldrealizethatwhatyoudoIsimmenselyvaluable,anddifficult,too,inawayridingacamelisnot.Thoughthatisvaluabletoo—youtwowillamazeeachother.TheBlueManandyou,andthatisalsoapartoflifeWhichyoumustcatchinyourpoem.Asforhowmuchone’spoetryShould“reflectone’sexperience,”IdonotthinkitcanavoidDoingthat.ThenaiveversionofsuchaconcernOfcourseisstupid,butifyoufeeltheneedto“confront”Something,tryit,andseehowitgoes.To“reallyfindyouremotions,”Write,andkeepworkingatit.SuccessintheliteraryworldIsmostlyirrelevantbutmaypleaseyou.ItisgoodtohaveafriendTohelpyoupastthemonstersontheway.BecomingfamouswillnothurtyouUnlessyouarefoolishlyovercaptivatedandforgetThatthistooismerelyapartofyour“experience.”ForthosewhomakepoetsfamousIngeneralknownothingaboutpoetry.Rememberyourobligationistowrite.And,inwriting,tobeseriouswithoutbeingsolemn,freshwithoutbeingcold.Tobeinclusivewithoutbeingasinine,particularWithoutbeingpicky,femininewithoutbeingeffeminate.Masculinewithoutbeingbrutish,humanwhilekeepingalltheanimalgracesYouhadinsidethewomb,andbeast-likewithoutbeinginhuman.Letyourlanguagebedelectablealways,andfreshandtrue.Don’tbeconceited.LetyourcompassionguideyouAndyourexcitement.Andalwaysbringyourendeavorstotheirend. OnethingapoemneedsistobecompleteInitselfandnotneedotherstocomplementit. 120 ThereforethispoemaboutwritingshouldbecompleteWithinformationabouteverythingconcernedintheactOfcreatingapoem.Aworkalsoshouldnotbetoolong.EachlineshouldgiveagatherednewsensationOf“Oh,nowIknowthat,andwanttogoon!”“Measure,”whichdecideshowlongapoemshouldbe.Isdifficult,becausepossibleelaborationisendless.Asendlessasthedesiretowrite,sothedecisiontoendApoemisgenerallyarbitraryyetmustbemadeExceptinthefollowingtwocases:whenoneembarksonanepicConfidentthatitwilllastallone’slife.Orwhenonedeliberatelycontinuesitpasthopeofconcluding — EdmundSpenserandEzraPoundseemexamplesOfoneofthesecasesortheother.AndnooneknowshowTheFaerieQueeriecontinued(ifitdid,asonewritersaid.ThelastpartsdestroyedinthesackingofSpenser’shouseBythecrazedbutjustifiedIrish,orwasitbyhisservants?).ItmaybethatSpenserneverwentbeyondBookSixInanyseriousway,becausethethoughtofendingwasunpleasant.Yethisplanforthebook,ifhewroteon,wouldobligehimtoendit.ThisunlikePoundWhohadnosetdeterminedplacetocease.ComingtoastopAndgivingdeterminedformiseasiestindrama.Itmaybe,orinshortsongs,like“We’llGoNoMorea-Roving,”oneofByron’smostTouchingpoems,anabsolutesuccess,thebestShortone,Ibelieve,thatByronwrote.InalltheseCases,then,exceptfor“lifetime”poems,thereisapointonereachesWhenoneknowsthatonemustcometoanend.Andthatisthepointthatmustbereached.Toreachit,however.Onemayhavetocutoutmuchofwhatonehaswrittenalongtheway.FortheenddoesnotnecessarilycomeofitselfButmustbecoaxedforthfromthematerial,likeablossom. AnyonewhowouldliketowriteanepicpoemMaywishtohaveaplotinmind,oratleastamood—theMinimumrequirementisaform.Sometimesastanza.LikeSpenser’s,orAriosto’sottavarima,willsetthepoemgoing I2I DownhillanduphillandallaroundexperienceAndtheworldinthemaddestwayimaginable.Enough,Inthiscase,tobegin,andtoletoneselfbecarriedBythewindofeight(or,inthecaseofSpenser,nine)loudrhymes.SometimesblankversewilltempttheamateurOfendlesswriting;sometimesacouplet;sometimes“freeverse.”“Skeltonics”arehardtosustainoveranextendedperiodAsare,inEnglish,andinGreekforallIknow,“Sapphics.”TheepichasaclearadvantageoveranysortoflyricPoeminbeingtherewhenyougobacktoittocontinue.TheLyricisfleeting,usuallycaughtinoneBreathornotatall(thoughseewhathasbeensaidbeforeAboutrevision—itcanbedone).Theepiconeiswriting,however.LikeagreatsheepdogisalwaysthereWaggingandwaitingtowelcomeoneintothecornerTobepettedandsentforthtofetchanarrativebone.Owritinganepic!whatapleasureyouareAndwhatanagony!Butthepleasureisgreaterthantheagony.Andtheachievementisthesweetestthingofall.Menraisetheproblem,“Howcanonewriteanepicinthemodernworld?”Onecananswer,“Lookaroundyou—tellmehowonecannot!”WhichismoreorlesswhatJuvenalsaidaboutSatire,butepicisaformOurinternationaltime-spaceplancriesoutfor—orsoitseemsTooneobserver.Thelyricisanecessitytoo.AndthoseyoumaywriteeitheraloneOrintheintersticesofyourepicpoem,likeflowersCranniedintheGreatWallofChinaasitsweepsacrosstheearth.Towriteonlylyricsistobesad,perhaps.Orfidgety,oroverexcited,toodependentoncircumstance — Butthereisawayoutofthat.ThelyricmustbebentIntoamoreoperativeform,sothatFragmentsofbeingreflectabsolutes(seeforexampletheverseofWilliamCarlosWilliamsorFrankO’Hara),andyoucangoonWithoutsayingitalleverytime.Ifyoucanmastertheknackofit.Youareafortunatepoet,andaskilledone.YoushouldreadAgreatdeal,andbethinkingofwritingpoetryallthetime. 122 Totalabsorptioninpoetryisoneofthefinestthingsinexistence — Itshouldnotmakeyoufeelguilty.Everyoneisabsorbedinsomething.Thesailorisabsorbedinthesea.Poetryisthemediationoflife. TheepicisparticularlyappropriatetoourcontemporaryworldBecausewearesouncertainofeverythingandalsoknowtoomuch,Acuriousandseeminglycontradictorycondition,whichtheepicsalvesBygivingusourknowledgeandourgrasp,withallourlackofcontrolaswell.Thelyricadjuststouslikeabutterfly,thenepicallyeludesourgrasp.PoeticdramainourtimeseemsimpossiblebutactuallyexistsasAfabulouspossibilityJustwithinourreach.TowritedramaOnemustconceiveofananswerertowhatonesays,asIamnowconceivingofyou. Astowhetherornotyouuserhymeandhow“modern”youareItissomethingyourgeniuscandecideoneverymorningWhenyougetoutofbed.Whataclearday!Goodluckatit!Thoughmeterisprobably,andrhymetoo,probably,deadForawhile,exceptinnarrativestanzas.Youtryitout.ThepleasureoftheeasyinflectionbetweenmeterandtheseeasyvocablelinesIsapleasure,ifyouareabletohaveit,youareunlikelytorenounce.Asfor“surrealistic”methodsandtechniques,theyhavebecomeaNaturalpartofwriting.Yourpoetry,ifpossible,shouldbeextendedSomewhatbeyondyourexperience,whilestillremainingtruetoit;UnconsciousmaterialshouldplayalusciouspartInwhatyouwrite,sincewithouttheunconsciouspartYouknowverylittle;andyourplaineststatementsshouldbeEvenbetterthanplain.Areadershouldputyourworkdownpuzzled.Distressed,andilluminated,readytobelieveItiscurioustobealive.AsforyoursenseofwhatgoodyouDobywriting,comparedtowhatgoodstatesmen,doctors.Flowersalesmen,andmissionariesdo,perhapsyoudolessAndperhapsmore.IfyouwouldliketotryoneoftheseOtheroccupationsforawhile,tryit.IimagineyouwillfindThatpoetrydoessomethingtheydonotdo,whetheritis 123 Moreimportantornot,andifyoulikepoetry,youwilllikedoingthatyourself. Poetryneednotbeanexclusiveoccupation.Somethinkitshould,somethinkitshouldnot.ButyoushouldHaveyearsforpoetry,oratleastifnotyearsmonthsAtcertainpointsinyourlife.Weeks,days,andhoursmaynotsuffice.Almostanyamountoftimesufficestobea“minorpoet”OnceyouhavemasteredacertainamountofthecraftForwritingapoem,butIdonotseethegoodofminorpoetry.LikegoingtotheTourd’Argenttogetdinnerforyourdog.Or“almost”beingfriendswithsomeone,orhangingaroundbutnotattendingaschool.Orbeinganurse’saidefortherestofyourlifeaftergettingadegreeinmedicine.Whatisthepointofit?AndsomemaywishtowritesongsAndusetheirtalentthatway.Othersmayevenendupwritingads.Tothoseofyouwhoareleft,whentheseothershavedeparted.Andyouareastrangebunch,Ialoneaddressthesewords. Itistruethatgoodpoetryisdifficulttowrite.Poetryisanescapefromanxietyandasourceofitaswell.Onthewhole,itseemstomeworthwhile.AttheendofapoemOnemaybetemptedtogrowtoouniversal,philosophical,andvagueOrtobringinHistory,ortheSea,butoneshouldnotdothatIfonecanpossiblyhelpit,sinceitmakesEachthingonewritessoundlikeeverythingelse.Andpoetryandlifearenotlikethat.NowIhavesaidenough. 124 OnBeauty BeautyissometimespersonifiedAsabeautifulwoman,andthispersonificationissatisfyingInthat,probably,ofallthebeautifulthingsoneseesAbeautifulpersonisthemostinspiring,because,inlookingather.Oneissweptbydesires,asthesailsaresweptinthebay,andwhenthebodyisexcitedBeautyismoreevident,whetheroneisawakeorasleep.AbeautifulpersonalsosuggestsawayTobeatonewithbeauty,tobeunitedwithit,physically,withmorethanoureyes.Andstrangeitis,thistactileexperienceOfbeauty,andthesubjectofmanyotherworks.ThefirstbeautyoneseesThatoneisconsciousofas“beauty,”whatisthat?Somesay“Themother’sface”—butIdonotthinkThebabyisconsciousofanythingas“beauty”—perhapsyearsafterWhenhelooksatCarpaccio’sSaintUrsula,hethinksof“mother”Subconsciously,andthatiswhyhefindsher''bella—Poianchebellissima,”ashesaysinItalianTotheguardorfellow-viewerathisside.TheguardsmokesacigaretteLater,onthestepsofthepalazzo,andhegazesatthebluesky.Andforhimthatisbellissima.PerhapstheskyremindshimOfsomeone’seyes.Butwhyisthat,thishumanreminder.Ifthatiswhataccountsforbeauty,soenchanting?Likeathigh,theislandofKosIsextremelylovely,asaremanyotherGreekislands—Lemnos,Poros,andCharybdis.Wecouldsailamongthem,happy,fortunateTobeinsuchplaces,yettormentedbyaninnersenseOfanxietyandguilt,beleagueredbyafeelingwehadtornOurselvesfromwhatisreallyimportant,simplyforthisDeviousexperiencingof“beauty,”whichmaybenothingbutaclumsysubstituteForseeingourmothersagain.Butitisnotthat.Notasubstitute,butsomethingelse.ThereisnogoingbackwardsinPleasure,asHemingwaywrote,inDeathintheAfternoon,speakingofManoleteWhochangedtheartofbullfightingaround,andthereis 125 Nogoingbackwards,either,inbeauty.Mothermaystillbethere.Indimityorinnakednesseven,butonceyouhaveseenLemnosItisalloverformother,andSamosandChiosandKos,andOnceyouhaveseenthegirlsofyourowntime.Perhapsone’searliestexperienceOfbeautyisasortofconcentrate,withwhichonebegins.Andaddsthewaterofalifeofone’sown;thenFlavorscome,andcolors,andflowers(ifone’sMotherisJapanese,perhaps),mountainscoveredwithflowers,andcloudswhicharetheColorsofblossomingtrees.OnecannotgobacktoaNightingaleinthehopeofgettinga“morefundamentalExperience”ofitthanonehasgottenfromKeats’spoem.ThisSchemaisnotimpoverishingbutenriching.OnedoesNothavetheOdeinsteadofthebird,onehasthemboth.AndsoWithmother(althoughmotherdies),andsowiththepeopleWelove,andwiththeotherthingsofthisworld.What,inFact,isprobablythecaseisthatthethighAndnoseandforeheadofapersonhaveaninterchangeableRelationshipwithlandscape;weseeThepersonfirst:asbabieswearen’ttourists,andournew-flungeyesArenotaccustomedtolookingatmountains,althoughSoonweseebreasts—andlaterseetheCatskills,theBerkshiresandtheAlps.AndasweweremovedbybreastsbeforeWearemovedbymountainsnow.DoesthatmeantheWorldisforustoeat?thatourlivesareaconstantre-Gression?Or“Platoinsideout”?Ormightitnotmean,as Ihavesuggested,thatweareborntoloveeitherorboth? Beautiful,Charybdis,areyourarms,andbeautifulyourhands;Beautifulintheclearbluewateraretheswiftwhite-tintedwaves;Beautifulisthe“starlight”(isthereanylightthere.Really?WemaycometothequestioninawhileofwhetherBeautyisareflection);beautifulisthecopyOfMichelangelo’sDavid,andtheoriginal;beautifultheregattaOfhappydaysonereceives,andbeautifulthehaymowFromwhichthebirdshavejustflownaway.Ifthey 126 Haveleftsomeeggsthere,letusgoandlookatthemToseeiftheyarebeautifulaswell. Ifallthesethingsarecarry-oversfrommother,Thenmotheriseverywhere,shecompletesourconsciousnessOneverysideandofeverysightwesee.Wethankyou,mother.Ifthatisso,andwewillleaveyouthereatthebeginningofitall,withdad. ItisalwaysapossibilitythatbeautydoesnotexistIniherealestsense,butthatisjustastrueofeverythingelse.SoinawayitdoesnotmodifythispoembutactuallystrengthensitBybeingapartoftheawarenessthatputsittogether. Beautysuggestsendlessnessandtimelessness,butbeautyIsfleetinginindividualinstances,thoughaperson’sOralandscape’sbeautymaylastforquitealongwhile.Itisworthpreserving,byexercise,gooddiet,andotherWaysofkeepingingoodhealth,andinthecaseofLandscape,carefulgardening,andgood,enforceablezoningandAnti-pollutionlaws.EventhoughitmaycausedesperationIntheabstract,thethoughtthat“beautyisonlyforaday,”Sotospeak,inindividualinstancesitneednot.AgoodNight’ssleepandwakeuphappyatallthatisbeautifulnowIsthebestremedy.ItisJustaqualityofbeautythatItcomesanditgoes.Wearecontentedwiththeocean’sBeingthatway,andsummer,winter,fall,andSpringalsoleaveandreturn.IfbeautydoesnotreturnInallcasestothesameobjects,wemustsimplybealertandFinditwhereithasgone.EverygoodartistknowsThis,andeverypersonshouldknowitaswell,itbeingOnethingonecanlearnfromart,andofcourseasIsaidFromclosestudyofnature—thoughartissometimeseasierTolearnfrom,whetheroneisviewingitorcreatingit.People,ofcourse,areoftendepressed.Despitephilosophyandart,aboutthelossoftheirownBeauty,anditisafactthatonceonehassomething 127 Tonolongerhaveitisasorrow,andthereisnothingThispoemcandoaboutthat.Ontheotherhand,Youparticipatedinitforawhile(fortwentyorforFortyyears)andthatisprettygood.Andthereitis.Shiningintheworld.Yourownexterioris,afterAll,justatinypartofthat. BeautyquitenaturallyseemsasifitwouldbebeautifulNomatterhowwelookedatit,butthisisnotalwaystrue.TakeamicroscopetoManyvarietiesofbeautyandtheyaregone.Ayounggirl’sLovelycomplexion,forexample,revealsgiganticpores,hideously,gapinglyEmbeddedinher,asGulliveramongtheBrobdingnagiansobserved.AndPutsomeofhergoldenhairunderthemicroscope:huge.Portentous,menacingtubes.ButsinceOureyesaren’tmicroscopic,whocares?TohaveanOperationtomakethemsowouldbeinsane.AcertainSanityisnecessaryforlife,andevenourdeepeststudiesneednotCarryusbeyondacertainplace,i.e.righthere,theplaceWherewewouldgetmicroscopiceyes.NorisitnecessarytoPluckouttheeyesofananimal(adog,say)andTransplantthemforourown,sowecansecBeautyasadogseesit,orasakangarooorasarhinoceros.Wedonotknowifanimalsseebeautyatall,orifTheymerelyseeconvenienceandsex,acertainusefulloghereorthereaLoyalty-retainingmovingcreature.Idonotthinkweneedtoknow.Physically,inourownbodies.Togiveupourhumaneyes.Andindeedourhumanbrain,forthoseofahorseorlionmightBefantastictowriteabookabout,butthenwewouldNeverknowanythingelse.Isuggest,instead.Walkingaroundbeautifulobjects,ifonecan,forthatIssometimesverypleasantandrevealsnewerand,ifThatispossible,evenmorebeautifulviews.One’sfirstviewOftheBayofBaia,forexample,maybeimprovedSharplybytheviewfromaboatcomingintotheharbororFromtheHotelShamrockonthemountain’speak.Firstsightofagirl 28 Isoftenoneofbestones,butlater,sighingaboveherinbed.Sheisevenmorebeautiful.Andthenina.m,wakingyouupWithahappyalarm.WhowouldwantmicroscopiceyesatSuchamoment?ormacroscopicones,forthatmatter,whichwouldmakeYourgirllookextremelytiny,almostinvisible,likeaninsectYoumightswat,ifyouweren’tcareful;andyouwouldfeelFunny,wonderinghowsomeonesosmallCouldmakeyoufeelsohappy;anditwouldbesohallucinatory,toGotobedwithherandholdherinyourarms,forunlessyouhadMacrotactilearmandhandnervesaswell,shewouldFeelaslargeasyouare,almost,andyetbesosmall!YouWouldthinkyouwerestonedonsomethingmonstrous.IthinkTheproportionbetweeneyeandnature,then,is,asFarasbeautygoes,themostimportantproportionofall. Likeyourowneyes,itisprobablybesttoacceptyourowncultureInrespondingtowhatisbeautiful.TotrytotransformyourselfToanAncientMesopotamianoraNavajopriestInordertodecideonthebeautyofastallionoraStoneJarcouldendupbeinganimpedimenttoactuallyseeinganything.SomeKnowledgeishelpful,butyoushouldexercisereasonandcontrol. Ingeneral,anysortofartificialaidsTolookingatsomethingmaybeanimpedimenttobeautyUnlessyouaresothoroughlyaccustomedtothemthatYoudonotknowtheyarethere.Soatelescope.WhenlookingattheValleyoftheArnoforthefirsttime,maynotGivethepleasureyoumightgetfromyournakedeye.EvenifyoureyedidnotenableyoutoseethingsinSomuchdetail.Eyeglassescanbeannoyingatfirst,asWell,andevensuchaslightthingasamap,lookedatTooclosely,cankeepyoufromenjoyingthelandscapeitexplicates. Naturalness,importantinthelookingatbeauty,isalsoesteemedAmaincharacteristicofthebeautyofwhatisseen. 129 “Naturalness”isdifficulttodefine,thoughoneknowswhatitisWhenoneseesit.Greekstatues,forexample.Arebothmorebeautifulandmorenatural-seemingThanthepeopleintheharborofLemnos,ormorenaturalinAcertainway.Onesaysofacertainstatue“Hownaturalitis!”butdoesnotpraiseAstrovapoulosthebutcherOrAxanthethewaitressinthesameway.ItmaybeItisbecauseitwouldseemfoolishtopraisealivingHumancreatureforbeing“natural,”butwedopraisesome—usuallychildren.OrfamousorprestigiouspeopleonewouldnotexpectTobehavelikeeveryoneelse,orgreatbeautieswhodonot“Putonairs”—thosewe’dexpecttobestiff,butWhoarenot,exceptinthecaseofchildren,butThemweseemtobecomparingtoourstifferselves.Statues,Whichareexpectedtoberigid,mayhaveastrangeappearanceofmotionAndease.AndindancersoneadmiresthesamecontrastBetweenrigidityandmovement.WheredoesthisleaveusAswelookattheocean,then?Ittooisbothfrozenandmobile.WithoutthetidesItwouldprobablybeagreatmess.AndinagirlNaturalnessisrealbreastsandawarm,attemptingsmile.Combinedwithbonestructureandagoodcomplexion.Pimples,howeverNaturaltheymaybe,arerarelypraisedassuch.NorareSnoringpeopleorthedeaf,thoughbothconditionsareNatural.Attheopposite,ornotquitetheopposite,polefromnaturalnessIsstrangeness,thoughstrangeneednotbeunnatural.BeautyseemsacombinationOfnaturalandstrange,whichisonethingthatmakesitsocomplexTotalkabouttosomepeople,whowantittobeoneOrtheother:avant-gardepeoplewishingforitalwaystoBestrange,“traditionalists”wantingitalwaystobeNatural—neitherreallyunderstandingwhatthosewordsmeanOrhowtheyarerelatedtothings,sinceTheworldisnaturallystrange,i.e.whatseemstousnatural 30 Isreallybizarre—thecompositionofahumanface,forExample,orthesplendorsofthesun.ThoughstrangeasWellasnatural,dependentonourcultureandonourvision.Beautyisagoodcompanion,trustworthyandcheerful.PeoplearerighttolookforabeautifulmateandtoPutwindowswherethebeautyisoutside. Animals,thoughnaturalandstrange,Idonotusuallyfindbeautiful.Orfishorinsectseither.Idonotknowwhythisis.ManyPeoplefeelotherwise.Birdsmakemethinkuncomfortablyofcolor(Exceptwhentheywhizpastbysurprise)andtheideaoffeathers Ifinddisturbing.Whateveritscause,astrongfeelingofdiscomfortMakeshardtheperceptionofbeauty.YoushouldnotworryIfsomepeoplefindsomethingsbeautifulthatyoudonotFindso.ThereisprobablysomethingthatseemsuglytoothersWhichgivesyouthepleasurethatbeautybringsIntoourlives.SuchstrongfeelingsasphysicalDiscomfort,ordeprivation,oraterrorofdiseaseorDeath,canmakebeautyunlikelytogetthroughtoyou.ItmaybeThatseeingbirdsinamorenatural,everydaywaywouldMakethemseemmorebeautifultome.IdonotknowSincethishasnothappened.BirdsaresomethingIwastoldWere“beautiful”whenIwasachild.Flowersalsowere,andEspeciallyroses.IamstillslightlyuncomfortablewithRoses.Themoonandthestarswerealsoonmyparents’andTeachers’listofwhatwasbeautiful.IthasbeenHardformetolovethem(starsandmoon,Imean)butIhave.Despitethisearly“training,”whichmaybeinjurioustobeautyInsomecases,inothersnot.Inraisingyourchild.Youshouldshareyourfeelingwithhimofwhatisbeautiful.Butdonotexpectachildtorespondtoitthatway.Heorsheislikelytorespondmorelikeapoetoranartist.Bywantingto“do”somethingwithit—torunThroughit,oreatitortearitapart.ItisinlaterlifeperhapsPreciselythesuppressionofthesefeelings,orsomeofthesefeelings.Thatresultsinourfeelingofbeauty,whichwearemerelytocontemplate. ContemplationseemedtoAristotlethesuperiormode,toothersmayseemanunnaturalmodeOflife.MostpeoplestillfeelinthepresenceofbeautythatoldwishTodosomething,whetheritistomakeloveTothebeautifulperson,inthecaseitisaperson,orifItisalandscapeoraseeminglybillionstars,oraLightbluescarcelyripplingbay,torunthroughit,getoutaTelescope,ordiveinandswimorbuildaboatorbuyapieceofPropertyadjoiningit.SometimesitismerelyanimpulsetoJumpupanddown,ortoscream,ortocallpeopleuponthetelephonetoTellthemaboutwhatonehasseen.Inanycase,nothingsatisfiesTheimpulsebutmerelyexhaustsit.TheperceptionofbeautywearsoutAfterawhile,speededupbyactivity,andthenoneisallrightagainorNotallrightagain,dependingonhowyoulookatit.Rememberedbeauty.Ontheotherhand,ifprotectedproperly,canbeasourceoflightandHeattoone’simaginationandone’ssenseoflife,likeThesunshininginonone’sshoulder.ItisdifficulttomakeTheimpressionofbeautylastasitisdifficulttomakethepleasureoflove-Makinglastfordays,butitcansometimeshappen.ThelengthoftimeonestayswithSomethingonethinksisbeautifulcanhelpittostayWithone,sogoingbackthroughthegalleryisoftenagoodidea.Inthesecases,contemplationitselfisaformofactivityTheobjectofbeautyincites.Butchildren,toldtocontemplateInthisway,arelikelytodislikewhattheyseeBecausetheycannotcontemplateandthuscandonothingWithit.Beauty,alongwithseemingstrange,natural,andbeingtemporalAndadaptedtothesizeofhumaneyesandbeingaconcentrateWithtimeadded,mustalsoseemlikesomethingofone’sown.Rosesandbirdsbelongedtomymotherandherfriends.IlovedTulips,daisies,daffodils,andthewhiteTinyflowerswhosenameIdon’tknowwhichgrewinThewoodsinbackofmyhouse,whichwasusedasadump(theWoods,Imean)andwhichweresosmalltheywereuselessforthedecorationofhomes. •32 Onereactionbeautysometimescauses,intheabsenceOfotherresponses,isthatitmakesonecry,perhapsBecauseofseemingapossibilityofhappinessprojectedIntothepast,asitis,infact,inspace,whichoneCanneveragainreach,becauseirrevocablybehindone.ItmaybeThattherewasneveranychanceofthekindofhappinessBeautysuggests,andthusthatourtearsareInvain,butitishardtoimaginewhat“useful”tearswouldbeAfteroneisanadult.Cryingiscrying,andBlossomingplumandcherrytreesmaymakeonecryAgooddeal,asmayrockycoastlinesandRenaissanceart.ThetearsinsuchcasesareprobablycausedbytheconflictBeautysendsupof“Toomuch!ThereisnowaytoDealwithme!”AndthepresenceofbeautymaymakeTearseasierandseemsafer,too,sinceitseems,also,towarrantandprotect. IfnoneoftheactionswetakeinregardtobeautySeemscompletelysatisfactory,andifwegoonfeelingAnimpulsetodo,tofinallydosomethingwhenweareinitspresence,thenItmaybeeitherthatbeautyisafrontforsomethingelseorthatIthasapurposeourmindshavenotpenetratedyet—orboth.ManypeopleSaythatitisallatrickof“Nature.”“Nature”makespeopleBeautiful,sopeoplewillmakelovetoeachotherandtheHumanracewillgoon,which“Nature”apparentlydesires.Others,andsometimessomeofthesesameones,assumethereisAGod,aDivineBeing,withabsolutepower,whoalsowishesThehumanracetogoon,aswellastoremindthemBythebeautyofmountains,lakes,andtrees(aswellasofhumanfeatures)OfhowbountifulHeis,sothattheywilldoHisWill.TheHumanfeaturesarelovely,also,toremindthemOfwhatGodHimselflookslike(approximately).IbelieveAllthisistoosimpletobecorrect,butyouarefreetobelievewhatyouwill.NorcanIsubscribetothe“AnalogyTheory”ofbeauty. 133 ThatbeautifulthingsexisttoshowushowtobehaveToourselvesandtoeachother.Foronething,thecorrespondenceIsinsufficientlyclear—justhowthatbluesky,forexample,canHelpmetodowhatisright.ItistruethatclarityandharmonyMaybetheresultofanethicalaction,butitisalsoTrue,often,thatsuchactionsinvolvepainanddeprivationWhichseeminimicaltobeauty,andwhichIcannotseeupthereatall. ThebeautyofmanythingsdoesseemtoshowTheyaregoodforus(orgoodforourdescendants),butWhataboutpoisonflowersandberries?Treacherousbays?BeautifulWolfwomenwhosimplywishtodevourus?WhataboutBlake’sTyger?MyownviewisthatweareinasituationThatisnotunderourcontrol(oranyone’s,forthatmatter)butWhichwecanhandle,ifwearewiseaboutit,fairlywell.TemperyouradmirationforbeautywithwhateverElseyouknowoftheparticularexampleyouarelookingat.DonotLeapintoareflectioninalake,ortakeupwithabadwomanBecauseherbreastsarebeautiful,orcommitSuicidebecauseBotticelli’sVenus(itisnotarealSituation)remindsyouofwhatyourlifehasnotbeen.Thesearetimestoletthe“Enchantment”wearoffforawhile—foritisanEnchantment,anditwillgoaway.YouwillfeeldrivenToactonyourfeelingimmediately,and — Perhapsyoushouldgoaheadanddoit,eventhoughyouwillbedestroyed.Noteverymancandieforbeauty.PerhapsthereissomekindofListOnwhichyournamewillberecorded.Idon’tknow.Idon’tknowifI approveofthat.However,myapprovalmaynotbethatwhichyouarcafter.AsayoungmanmyselfIfeltIwoulddoanythingforBeauty,butactuallyIwasfairlycautiousanddidNothingthatseemedlikelytoresultinthedestructionofmyabilityTostayaroundandhavetheseideasandputthemintowords. Iwouldgoforwardonestep,andbackanother,inregardto •34 Beauty,butbeautyofcoursewasmingledwithotherthings.Idon’tProposemyselfasamodel.Farfromthat.SinceIamstilltheSameway,Iaminterested,though,inifhowIamMakessensetomeinthelightoftheseotherthingsIamsaying. OnethingInoticeIhavedonewhichdoesseemrighttomeIstothinkaboutbeautyagooddealandseemanyexamplesOfit,whichhashelpedmetohavewhatiscalled“goodtaste”Init,soIamabletoenjoyagreatmanythingsThatIotherwisecouldnothave.DiscriminatingtastedoesnotDecreasetheamountofbeautyyouperceive,butaddstoit.Ifyounoticeanoppositeeffect,youare“improving”inThewrongway.GovisitalotofforeignplacesWhereordinarythingshaveanextraordinaryaspectandthusInviteyoutoseethemesthetically.TravelwithsomeoneElse,andtravelalone.StandinfrontofabeautifulobjectuntilyouAreJustabouttofeeltiredofbeingthere,thenstopAndturnaway.Varyyourexperienceofwhatyousee.Invarietyisrefreshmentofthesenses.Agreatpainting,aMountain,andapersonareagoodcombinationforoneday.Sometimes,samenessincreasesbeauty,or,rather.Varietywithinsameness,aswhenlookingatbeautifultwins.Triplets,orquadruplets,orinclimbingalotofstaircasesinGenoa,Acityfamedforthebeautifulstructureofitsstairways. Theimpulseto“dosomething”aboutbeautyCanbeactedon,aswehaveseen,bymakingloveor,sometimes.Evenbymarrying.ManiscapableofimprovingThebeautyofnatureinnumerousways,ofwhichplantingHugelongrowsofbeautifulflowersisnottheleast.TheGannasarenodding,therosesareasleep.Andhere’saTinyormedium-sizedbumblebee,noit’sagreatbigone!Andtheoleandersareplanted,theyarestandingNexttothepalms.Youfeelasurgeofunaccountabledelight.Thewindmovesthem.AndExtraordinarycitiesmayalsobetuckedtogetherbyHumanimaginationsandhands.Andotherworksofartaswell. 135 Beautyisperceivedinacuriouswayinpoems,Liketheoceanseenthroughapartiallyknocked-downwall.Inmusic,beautyis“engagedin,”asinsculptureanddance. “Iambeautiful,Omortals,likeadreamofstone,”saysBeauty,inBaudelaire’ssonnet“LaBeaute,”whereBaudelaire,inFewerwordsthanI,hassetdownhisideasonthesubject.EssentiallyheSeesBeautyaseternalandpure,anenslaverofpoets.Rilkesaysthatwelovebeautybecauseit“soserenelyDisdainstodestroyus.”Inmakingworksofart,then.IstheexcitementwefeelthatofbeingclosetotheelementsofDestruction?Idonotwantanymysteryinthispoem,soIwillLetthatgo.Or,rather,IwantthemysterytobethatitisclearButsaysnothingwhichwillsatisfycompletelybutinsteadstirstoaction(orcontemplation)Asbeautydoes—thatis,Iwishittobebeautiful.ButwhyIwantthat.Even,Idonotentirelyknow.Well,itwouldputitinaclassofthingsThatseemsthehighest,andforonelifetimethatshouldbeenough. BeautyissometimesspokenofAsifitwerea“specialoccasion,”likegoingtotheballetIfonedoesthatonlyonceayear,orlikegoingtoChurch,ifonedoesthatonlyonreligiousholidays.Ex-periencedinthisperipheralfashion,beautycannotbeSufficientlyunderstoodsoastobeasvaluableTousasitshouldbe,evenifwedonotunderstanditCompletely.SomeunderstandingwillrubofffromfrequentContactwithitinbothphysicalandintellectualways.Andthisunderstandingwilldoussomegood.Ofcourse.ItispossibletolivewithouteverhavingseenmountainsOrtheocean,butitisnotpossibletolivewithouthavingseensomeBeauty,andonceonehasseensomethingandLikedit,onewantstohavesomethingmoretodowithIt,eventothepointofhavingitinextricablytangledUpwithone’slife,whichbeautymaybe,anyway,whetherweWantittobeornot.Itisapleasuretobeontopofthings.Evenifonlyforamoment.Beautymaybeanunsatisfiable Appetiteinducer,thecluetoaninfinitemystery,orahoax.OrperhapsasimpleluxuryforthosewithenoughmoneyandtimeTogoinpursuitofit,likechateauxvintages.Oritmaybethewholeworks(seeKeats).ItmaysimplybeabloomwhichisfollowedbyFruitionandnotsupposedtolastandwehaveperverselyarrangedthingsSoinmanycasesitdoes,thewayweforce-feedgeeseAndpigs,andnowwearesimplystuckwithit,gruntingandCacklingallaroundus,fromwhichwetrytomakemusic.OritmaybethatbeautyisaninvitationToapartythatdoesn’texist(Whitmanthinksthepartyexists).Inanycase,youwillprobablywantasmuchOfitasyoucantakewithyou,becauseitis,inspiteofAllthedoubtsexpressedabove,certainlyoneofthesweetestthingsInlife.Ofcourse,thisisnottheendofthesubject,butitisAsfarasInowcansee,whichinregardtobeautyisAllwehave,andonethingitseemstobeabout. 137 TheArtofLove“whatdoyouknowaboutit?" I TowintheloveofwomenoneshouldfirstdiscoverWhatsortofthingislikelytomovethem,whatfeelingsTheyaremostdelightedwiththeirlivestohave;thenOneshouldfindthesethingsandcausethesefeelings.NowAstoryillustrates:ofcoursethedifficultyIshowtotalkaboutwinningtheloveOfwomenandnotalsospeakofloving—anewProblem?anoldproblem?Whatever—itisasomethingsecretTonoonewhohasfinallyexperiencedit.Presbyopic.Andso,LittleparksinParis,proceed,pronounceOnthesecontributingfactorstothe“mentalpsycheOfanairplane.”RenumerateTheforceswhichglossourtongues!AndthenBetty,Theyoungestrabbit,ran,startled,outintothedriveway.FearthatTerrywillrunoverhernowcalmed.BackTotheAlps,backtotheloveofwomen,thesunsetOver“fourevenlydistributedbandlotsinWhichyouheldmyhand,”mysteriouscompanionWithopaleyesandovalfacewithoutwhomI CouldneverhavesustainedtheFrogonianevening — Waitaminute!ifthisistobeamanualoflove,isn’titJustabouttimewebegan?Well...yes.Begin. Tieyourgirl’shandsbehindherbackandencourageherToattempttogetloose.ThiswillmakeherbreastslookEspeciallypretty,liketheParthenonatnight.SometimesthoseilluminationsAreverybeautiful,thoughsometimesthewordsAretooexpected,tooFrench,toobanal.Ain’tyouseacracker.Though?Andotherpoems.OrFreemasonryRevisited.Anyway,Tieherup.Inthisfashion,shewillbelikeMinnieMouse,willlookLikestarlightoverthesensuousAegean.Shewillbethegreatestthingyoueversaw.However,awordofadvice,forcoldSeptemberevenings. 138 Andinspring,summer,wintertoo,andlaterinthefall:Besureshelikesit.Oronlyatfirstdislikesitalittlebit.OtherwiseYouareliabletoloseyourchancesforotherkindsofexperiments.LiketheTheseion,forexample.Orthetwo-partsong.Yes!thisIsAthens,kingofthecities,andlandoftheCountriesoftheFall.Whereatomameansperson,andwherewasAlovelyepochoncethoughwehowevermustgoonWithcontemporaryproblemsinecstasy.Let’ssee.YourGirl’snowalittletiedup.HerhandsstretchedbehindheratAnangleofabout40degreestoherback,no,say,seventeenAndZsendinghisfirstrosesatseventeen(rosesalsoworkAswellashandtyingbutinadifferentlessfracturedFramework)andshereceivingthemwriting“IhaveneverReceivedrosesbeforefromaman.MeetmeatthefountainAtnineo’clockandIwilldoanythingyouwant.”HewasPanicky!anddidn’tknowwhattodo.WhathadhewantedThatnowseemedsoimpossible?hedidn’texactlyknowHowtodoit.SohewrotetoherthatnightamidthecapitalsOfanarboringcivilization,“FannyIcan’tcome.Themaidisshocked.TheButterfactoryisinanendzoneofprivatefeelings.SoThechocolatewaspstandsontheVenetiansteps.SoThecloudburstsareweeping,fulloffeelingAndstones,sotheflyingboatsarelovingandtheteaIsfullofquotients.So—”That’senoughcriesFannyshetearsItupthenshereadsitagain.OnebreastmaybesomewhathigherThananotherwiththehandstiedbehind.AsSaintUrsulaandherVirginsHadtherightattitudebutwereinthewrongfieldoffancy.Notthesexualfield,sotheseerogenouszonescomeForwardwhenweneedthemifweareluckyandnowIwillspeakOfthevariousdifferentvirtuesofrope,string,andchicken-wire — IfyouwanthertobreakloosesuddenlyinthemiddleOfthelovemakingepisodewhenyouareinsideherandcryyesYesthrowingherarmsandhandsaroundyou,thentrystring.Otherwiseropeismostpractical.AsatRavennaThemosaicsthatstartfromthewallstayonthewall,inThewallandtheyarethewall,inasense,likethetracksinOhio, 139 Pennsylvania,andIllinois.Roundingthebendyouwillseethem.Theyarehardtotellfromtheearth.Shewillkissyouthen. Thankyou,parentsoflovingandpassivegirls,evenalittlebitmasochisticonesWholikethethingsthisbookisrecommending.Itistoyou.AlthoughtheydonotknowyouoftenandEveniftheydidmightnotconsiderthis,menowethesejoys. Tolackawoman,tonothaveone,andtobelongingforoneAsthegrassgrowsaroundthePerrierfamilyhome.Thatistheworstthinginlife,butnowherenearthebestistohaveoneAndnotknowwhattodo.Sowecontinuetheseinstructions. Thewoman’sfeetmaybetiedaswellasherhands.I’dsuggesttyingthemOrreallytheankles,that’seasier,tothelegsatthefootofthebedOrofthepooltableifthatiswhatyouaremakingloveupon.I RememberadayinPariswhenamanhadadancingbearAndIwalkedhometoFreesiathinkingaboutape-mongeringanddeath—Holdonaminute,thereareWhiteblocksorcubesonthejettyofFrenchpoeticpoliticalinvolvementWhich“LoveDoesNotNeedaHome”willcannilyplayforyouonthephonographIfyouarenotAC/DCruiningacertainpartoftheequipment.HersmileWillbeglorious,asunrise,herfeettiedtothelegsofthebed.Ifherhandsarefreeshecanmoveupanddownreadily(theSitup/liedownmovement,neartheBoulevardRaspailAndinirregularpatterns—forsomereasoncertaindetailsKeepcomingbacktounderminetheircandidacies).Whatgoodthiswillbetoyou Idon’tknow,buthersittingupandthenlyingdownwill(again)Makeherbreastslookpretty(Fontainebleauyouaremyark.AndIssyyouaremyloom!)andgivetensitytothethroatMusclesandthestomachmusclestoo!Youcansimplyenjoythat 140 (Thetensingintheabdomen)byputting,lightly,yourfingersonit(theAbdomen)asonevoyagesonaSundaytotheFleaMarketNotinthehopeofreallyfindinganythingbutofsensinganewlightpanoramaofone’sneeds.Somuchforthepleasureintensingstomachmuscles.OfcoursewiththegirltiedthiswayYoucanhitherupanddownifyouliketodothatAndshewillneverbeabletogetupandwalkawaySinceshecan’twalkwithoutherfeet,andtheyaretiedtothebed. IfyoucombinetyingherhandstothebedandherfeetYoucanjumponher!Shewillbeallflattenedandsplayedout.Whatafinewaytospendanautumnafternoon,oranAprilone!Sodelicious,youjumpingupanddown,shelyingthere,helpless,enjoyingyoureverygasp!YoumayenterherbodyatthispointofcourseaswellAsthePostalMuseumstandsonlyafewmeterageyardsaway.Theyhaveanewstamptherenow,ofakingwithhiscrownOnbackwards,darkred,itisamistake,andworthfivemillionpounds!Youcancomeoutandgothere,away!Dear,staywithme!!Andshepleadswithyouthereassheliesonthebed,attachedtothebedBythecordsyouhavetiedwithyourhands,andattachedtoyoubyherloveAswell,sinceyouarethemanwhoattachedherthere.Sinceyouaretheknowingloverusinginformationgleanedfromthisvolume. Tyingup,bouquets,bouquetingbunch-of-flowerseffects.TieherhandsandlegsTogether,Imeanherhandsandfeet,Imeanankles.Therearedifferentprocesses.Tiethelefthandtotheleftankle,righthandtorightankle.Spreadoutinanypositionandmakelove.ShewillbecapableoffewermovementsButmaybringyouadeep-seajoy.CrabsandlobstersmustlovelikethatAndtheydon’tstaydownatthebottomoftheoceanfornothing — Itmustbewonderful!Inanycaseyoucantryitinyourmistress’sbed Orinyourownofcourse.YoucantielefthandtorightankleAndsoon.Thisgivesacriss-crosseffectAndisgoodafteraquarrel.ThebreastsinallthesecaseslookExceptionallybeautiful.IfyoudonotlikelikingThesebreastssomuchyoumayhitthemIfshelikesthat,andaskhertoaskyoutohitthem,whichShouldincreaseyourpleasureinmasteryparticularlyifsheisalltiedup.“HitMyTits”couldbeamottoonthesailboatofyourhappiness.Ifyoudon’tthinkYouhavegottenyourmoney’sworthalreadyFromthisbookyoudeservetoturninanearlygraveSurroundedbywormwomenwhoassailandhityouUntilthereisnothingleftofyousohardthattheycan’teat.ButIamsurethisisnotyourfeeling.So,havingagreed.Letusgoon.YoushouldbuyanotherbookAndgiveittoyourbestfriend,however,ifatthispointyoudoagreewithme. Iwillwait;meanwhilewecanbothstareatyourmistress,wheresheisalltiedup. Well,youcanrollherlikeawheel,thoughIdoubtshe’llapproveofit.Womenrarelydo,Iknewoneonce,though,whodid.ForThisofcourseyouusetherighthandrightankleleftHandleftanklearrangement,usingsplintsonbothsidesofeachKnotsothatthelimbswillstayinwheel-position.NowthatsheLookslikethatwhichmakesachariotroll,rollher!Ifthishurtsher.Sootheheralittlebykissingherallaround,saying“Ah,mylovelywheel,wentoverabump,didit?”andsoon.Untilshefinallyisresignedtobeingyourwheel,yourdearbelovedoneAndiseagertoberolledaboutbyyou.SmallobjectsplacedonthefloorWillgiveyoubrieftwingesofsadisticenergyandspeedupyourwheeling. IsuggestendingbywheelingheroutanopeneddoorWhichyouthencloseandstabyourselftodeath.Thisprocedure,however,israre. 142 Iwascarriedaway.Forgiveme.Thenextchapterswillbemuchmoresane. Nailingawomantothewallcausestoomuchdamage(Nottothewallbuttothewoman—youafterallwanttoenjoyherAndloveheragainandagain).Youcan,however,wraptapearoundherarms,waist,ankles,andkneesAndnailthistothewall.You’llenjoythepleasureofnailingAndtheverythoughtofitshouldmakeherscream.YoucanfitthistapeOnherliketabs,soyourgirlwillbelikeapaperdoll.Andyoucantrythingsonheroncesheisnailedup.YoucanalsoThrowthingsather,whichissomethingIverymuchliketodo — Smallrakes,postalscales,aluminumbeltbuckles,Venetianglassclowns — Assoonasyoustarttohurther,youshouldstopAndkissherbruises,makemuchofthem,drawacirclearoundeachhitWithaboldfeltpen.InthiswayyoucantrytohitthesamespotsoverandoveragainAsthelittleparkgrowslargerthemoreyoulookatitButtheflowersareinanotherstory,alemon-coveredvolume,stop!ThekneesOfthisgirlarenowlookingverypretty,sogoandkissthemAndslipyourhandsaroundthebackofthemandfeelwhatiscalledTheinsideofthekneeandtellheryouloveher.Ifsheisabletotalkshewillprobablyaskyoutotakeherdown.Whichyouthencando.However,ifshewantstostayupthereAsbluedaychangestonight,andisblackinthehemispheres,andboatsgopastAndyouarestillfeelingwonderfulbecauseofherbeautifuleyesAndbreastsandlegs,leaveherthereandrunupagainstherAshardasyoucan,untiltheveryforceofyourbumpingBreakstapefromnailorgirlfromtapeorbreaksgreatchunksofwallSoyouandshelietumbledtheretogetherBruisesonherbody,plasteronyourshoulders,shebloody,shehysterical,butjoyinbothyourhearts.Thenpulloffthetapeifithasn’tcomeoff 143 Andbitehertothebone.Ifshebitesyouback,appointher“Lover”forawhileandletherdoallthistoyou.Thatis,Ifyou’dlikeit.You’llsuffer,ofcourse,frombeinglessbeautifulthansheAndlesssoft,lessinvitingtocausepainto.Tobeagreatlover.However,youmustbeagreatactor,sotry,atleastonce. OhtheanimalsmovinginthestockyardshavenoideaofthesejoysNordothebirdsflyinghighintheclouds.Think:tendernesscannotbeallAlthougheveryonelovestenderness.Norviolence,whichgivesthesenseoflifeWithitsdramasanditsactionsasitis.Makinglovemustbeeverything — Acity,notastreet;acountry,notacity;theuniverse,theworld — Makeyoursso,makeitevenagalaxy,andbeconsciousandunconsciousofitall.Thatistheartoflove. 2 Whichcannotbebegun,however,untilyoumeetsomebodyYouwanttomakeloveto,asubjecttobedealtwithinthesechapters.So,avanti!Hereyouare,girl-less,wanderingthecity’sstreetsOrdeepinthecountry,paleamidflowers,orstaring,perhapstoo!.AtbarrelsofcameldungbeingshoveddownaroadintheMiddleEastOronaskyscraperinagreatcity,tenthousandmilesbeneaththeoceanfloor.Howdoyoumeetawoman?or,ifyoulikeyoungerwomen,agirl?Well,thethingtodoisfindoutwherelocalgirlscongregate — Thismaybeatthecamelshack,alongtheshoreoftheAshkenaziortheMediterraneanAtabeach,oralongthesidestreetsorattheschool,whereverItis,gothere!YouwillbehappyonceyouhaveseenthegirlsOrwomenandyourbodybecomesactive,remindingyouyoumustsucceedAstheearthquakeandthevolcanoremindlifetheymustsucceed 144 Anditmustsucceed.Successisajoyalthoughitisnoteverything — Still,inmattersoflove,thereisnothingwithoutit!WithnoSuccess,simplynothinghappens.YouareadeadpersoninafieldWithmudbeingheapedonyou;withoutsuccess.Nothinghappensinthefieldoflove.SomethingHastobethere,aspark,afirmhandclasp,ameaningfullook,somehope.Something,whichonecangetonlyinthepresenceofwomenSinceiftheyarenotthere,howcantheygiveit?ButYoudonotneedtoberemindedofthis,youarealreadyreadingThisstrangelyeventfulandstaggering“ArtofLove.” ManypeoplegetmarriedbeforetheyevenrealizehowtomeetgirlsAndsohaveawideselection;thismayresultininfidelity,divorce.Andfrustratedfeelings;soitisagoodidea,whetheryouarecontemplatingmarriageornot.Tolearnwheretomeet,tofindthewomenwhomyoumightlove.InbigcitiesoftenguidebooksareaccurateindicationsOfsomeofthespotstobeginyoursearch.GreattouristattractionsSuchastheAcropolis,theBermudaShortsfactory,andSt.PetersinRomeArelikelytoattractwomenaswellasmen,sincetheytoosharesuchhumanfeelingsAscuriosity,interest,thedesiretofind“somethingafarFromthesphereofoursorrow”(asShelleysays),alwayshopingtofindthis.Evenasmenare,insomestoriedsuccessesofhistory,business,orart.Sothatisagoodplacetomeetthem,too,sincetheirsoulsarelikelytobeopenInawaytheyarenototherwise:historicalbeautyisafriend.Openingandsofteningthefeelings,butnohumanfriendisthere.Soyoumayfillthegapbysharingtheopennesswithher.Andbyappreciatingtheworkathand.SomeliketofalldownrightthereAnd“madelovemyfirstsightoftheAcropolis”or“Bellini’spicturesmovedme,so—”AstheferryboatPursuesitscoursefromBrindisitoCorfuandbackagain •45 ManyyoungcoupleswereseensteamingonitsdecksWithhappyenergy,andamongthelimetreesinSouthernAfricaAthousandhippopotamusesmetwithgleeandfrightenedeveryoneawayBytheirlovemaking,whichincreasedtheacidityofthelimesOnemillionpercent.WhyshouldtheybehavingallthefulfilmentandfunAndyounot?Myfriends,thereisnoreason.SoanotherkindofplacetogoIncitiesisthecollegerestaurants.ThereyounggirlscongregatespeakingoftheircoursesAndtheirboyfriendsandtheirprofessors.YoucanpretendtobeapoetOraprofessor,andspeaktothemaboutstartingalittleshopWherenoonewillcome.Theircuriositypiqued,theymayfollowyouasfarasacoffeeshopWhereyoucangoonspeakingtothem,inprivate—butthatiscoveredinThenextchapter—“Antic,”or“WhattoSay.”SometimesadepartmentstoreWillbefullofwomen.Youcangoasawomanyourself,asaCripplewhoneedstheirhelp,orasaregularmanshoppingforsomerealwomanheknowsWhoneedstheiradvice.Itdoesn’tmatterhowyougo;whatmattersIsgettingthewomanalone,soyoucanspeakofyourdesires.Noonecanresistthis,butfirstyouhavetofindtheonetospeakto.Well,almostnoone—butyourratioanywayshouldbeseventoone.Successoverfailure.Dangerousintersectionsinmid-cityAregoodplacestomeetgirlsandhelpthemacrossthestreet.Youcanstandthereanddothisallday,madlydodgingthetrafficAndwithahappysmileyoufindtheoneyoulikeandcrosshertooWithaswifthitonthebellyandalargeandwickedsmile.Shewilllookatyousurprisedandyoucancarryonfromthere,butatleastyouwillbebeginningWithhergratefultoyou,forhavingsteeredheracrossthestreet. Lifeisfullofhorrorsandhormonesandsofewthingsarecertain. 146 Somanyunknown—butthepleasureofcouplingwithacreatureoneiscrazyaboutIssomethingundisputed.Sodon’tbeafraidtospendHours,evendays,weeks,evenmonths,goingtoplacesAndtryingtofindthepersonwhocangiveyouthemaximumpleasureinlifeAsthesunhitsthetopofmountainsbutoftenprefersthehillsWheremarketsglintinthefadinglightandone’slungsseemfilledwithsilver.Ohorrorsofloneliness!AbandonmyspiritwhileitwalksforththroughtheworldandattemptstofindforpeopleAndtellthemwheremarvelouswomencanbefound.Ofcourse,youwantaveryparticularone.Tofindher,however,youmayhavetolookatagreatmany,andtrymore.Someinthelight,someinthedark.Orgiesaresometimesorganizedforpeople.Youcantrythat,butIwouldn’t,alllifeisanOrgy,whylimitoneselftoalittleroom,fullof(probably)MainlypeoplewhoareemotionallydisturbedAsyouandIarenot.IfyoucouldorganizeanorgyOfyourown,thatmight,Ithink,besomethingelse.ButWehavestrayedfromoursubject.TheCrossoftheSevenWindsHotelOnEastVortexStreet,inAlbenport,isagoodplacetomeetgirls.Itsohappenstherearealwaysatremendousnumberofthemthere(Noonehaseverknownwhy).Andthereyoumayfindsomeone! Happythemanwhohastwobreaststocrushagainsthisbosom,Atonguetosuckon,aliptobite,andinfactanentiregirl!HeknowsasuccessNotknownbyMountAetnaorVesuviusorbyanymajorvolcanooftheworld!Hehassomeonetocomeinto,andstaythereandtremble,andshakeabout,andhold.Anddreamabout,andcomebackto,andevendiscusspartypoliticswithifhewantsto. 147 Orpoetry,orpainting.Butwhereshallyoufindthisbird?OnagondolainVeniceThetourguidesaid,“Lookatthosebuildings”andIfeltmychestcrushedagainstyourBosom,andthewholeearthwentblack;whenIawokewewereinBrindisi,Youhadnailedmetoacanoe,youwerestandingonmystomach,youhadaratinyourhandWhichyouwerewavinginthesummerbreeze,andsaying“ThisisfromtheAlmanachOfLiving,attention,pleasepayattention,greeninessandmountains,ohthisistheartoflove!” Uncooperativecities!yourhideousbuildingsblockoutairandsunlight!FumesDestroyhumanlungs!MuggersandburglarsInfestyourstreets!You’rehorrible!Ihateyou!(Sometimes.)WhereelsearewomentobefoundAndthesweetjoystheyfurnish,theprospectofalifejoinedtoalifeMorewonderfulthanairjoinedtoafountain—thereisnothingliketheartoflove!Aplume,acabana,acanvas,amoderntire,apampa,aplume,asailboatAllhavemeaningasanoceanhastar,inrelationtoloveonly.Yes,That’smysecret.Whatisyours?Imeantosaywithoutloveeverythingisonlyhalfinorder.Ortwo-fifths,orone-third,perhapsformanyandIthinkIamoneHardlyorderedatall,forus,withoutlove,lifeisagreatmess!Byorder Imeanclarity,Imeanjoy. InIndiatheartoflovehasbeenstudiedingreatdetailButthatwasinanotherage,anothertime.MybookbringsitalluptodateAndisorientedtotheWesternWorld!ThoughmyChineseeditionMaysoonbeforthcoming!Butnowofftothecountry!Andhowtheretofindgirls! 148 SometimesinthecountrytheremayactuallybenogirlsAndonemustreturndisconsolatelytothecity.However,firstoneshouldhaveagoodandintensivelook,Fortofail,andespeciallyinmattersoflove,isdepressingAnddepressioneatstheheartawayandmakesonelessabletolove.Oysters,clams,steak,anythingwithahighproteincontentIsgoodforone’ssexualpowers,sincesemenisallprotein;Forthefeelingpart,self-confidence,joy,andatenderandpassionatelylovingheart!Howcangirlsstayawayfromyou?TheywillhavetofindyouIfyouarelikethat!Butwhatiftheydonotknowyouexist? So—inthecountry,WALK!circulate,coverasmanysquareinchesoftheareaasyoucanSothatfemaleeyescanseeyou,eveniftheyarehiddenbehindrampartsofhayOrcowbarriers,pigbarriers,hogbarriers,chickenbarriers,bullbarriers.Evenpeeringoutfrombetweentheintersticesofabarn.OncetheyseeyouTheywillloveyou,ifyourradianceshinesinyourface(Forthistherearechemicalpreparations,butnaturalnessisbest)Andtheywilltentativelycomeouttomeetyou.Here,immediatelove-makingisbestBecauseoflackofplacestogo,chanceoftheangryfarmer,etcetera.Butthismaybedealtwithlater.InTurkey,inthecountry.Slingyourgirlunderacamel,andhaveherthere.YouwillthrillgentlyAndgreatlyasthecameltrotsdowntheroadtowardthemill.Whereyouwillbethrownamidsttherawgrain.YoumustimmediatelyescapeOryou’llbegroundtobits!AndtakethegirloffwithyouForshemaylatercometobetheonethatyouwilllove.Whichyoucannotdoifsheisinathousandpieces,oreveninfifteenOrthree.OnemanoncelovedagirlwhowasintwoButthatwasarareoccasionanddoesnotaffectthemoregeneralbehaviorThatisthesubjectofthisbook.Sorescuethegirl.Inanycase. 149 Evenifyoudonotloveherlater,youwill,Ifeelsure.Enjoymakinglovethatonceafterescapingfromdeath. Formeetinggirls,then,inthecountry,theruleisBESEEN.Inthecity,GOWHERETHEYARE.InTurkey,oranyforeigncountry,TRAVELWITHTHEIRCUSTOMSOFLIFE,aswiththeincidentofthecamel.Havingfoundthewoman,however,whatcanyousay? Orwhatifsherunspastyou,fleetingly,atthebeginningofnight? 3 Ofcourseyoumuststopher.Sayanything:“Hello!”“Good-bye!”Anythingtoarrestherattention,sothatwhenherpaceisslowedShewillbeabletolistentoyouandbetotallyentrancedbyyou.Sothatlatershewillbewithyou,allbreastsandfragrance!AndwhatyousayshouldnotmerelywinoverthewomanButaddtothezestandtothegloryofeverythingyoudo. Sweetismakingloveoutofdoors,andmakingloveonwallsBuilttosurroundancientcities,sweetbeingclosetoagirlbeneathoverheadhighwaysOrinadowntownsunlithotel,fromwhichafterwardsyouwalkoutandlookatthestatuesOfthecity,atthemainpiazza,andtheoperadome.AndsweetitisifyouhaveengravedyournameOrwrittenitorstampeditonyourgirl’sthigh,towalkonmirroredfloorsSoyoucanseeit.AnditisagreatpleasureTohaveyourgirlridingonawagonandyourunafterherAndcatchherandpullherdownandmakeloveontheroadinthedust.Sweetthefirstcontactofbodies—andoneofthesweetestthingsinlifeistotalktosomeone 150 Deliciousandunavailableandtowhollywinheroverbywhatyousay! Whenyoufirstseeawomanyoudonotknow,sometime,someautumn,SeptemberyDaywhentheleavesaremakingcurtainsthroughwhichthegargoylespeerAtyouasyouarestandingthereastonishedbythativoryandthosehooksYouimaginetobeholdingalltogetherwithoutwhichshewouldbenakedandinyourarms.Asyoustandtherethinkingofthat,youmayfindyourselfspeechlessFromsomuchexcitement!Insuchsituations,oneThingyoucanusuallyrelyonisaskingfordirections — Tosomeplace,tobesure,whichyoucannotfindunlessshegoeswithyou.AndofcourseyoushouldhavesomeroomalongthewayTowhichyoucantakeher.AnditisagoodideainmostcasesalsoToaskfordirectionstoplacesthatarelikelytoexcitetheWomanyouareaskingthemof,suchas“WhereistheDuomoofRopes?”or“InwhatmuseumistheDaumierpaintingofthegirlwhoisrollinglikeawheel?” ( Ifyoupretendawomanissomeoneyoualreadyknow.Analreadyexistinggirlfriend,lostlove,formerstudent,andsoon,thatisalsoagoodwaytoBegin,andyoucanstartintalkingatonceinarelaxedandIntimateway,whichisajoyinitself.Andifyoupretendtoknowawoman,youcankissherAtonce,whichisalwaysanexcellentidea.NotonlydoesdoingsoSometimesbringinstantsuccess,butitalsopreparesthewayForpossiblefutureencounters,asdoesthoughtfulpraise — Forawell-placedcompliment,likeanEasteregg,beautifulbuthidden.Caninfluenceawoman,asakisscan,foryearsofherlife. Ingeneral,youshouldkissasmanywomenasyoucan.Takinganyexcusetodoso:pretendingyouknowher,saying •51 Helloorgood-byetoher,seeingherataparade,ataparty,andsoon.Intrainstations,kissanyprettygirlinsight.AfriendlykissmayimplantinagirltheideaThatshewouldliketoseeyouagain.Thenwhoknowswhatmayhappen? Complimentsmaybewhisperedasthegirlwalkspastyou;Statedtoherdirectly,asyoumoveintoherpath,thenbowasshegoesbyyou;Readintoadictaphoneandplayedaswomanafterwomancomesalong.Theymaybegivenwhenyoudonotknowthewoman;givenafteroneminute’sacquaintance;Aftertwo;afterthree.The“striking”compliment,i.e.,withwhichtoWintheoneonedoesnotknowshouldnotbedelayedbeyondapproximatelyThreeminutes,unlesssomeotherpotentfactorishavinganeffect—yourBeingfamous,excessivelygood-looking,orcoveredwithpreciousjewelsOrbeingaccompaniedbyaninterestinggiganticanimal,i. E.,anythingthatwillmaketalkeasybecauseofastonishmentOradmiration—buteveninthesecasesyoushouldquicklycometopraiseBecauseitissomoving,andlovemakesitsonaturalathingtodo. Inregardtocontent,complimentsareofsixtypes,reducibletothreeChiefones,whichareComplimentstotheBody—includingofcoursetheface.Thecoloration,andthemovements;ComplimentstotheMind—forLackofabetterterm,consideredtoincludethesensibilityAsawhole,sensitivityinparticular,deepunderstanding,andComprehensionofdetails;andComplimentstoSomethingElse — whateverDoesn’tgoinOneorTwo,suchasabilitytofireclaysculptures,arrangeflowers.Orbehaviorandeleganceingeneral.Underthislastcouldcome 152 Moralorcharacterologicalpraise,thoughthismightbeconsideredasbeinginCategoryTwo.Theessenceotthecompliment,ofwhatevertypeitisYougivethewoman,ifitistogiveyouthemaximumBenefitsofherenjoymentandpassionforyou,andifyouaretoLikegivingit,asonemaylikegivingtheworldapoem,Asymphony,orabridge,isthatitbefree,afreepossessionOfthewomanorgirlthatyougiveitto,inotherwordsthatsheFeelsnoobligationtorespond(thoughIassureyouthatshewill)Andfeelsfreetowearitentirelyonherown.ThenshewillturntoyouWithhappyandreturningdesire.OfallcomplimentsthereAretwokinds:thosewhichshowdesire,andthosewhichdonot.“YoulookEtruscan!”Isagoodexampleofthecomplimentwithoutdesire(Apparently)and“YoulooksodeliciousIwanttobiteyou!MyGod,youdrivemeCrazy!”isanexampleoftheotherkind.IntheonecasethewomanisleftwithAhighhistoricfeelingandfeelingherbeautyissomehoweternal.ThatshesharesinaneternallybeautifultypeAwayfromthesphereofoursorrow,andthusthatherlifemustsomehowmeansomethingAndshebeanachievementofsomemarvelouskind(whichsheis),andtheother,moreEarthy-seemingcomplimentmakesherfeelahappyobjectofdesire.Thesourceoffervidfeelinginothers,asortofspringtideorpassageoftime.OrelseaVenus,orelseasunrise,orsunset,thecauseofsleeplesseveningsandgasps(Thiscomplimentisnotdemanding,becauseitisexaggeratedAndhumorousinbeingthat,andletsthewomandecide). Everythingaboutlovemakespeoplefeelinamoreintenseway.Soitseemsnaturalenoughtostartrightin,with“YouarebeautifulAsa)Botticelli’sVenus,orb)asliceofangelhoodcake,IwantTodevouryou—formysweettoothistherulingtoothofmylife!” 153 Lateryoucancrytoher,whenalonewithher,“Ohyouaretheenslavingofme.Dearsweetandirrefutablelove!”AndwhenyouaredancingwithherOranywhereinpublic,youmayevenwishtopraiseherInasecretlanguagewhichnooneelsewillunderstand — “Gahshloohlyebopdoosh,”forexample,maymean“YourleftlegIswhitereventhanthesnowwhichonMountKabanayashiTopsallJapanwithitssplendor!”And“Ahmgahmdoombahmambahmglahsh”:“IWouldliketotieyoutothisbannisterandKillyouwithmykissesallnight!”ForifyoubelieveThereisamagicinlove,togettoityouwillgotoanyextremes. Andonegoesonlooking,andtalking.AndneitherthetongueNortheeyeswearout,andthestreetsarefilledwithbeautifulbreastsandwords. OneexcellentthingtodoonceawomanwilllistentoyouIstoreadherpoems,andthebestofallpoemstoreadisthisone.Accompanied,ifyoulike,byactingoutitsdetails.Whichnowletuscontinue. 4 FortherearenumerousquestionsremainingwhichonemustconsiderIfoneisseriousaboutloveanddeterminedtolearnallitsways. WhatisLove’sIdealCity?whatstrangecombinationOfParisandVenice,ofSplitforthebeautyofitsinhabitants.OfWacoforitsbyways,ofVladivostokforitsbars?What,precisely,ismeantbythe“loveofGod”?orthe“loveofhumanity”?Howcangirlsbestbeconqueredindifferentcities?Whatplaces,orbitsoflandscape,mostspeakoflove?Howtomakeyourgirlfriendintoanairplane,oralivingkite;Howtoconvertsuccessinbusinessorartintosuccessinlove; 154 Keepingone’slibidinousimpulsesatapeakallthetime;Howtoexplain,andhowtoprosperwithhavingtwoloves,orthree,orfour,orfive;Meetingwomen,disguised,inmuseums,andwalkingwiththem,naked,inthecountry;Howtospeakoflovewhenyoudonotknowthelanguage;howtomasterresentment;Howtocauseallthewomeneatinginagivenrestauranttofallinlovewithyouatthesametime;Greekaphrodisiacfoods,howtoeatthemandhowtopreparethem;Onesecretwaytomakeanywomanhappysheiswithyou;Apollo:woman-chaser,homosexual,orboth?Zeus:godlikewaysofseducingwomen;Howtojudgetheaccuracyofwhatyourememberaboutpastlove;Buildingahouseideallysuitedtolove;howtoreassurevirgins;Howtoavoidbeinginterestedinthewrongwoman;sevensuresignsofsomeoneyoudon’twanttolove;Threefairlyreliablesignsofsomeoneyoudo;Useofthecar—makingloveunderthecar;inthecar;onthecarroof;Travelingwithwomen;whattodowhensuddenlyyouknowthatthewholerelationshipisnolongerright;Howtopumpfreshairintothelungsofadrownedgirl;the“kissofdeath”;howtoappeartotallyconfidentandtotallyavailableforloveatthesametime;Maintaininggoodlooksunderexhaustingconditions;forty-onethingstothinkaboutinbed;Howtowintheloveofagirlwhoishalfyourage;howtowintheloveofonewhoisonefifthyourage;Braceletswomenliketohaveslippedontothem;placesinwhichwomenarelikelytoslipandthusfallintoyourarms;Thebridgeofships:howtomakelovethereintwenty-fivedifferentpositionsSoastohaveahappyandrosycomplexionlater,atthe“Captain’sTable”;Loveindifferentcultures:howtoverifywhatyouarefeelinginrelationtothedifferentcivilizationsoftheworld — 155 Roomfordoubt:wouldtheGreekshavecalledthis“love”?DosuchfeelingsexistinChina?DidtheyexistinMingChina?Andsoon.TheBirthdayofLove — OnwhatdayisEros’sbirthdaycorrectlycelebrated?Waslovebornonlyonce?Isthereactuallyahistoricaldate?Presentstogiveonsuchaday;WhatmemorablethingdidSpinozasayaboutlove?HowtodealwiththesweetheartsofyourfriendsWhentheywanttogotobedwithyou;howtomakelovewhileasleep;TheBookofRecords,andwhatitsays;howtoendaquarrel;Howtoplana“dayoflove”—whatfoodanddrinktohavebyyourside,whatnewspapersandbooks;HowtoproposethesubjectsothatyourgirlfriendwillgoawaywithyouOna“voyagetothemoon,”i.e.,lieunderthebedwhileyouCreateagreatholeinthemattressandspringswithyourhatchetAndthenleaponher,coveredwithfeathersandshinymetalspringFragments,screaming,asyouatlastmakelove,“Weareonthemoon!”HowtodressWarmlyforloveinthewinter,andcoollyinthesun;Mazestoconstructinwhichyoucanhidenakedgirlsandchasethem;Dreamsoflove,andhowtheyaretobeinterpreted;How“loveaffairs”usuallygetstarted;whentothinkofmarriage;howtopreventyourgirlfrommarryingsomeoneelse;“Magicalfeelings”—howtosustainthemduringaloveaffair;travelingwithadoctorAsawaytomeetsickgirls;travelingwithapoliceofficerasawaytomeetcriminalgirls;Whatis“Zombie-itis”?domanywomensufferfromit?howcanitbeenjoyedWithoutactuallydying?wherearemostadherentstoitfound?Whattenthingsmustanoldermanneversaytoayoungwoman?Whataboutlovingoutdoors?whatgoodcanwegettherefromtrees,stones,andrivers?Arethere,infact,anydeitiesorgodsofanykindtoLove?Andifso,cantheybeprayedto?Dotheprayersdoanygood? 56 whatcanbedonetocurethe“inabilitytolove”?senselesspromiscuity?twenty-four-hour-a-daymasturbatorydesires?Whatninethingswillimmediatelygiveanyonethepowertomakelove?Whatthreethingsmustusuallybeforgotteninordertomakelove?Waysofleavingyourinitialongirls;other“personalizinginsignia”;Howtoturnyourgirlintoaduck,turkey,orchicken,forfifteenminutes;Whattodowhenshecomesbacktoherself,soshewillnotbeangryorfrightened;Howtomakelovewhilestandinginthesea;curesfor“frozenlegs”;Love’sicebox;LoveCursestoblightthosewhointerferewithyou,andLoveCharmstowinthosewhoresistyou;Travelingwhileflatonyourback;GirlsfromSixteenCountries;whattodowithaCommunistorotherIron-Curtain-CountryGirlSothatpoliticswillnotcomeintoit,orwillmakeyourpleasureevengreater;Howtoidentifyyourself,asyoumakelove,withsunlight,trees,andclouds;WhattododuringaSexEmergency:shortageofgirls,lackofdesire,absenceofspaceinwhichtositorliedown; • Howtoreallyloveawomanorgirlfortherestofyourlife;whattodoifsheleavesyou;Seventeentriedandtestedcuresfortheagoniesoflostlove;Tellinga“true”emotionfromaninsomeway“untrue”one;Howtocompensateforbeingtoo“romantic”;canenjoyedloveevercomeuptoromanticexpectations?Waysoflocatingwomenwholoveyouinacrowd;givingintotallytolove;Howtotransformawomanintoa“HumanLetter”Bycoveringherwithinscriptions,whichyouthenshiptoyourselfInanotherbedroom,unwrapit,readit,andmakelove;Makinglovethroughapieceofcanvas;makinglovethroughwalls;Whattodowhenoneloverisinasecond-floorapartment,theotherinthefirst-floorone; 157 Openingsintheceiling,andhowtomakethem;howtoanswerthequestion“Whatareyoudoingupthereontheceiling?”ifsomeoneaccidentallycomeshome;WaystoconcealthefactthatyouhavejustmadeloveorAreabouttomakelove;howtoexplainpinkcheeks,sleepiness.Isloveallpartofa“GreatPlan,”and,ifso,whatisthePlan?Ifitistokeeptheearthpopulated,thenwhatisthereasonbehindthat?Throwingyourgirlintotheoceanandjumpinginafterher,aphrodisiaceffectsof;genius.Itsadvantagesanddisadvantagesinlove;politicalantagonisminlove;SheisaMoslem,youareaRepublican;orsheisaMaoist,andyouareforimprovingthesystem;Howtokeeppassionalivewhilebesetbyanxietyanddoubt;Whatisthebestwaytomakeloveinarocket?whatisthesecond-bestway?Howtomakesureone’sfeelingis“genuine”;howtousegags;whentowearahat;Atwhatmomentdoesdrunkennessbecomeanimpedimenttolove?Whatistheroleofsexinlove?Isfidelitynormal?Areallwomen,inonesense,thesamewoman?Howcanthisbestbeexplainedtoparticularwomen?Drawingone’sportraitonawoman’sback — Materialsandmethods;isgrowingolderdetrimentaltolove?Useoftheaviary;useofthekitchengarden;whatareeighteentotallyunsuspectedenemiesoflove?Doeslackoflove“drypeopleup”?howcanonebesureone’slovewillbelasting?Whatreasonablesubstitute,inlove’sabsence,couldbefoundforlove? Thebestauthorstoconsultaboutlove(asidefromtheauthorofthisVolume)areOvid,Ariosto,Spenser,andStendhal.PlacesorbitsoflandscapeWhichmostspeakoflove;PiazzaleMichelangelo,lookingdownattheArno,aboveFlorence;ThecandyfactoryinBiarritz,specializinginruby-redhearts;Gus’sPlace,inIndonesia,asmallcart-wheelstorefullofwhitepaper;theRotterdamHarboronanAprilevening. 158 TheIdealCityforLove—shouldbeacombinationOfNaples,foritsbywaysanditspopulationanditsBay;Paris,Foreverythingexceptthestinginessofsomeofitsinhabitants;Rome,foritsamazement,notforitstraffic;Split,foritsabsenceoftheBaroque;Austin,Texas,forhavingsomanyprettygirlsthere;Eveningtown,Pennsylgrovia,forbeingcompletelyunknown.Sonoonecancomeintospoilthelovification,althoughmanycananddocomeinAndaresweptupintoitentirely,Iwilltellyoulater,ifIremember,howtogetthere;Shanghai,fortheunusabilityofitsstreets;Hangkow,foritsevenings;Phoenix,foritstemperatureOnautumnevenings;MexicoCity,foritsFragonardesqueroseOfbullfights!thecapedhat!thepaseos!AndthemagicAspirintabletofCapesville,Georgia,Wherenoonelives;EasterIslandCity,fortheuncloisteredqualityofitsinhabitants;ThailandChonk,Forthebittersweetlemonssoldatitsfair;andEgg-Head,Florida,foritsstones.ThisidealcityoflovewillnotbeasspreadoutAsLondonis,orasover-toweringasNewYork,butitwillbeacity.Suburbsareinimicaltolove, * Imposingthecity’srestrictionswithoutitsstimulationandvariety.Thecitymustincludenumerousgirls.ThereforecityplannersWillincludeasmanycollegesastheycanandencourageSuchprofessionsaswilldrawyoungwomentothecityfromoutside. Tomakeyourgirlintoanairplane,askhertoliedownonalargepieceofcanvasWhichyouhavestretchedoutandnailedtoathinsheetofaluminum,or,ifyouareeconomizing,ofbalsawood.Whenshehaslaindown,wrapthestuffsheislyingonaroundherAndaskhertostretchoutherarms,forthesewillbethewingsOftheplane(sheshouldbelyingonherstomach),withherneckstretchedtaut,herchinRestingonthecanvas(herheadshouldbethe“nose”oftheplane);herlegsandfeetshouldbe 159 closetogether(tiedorstrapped,ifyoulike).Now,oncesheisinairplaneposition.Wrapthealuminumorbalsa-coatedcanvasmorecloselyaroundherandfastenitattheedgesWithstaples,glue,orrivets.Carryhertotheairport,ortoanyconvenientfield.Andputherontheground.Askherto“takeoff!”Ifshedoes,youhavelostagoodmistress.Ifnot(Anditismuchmorelikelytobe“ifnot”),youwillenjoymakinglovethereonthefield — You,bothpilotandcrew,andpassengers,andsheyourlovingplane! PerhapsyouwouldalsoliketoturnyourgirlintoashoeorintoashoeboxOraplastercherrytreeoranyoneofamillionotherthings.AbookletiscomingoutSpecificallyandentirelyonthat,calledTheShopofLove. ThebestwaytoconquergirlsindifferentcitiesistoknowthemayororruleroftheparticularcityAndhavehimintroduceyoutothegirls(perhapswhiletheyareundertheinfluenceofastronglove-makingdrug). Toreviveanoldloveaffair,writethewomanconcerned,orcallherup.Suggestconvertingherintoaplane.Ifshelovesyoustill,she’llhesitateorsayyes.Ifshesaysno,proposeconvertingherintothesummerdawn.Tocauseallthewomeninagivenrestauranttowishtomakelovetoyou.Bringinthemodelofanairplaneandstareatitattentivelyandrefusetoeat. Youcantellawoman’scharacterbylookinginhershoe,ifyouhavethespecialglassesdescribedinTheShopofLove.Otherwise,theeyes,mouth,andbreastsarcbetterindications. i6o Ifthebreastsareround,shemaybefoolish;iftheeyesaregreen,shemaybeJewish;Ifthemouthisfull,shemaybepettish.Buteverythingsheiswillbeforyou. Thewrongwomancanbeidentifiedbythefollowingcharacteristics:Sheeatsatleasttwiceasmuchasyoudo;hershoesorclothingareunbuttonedoruntied;shedislikescoldwater;Herfaceistheshapeofadonkey’s;shefearseveningForeveningdrawsoneclosertobed.ShecontradictsherselfAndisstubbornabouteachthingshesaid.SheisperpetuallyunhappyAndwouldhateyoubitterlyforchanginghercondition.Immediatelyleaveher!Thispersonisnotforyou! Twosignsoflove-worthinessinawomanareclimbingtotheroofWithoutfearandwithasmileonherface;turningaroundtolookatyouaftersheturnsawayfromyou. UseofthecarisnowlocatedinTheShopofLove. Whenyouknowtherelationshipisnotright,thinkofitallagain.Tryagainthenextday.Ifyoustillthinkthesamething,endit. Thekissofdeathiscurrentlyprohibitedbylaw.Lookforitinlatereditions. Tomaintaingoodlooksunderexhaustingconditions,thinkaboutaneskimoRidingawhitehorsethroughavalleyfilledwithfallingothereskimosSothathealwayshastobeattentive,sothatnoeskimofallsonhishead.Thiswillgiveyouanalertlook,whichishalfofbeauty. Onethingtothinkaboutinbedisthefullextentofthispoem.AnotheristhecityofRome.AnotheristheByzantinestained-glasswindowshowingJesusasahumanwine-press. i6i Donotthinkofcancellationofairtrips,botchedtennisracquets,orslightlytornpostagestamps.Thinkoftheseasons.Thinkofevening.ThinkofthestoneduckCarvedbythecementcompanyinBeirut,toadvertiseTheirproduct.ThinkofOctober.Donotthinkofsleep. Towintheloveofagirlhalfyourage,addyourageandherstogetherAnddividebytwo;actasifyouweretheagerepresentedbythatnumberAndasifsheweretoo;thesamewithgirlsonefourthoronefifthyourage.Thisiscalled“AgeAveraging,”andwillworkinallthosecasesInwhichagedifferenceisaproblem.Oftenitisnot. LovebetweenlivingbeingswasunknowninMingChina.Allpassionwascenteredonmaterialthings.Thisaccountsforthevases.InAncientGreecetherewasnotimeforlove.InSomalilandonlylittlechildrenloveeachother. Spinoza’sremarkwas“Loveistheideaofhappinessattachedtoanexternalcause.” Friends’sweetheartsshouldbeputoffuntilthenextday. Tomakelovewhileasleep,tryreadingthisbook.IthasbeenknowntocauseSomnamoria.TheBookofRecordssaystherecordnumberoftimesamanmadeloveinatwenty-four-hourperiodwas576times.Therecordnumberoftimesawomanmadelovewas972times.Themandied,andthewomanwenttosleepandcouldnotbeawakenedfortwoyears.Shelaterbecamethedirectressofalargepublishinghouseandthenlaterinlifebecameanun.Themostpersonsanyoneevermadelovetoinrapidsuccession(withoutapauseofanykind)wasseventy-one. 162 DreamsaboutloveshouldbeactedonasquicklyaspossibleSoastobeabletofullyenjoytheiratmosphere.Ifyoudreamaboutawoman,phoneheratonceandtellherwhatyouhavedreamed. Zombie-itisisloveofthelivingdead.Itiscomparativelyrare.Ifawomanlikesit,youcanprobablyfindotherthingsshelikesthatyouwilllikeevenmore. Tenthingsanoldermanmustneversaytoayoungerwoman:i)I’mdying!2)Ican’thearwhatyou’resaying!3)Howmanyfingersareyouholdingup?4)Listentomyheart.5)Takemypulse.6)What’syourname?7)Isitcoldinhere?8)Isithotinhere?9)Areyouinhere?10)Whatwingsarethosebeatingatthewindow?NotthatamanshouldstresshisyouthinadishonestwayButthatheshouldnotundulyemphasizehisage. Theinabilitytoloveisalmostincurable.AlongseavoyageIsrecommended,inthecompanyofanirresistiblegirl. Toturnawomanintoaduck,etc.,hypnotizeheranddressherincostume.Tomakelovestandinginwater,see“ElephantCongress”intheKamaSutra(chap.iv).Duringashortageofgirls,visitnumerousplaces;givepubliclectures;carrythisvolume. Lostloveiscuredonlybynewlove,whichitusuallymakesimpossible.Findingagirlwhoresemblesthelostgirlmayoffertemporaryrelief. Onetestforloveiswhetheratthebeginningyouareorarenotabletothinkaboutanythingelse. Tolocateunknown-aboutloveforyouinawomaninacrowd.Lookintentlyateveryoneyoufindattractive,thenfalltotheground.Shewillprobablycomeuptoyouandshowherconcern. 163 RailwayExpresswillnothandlehumanletters,butBud’sBusandTruckServicewill. Sleepinessmaybeexplainedbydrugs;pinkcheeks,bytheallergythatcausedyoutotakethem. LovebeingpartofaGreatPlanisanattractiveideaButhasneverbeenvalidatedtoanyone’scompletesatisfaction. Throwingyourgirlintheoceanmakesherfeelsexywhenshegetsout.Geniusisnotadisadvantage. Hatsshouldneverbewornwhenmakinglove.AllwomenarenotthesamewomanThoughtheymaysometimesseemso.Theaviaryisbestusedonsummernights.ThereisnoSubstitutefororparalleltolove,whichgivestothebodyWhatreligiongivestothesoul,andphilosophytothebrain.Thensharesitamongthemall.Itisaseriousmatter.Withoutit,weseemonlyhalfalive. Maygoodfortunegowithyou,then,dearreader,andwiththewomenyoulove. 164 fromTheBurningMysteryofAnnain1951 iiiirH OurHearts I AllheartsshouldbeatwhenChoFu’sorchestraplays“Love”Andthenallfeetshouldstarttomoveinthedance.Thedancingshouldbeveryquickandallsteplightly.Everyoneshouldbemovingaround,allheartsbeating — Tiptaptiptap.TheheartisactuallybeatingallthetimeAndwithalmostthesameintensity.ThedifferenceisnotinourhearingWhichisalsoalmostalwaysthesame.Thedifferencemustbereally,Then,inourconsciousness,which,theysay,isvariegated.Black-and-whiteshoes,reddress,aneyeofflame,Ateethofpearl,ahoseoftrue,alifeofseethings.WouldYouliketodance?Theexcitement,itisthereallthetime.Ishumangeniusthereallthetime?Withtheanalogyofdreams.Whichsupposedlywehaveeverynight,oneistemptedTosay.Theseethingisalwaysthere,andwithitthepossibilityforgreatart. 2 Thegovernmentisthereallthetime,oractuallythepeopleStrugglefirstsothegovernmentwillbetherethensoitwillnotBeoverpowering.Whendoestheartcome,andtheseething.Andwhenisthebestpointforjustice,inalltheseIwouldliketobeliving.ThehousescomeandthentheindustryandthenthepeopleAndthegovernmentmustcontroltheindustry.Nosmokeinthehouses.Andtherearepeoplewhostudythisallthetime.Economists,governmentpeople,theysitdownandwalkaboutAndstudythesethings.AndsomeotherwiseindistinguishableboysAndgirlsbecomescientists,andcomplicatethesethings.Makethembetterandworse,andsomepaleinsecureothersComealonganddopoemsandpaintings,andalldieAndnewonesareborn,andtheregetstobehistoryandcultureAndcivilizationandthedeathofcivilizationandthelifeofitandinit. 3 Wc,whoareborninit,walkaroundinit,andlookatthesethingsAndthinkofthesethings.Somethingsarefirstandsomearesecond.NoonehasyetcompletelyfiguredoutourbrainButsomearetrying.Oneofthefirstthingsiswetrytobe“allright,”Todowellandtosucceed.Whetherthisisinallhumanbrains(Wethinknot)oronlyinourcivilization’s,wedon’tknowForsure,ormuchcare,butweactbyitanyway,justasweactBythemoralitywehappentobebornwith(i.e.,noteatingourgrandparentsAsHerodotussaidtheEgyptiansthoughtitpropertodo).Andinthedim,dazzlingadolescentballroomswestartonourway.Later,muchlaterperhaps,wetrytofigureitout — Orsometimesjuststartworkingmechanicallyononeaspect.Findingourselves“inlove,”wemayattachsupremevaluetothatOrtosomecrazyreligion,findingourselvesinachurchatsunset. 4 Whatdoyouthinkitisreallyallexplainableby,thisMysterythathasbeenbuiltupbyanaturalprocessAndhowmuchofitdoweneed?ThefootofeveryoneisadvancingAndthekneesofeveryoneshouldbeflexing,legsdancingAndlipsmovinggailyupovertheteethForthespeaking,andhandsdrivenintothepockets,eyesshining,stub-bedtoesforgottenaswewalkdownthesomewhereelsesayingGodDamnIt’sgoodtoseeyou.Butwhatshallwedo?ThegreatestplanIsparticipate,aid,andunderstand.EverydogshouldbeatthefootOfeveryman.Whatevidencethispastgiveus!ExamplesWithwhichweimpregnatetoday.ButtheshirtshouldfitOverthechest,thelightsilkpantiesovertherear.Theskyisshining.ThesunisabasketofwashLetdownforourskin,andgermsareallarounduslikecash. 168 5 Innatureisnoexplanation.IncityisnoExplanation.InlanguageisnoExplanation.Explanationisaclog,isalanguishingladLankywithluridbinoculars,dilapidated-looking.IamSittingandyouarestanding.Wehaveaknowledgeofgoodandbad. Iamexplodingwithdoubtsandwithtalent.Ilookeverywhere.I’malwaysgladwhenIfindsomethingsimple.Breathingissimple,walkingissimple,anddancing,sometimes,movingone’sfeet.AsimplewaytosaythatthingsaresimpleIsimmenselyenjoyablebutitisnotexplanation.Thepeopleshouldberushingalong.ThereisinthatwaynoproblemExceptthereisthisproblemHowtoparticipateaidandunderstandSimultaneously.Itseemsthereistoomuch.ParticipatinginthewallYouforgettounderstandthetaxreform.Andaidnoone. 6 SowhatistheecstasyweareallowedtohaveinthisonelifeAseverybodysaysthatwearegettingonwithlivinghere?Shouldyoudevoteyourlifetoreform?ortounderstandingyourlife?Aredifferentkindsofpeopleborn,someforaiding.Someforparticipatingin,someforunderstandinglife?Whichoneareyouandhowdoyouknow?YouarecrazyAnddon’tknowit,onepersonsays,andanothersays.Youareasleep.TomyselfIseemsaneandawake,andIgoon.Maybeafundamental-typesolution,“lossinnature,”“mysticalreligion”Or“sexualexplosiveness”iswhatweneed.Butdearcivilization — Whowouldliketogiveuptheaterforclimbingupatree?Noonewantsyouto.Rememberwherethismeditationbegan(withChoFu’sorchestra).ItistheproblemoflivingandnotbeingthefirstoneAndyetwantingtodoasmuchasthatfirstone,and,becausethereisallthattrainbehindone,more. 169 7 ThepeoplelookatallthepeopletheyarewalkingaroundOnebeingpeacefulorhorridorlonelyorboredOrpleasantandcontentedtherightkindOfcivilizationcouldbegoodforallthesepeopleAndcertainlyfoodwouldbegoodforthehungrypeopleAndlimitationsmustbeplacedonthegreedypeopleAndgunsmustbetakenawayfromtheaggressivepeopleAndmedicinemustbegiventotheailingpeopleAndsoonandeachindividualoneofthepeopleWhodreamseverynight(itissupposed)maybesupposedTohavetheseethingandthegoldencuriosity.HowtoorganizethethingSothateachofthesepeopleIshappywithit,happywithhim,withher,andmeAndwealsoare,andit,andall,withthem?Thatwouldbetheday — Howcanitbewitheveryonefeelingheisthemainoneandthegermsthereeveryday? 8 Differentcivilizationssimultaneouslyexisting,Indianinthethroesofone,samuraiinthewaningofanother.Heck-sayingbusinessmaninmine,andlittlecivilizationssuggestingsomethingLikefarmyardcivilization,fishingmanandnetandboatcivilization.Andthenbacktoyourownandtomyown,alltheEfficiencythegoodwilltheweaknessandthesnobberyTheuncertaintytherecoverytheratherlonglifetheburstsOfhelplessenthusiasmthesweetreformersinthestreetsTodayasIjustlookedoutthewindowandherecometheriotpoliceAndthesittinginsideandnotknowingifIshouldbeoutside,inthemidstofthis.TheorchestraplaysandeveryoneisgrowingupandbeingOneofwhoareavariousnumberofbeings 170 SimultaneouslydreamingofexistingAsthecivilizationssaytheyarewhenwespeak. 9 Tobeaback,whichdoesn’tbreak,andtohatewhatismysteriousThatdoesn’tneedtobe,grantmeOAthenaOftherosesandthegammaglobulin—however,prayerIsnothingIcaneverbeseriousabout(Ithink).TheansweriselusiveandtheworkaboutitgoesonAlongtimeandsowewantourlivestogoonAmongotherthingsinhopetofindananswer.ThoughweknowThattheanswerofeightywillnotbetheanswerofeighteen.Enroutewegivetitlestothings,wefurtherComplicateourownsituationandthatofotherpersonsAndwegetwiser,sometimes,andkinder,andprobablylessexciting(Certainlyso),andgrowoutofourillusions(sometimes)andsoCanlookaroundandsay.Oh!So!butusuallywithoutthetimeOrpowertochangeanything(sometimes—maybeafraction—ifso,it’samazing!)—thenoffwego. Fate InaroomonWestTenthStreetinJuneOfnineteenfifty-one,FrankO’HaraandI AndLarryRivers(IactuallydonotrememberIfLarrywasthere,buthewouldbethereLater,somewinternight,onthestairwaySittingwaiting,“adementedtelephone”AsFranksaidinanarticleabouthimbutthenOnthestairsunhappyinayouthfulmanner,muchHappenedlater),Frank,JohnAshbery,JaneFreilicherandI,andI HadjustcomebackfromEuropeforthefirsttime. IhadabottleofIrishwhiskeyIhadBoughtinShannon,wheretheplanestoppedAndwedrankitandItoldMyfriendsaboutEurope,they’dneverBeenthere,howmuchI’dlovedit,IWassohappytobetherewiththem,andmyEurope,too,whichIhad,Greece,Italy,France,Scandinavia,andEngland—imagineHavingallthatthefirsttime.ThewallsWerewhiteinthatlittleapartment,sotinyTheroomsaresosmallbutweallfittedintooneAndtalked,FranksosureofhisTalentbutdidn’tsayitthatway,I Didn’tknowittillafterhewasDeadjusthowsurehehadbeen,andJohnUnhappyandbrilliantandsillyandofthemallmyFirstfriend,wehadmetatHarvardtheyTendedexceptFranktopooh-poohWhatIsaidaboutEuropeandevenFrankwasmoreinterestedbuteverpoliteWhensoberIcouldn’ttellitbutBarelytendedtheytendedtobemuchmoreInterestedingossipsuchasWhohadbeensleepingwithwhomandwhatWassellingandgoingonwhereatI Wasalittlehurtbutusedtoitmy 72 ExpectationsfrommyfriendshipswereAbsurdbutthatwayIgotsoMuchoutofthemintactitwasn’tCausalbutthetwowaysatonceIwasNeversohappywithanyoneAsIwaswiththosefriendsAtthatparticulartimeonthatdaywithThatbottleofIrishwhiskeythetimeFourintheafternoonorThreeintheafternoonortwoorfive Idon’tknowwhatandwhydoIthinkThatmybeingsohappyissourgentAndimportant?itseemssomekindOfevidenceofthetruthasif Icouldgobackandtakeit?ordo IjustwanttoholdwhatThereisofitnow?thinkingsaysholdSomethingnowwhichiswhyDespitemeandlikingmethatAfternoonwhowassleepingwithWhomwasbestandMyhappinesspickingupAglassFrankWhatwasitlikeKennyAhfrommybeingvulnerableOnlysometimesIcanseethevulnerable-NessinothersIhaveeverknownFaultswiththemoronthetelephoneThesexualadventuresweredifferentEachpersonatworkautobiographyallThetimeplowingforwardifThere’snoquestionofmovementasthereIsn’tnodoubtofitmayInot ImayfindthismomentminuteExtraordinary?IcandonothingWithitbutwriteaboutittwoHundredfortyWestTenthStreet,Jane’sapartment, 173 Nineteenfifty-oneorfifty-twoICanneverrememberyesitwasLaterormuchearlierThatLarrysatonthestairsAndJohnsaidUmhumandhumandhumI Don’trememberthewordsFranksaidUnhunJanesaidAnHanandLarryifheWastheresaidBoobledyboopsoalwaysSaidLarryoralmostandIsaidAix-en-ProvencemenewsenseofThesethatLondonFirenzeFlorenceNowGreeceandunhunumhumanHanboopSoonIwasatLarry’sAndhe’sproposingwetakeaHouseinEastham—what?fortheSummerwhereisthatandAlreadythatafternoonwasdissipatedAnotherbegunmanymoreofThembutthatwasone IrememberIwasinAspecialpositionasifitWeremybirthdaybutTheywereinfactasifmyBirthdayorthatistosayWhoCaresifhegrowsolderifHehasfriendslikeTheseImeanwhodoesnotCare?thecelebrationisthecauseOfthesorrowandnotTheotherwayaround.IalsowentToVeniceandtoViennatherewereSomepeopleIdrovethereWithnewsunshineFranksaysLet’sgooutJaneJohnFrankAndI(Larrywasnotthere,InowRemember)thenmysteriouslyLeft 174 TheSimplicityoftheUnknownPast Outthewindow,thecowoutthewindowThesteelframeoutthewindow,therustedcandlestand;Outthewindowthehorse,thehandle-lesspan.Realthings.InsidethewindowmyheartThatonlybeatsforyou—averseofVerlaine.InsidethewindowofmyheartisastyleAndashowplaceofonion-likeconstruction.InsidethewindowisapictureofacatAndoutsidethewindowisthecatindeedJumpingupnowtothetopoftheRoofofthegarage;itspawshelptakeitthere.InsidethiswindowisarangeOfthingswhichoutsidethewindowarelikestarsArrangedbuthugeinfashion.Outsidethewindowisacar,istherustedwheelofabicycle.Insideitarewordsandpaints;outside,smoothhairOfarabbit,justbarelyseen.InsidetheglassOfthiswindowisanotebook,withlittlemarks.Theyarewords.OutsidethiswindowisawallWithlittleparts—theyarestones.InsidethiswindowIsthestart,andoutsideisthebeginning.AheartBeats.Thecatleaps.Theroomislight,thesunisalmostblinding.Insidethisbodyisawoman,insidewhomisastarOfsom.ekindorother,whichislikeauterus;andOutsidethewindowafarmmachinestarts. 175 TheBurningMysteryofAnnainigji 1.THEBURNINGMYSTERYOFANNA “Idon’tknowhowtokiss.”Won’tyoucomein? Tohavebentherbackhalfacrossthebed.Tobesobendingher. NotyethavingsaidWon’tyoucomein.Neveryethavingsaidit. Planningtosay,CanweWouldyouliketocomeuptomyroom? ThebedroomstairwayAndthenthoughtaboutit. Mynameisyou. Iamnotinterestedhimthefirstplace. IcomefromCorsica.Thesceneisveryconfusing. SheisdancingandI Thinksheispretty.That’sonepartofit. 2.WHYNOT? ItissatisfyingtohaveanoseRightinthemiddleofmyface. YouaskedmethequestionandIrepliedWithasmuchimaginationasIcould. 176 Thenonefoggymorningwemet.Wesatinacoldcafeandcomparedviruses. Oh,sure,I’dheardofyouathousandtimesFromEandLandXandAandY. WhatwasItryingtohide?Somethingmonstrous?Istherereallyanythingtohide? Ihatealltheseguiltmongers.Goddamnit, Isaidtomyselfoneday.I’llletfly! ThestoryofmyexistenceasIreconstructitNowisaboutonesixthpartreconstruction. SuggestedtomebyplasticinsteadofcorkInthebottleneckIsaid.Welllisten,now,well,well,tohellwithitWhynot? 3.WITHDADTheflyIcastwasred.DadsaidPushit! Wewentoutintheboat.Marble-likewasthesea. DowntothesandwewentAndtothedocknext. Let’sgofishingsaidDad. Ipulledonredsweater. IwassittingontheporchPeacefullywhenDadmarchedout. 177 ThisisoneofmyexperiencesWhichIthinkisfairlytypical. You’veaskedmetotellyouAlittlebitaboutmylife. Hello.Howareyou?I’mfine,Thanks.Todaythereissomethingnew. 4.STARTINGTheorangessubduedtheattackOrratherweenduredit. Iamtiredofbeingattacked,shesaid.Thentherainfell. Itwasasunnymorning.Sunnysunnysunnysunnysunny. Thenightwasdark.ThedogsHowledtillitgotsunny. TheyoungmanislivingwiththeFrenchFamilyneartheentrancetothetrough. Actualcashvaluenineteendollars.Heputsitonbutthenshetakesitoff. WhatwasitIrememberedofL.atschool?Akeenbursitislitthewindow. Simplesimplesimple,simplytostart.Tobesoeasywhenoneisatthestart. 178 5-ACRITICALPOINT She:Weren’tyoucuriousaboutourconversation? Isaid:Ihavebeenwatchingyouallfromhere. ThenIwentuptoherandstartedtospeak. IfeltshybutIhadtoconfrontthebeautiful. Talkingtoanotherstranger,IthinkaguyInthedistanceIsawher,thechecked-print-dressedgirlIhadseen. WanderingalongthroughthetwistingstreetsofthecityOnedayasIwas,asismyhabit. Perfectlytrue,butonthisdayitwasdifferent.Youalwaysdothesamethingseveryday. Getup,brushyourteeth,eatbreakfast,thenwander. Ireallydon’tseehowyoucanstandtheboredom. Ihopeyoudon’tmindifI’malittlecriticalI’mafraidthatyouwon’tlikewhatI’mgoingtosay. Ihadsomethingtosayshehadneverheard.Abirdwokemethismorningwiththeusual. 6.TWOBICYCLERIDERS Itisthesummerofgenius!Andalsoofgenes!Youreplied,asIgulpedoverthehill-Alps. Whatisthenatureofthings,Ireplied.Aswetorturedthehill-Alps. 179 Thisanswersallquestions,youdescribed,Aswehikedoverthehill-Alps. Thentellmemore,IthinkIsqueaked.Aswebrokethechainsofthehill-Alps. Andsothat’sthetruth,youindicted.Aswetoredownthemountsofthehill-Alps. ThementioniscottontothestreetWhichinturnencapsulesdriftedattention. Finally,withcouragemounting,Iaskedyou.Whatarewedoingonthesehill-Alps? ObeautifulpersonsilentandsereneInvitedbymetopedalonthesemountains. 7.ABSTRACTUnavoidableandinescapable.Whatisyournature?Isaid. Quiet,buthowtomakethem.Also,grabbingofthespirit? Admirable,Isaid.Theypresentedaproblem. WhenIfirstsawthemTheyfeltcomplete. Come,saidmymind, Iwillshowthemtoyou. 180 wherearethesenewUnities?Isaid. ThensomethingrainbowedAndanewthingpromised. Iwasliving.Isaid,IcandoallthatIwish. 8.WHATIWASTHINKINGOFThereedswereverysunny.“Yes,heLivedhere—Cezanne,”yousaid. RetiringfromthebicyclesandremarkingHowpainfulitwastobike,pleasantertowalk. Wasitthedayamanwithamoustache,agirlAnne,threelawstudentsandIwent? Comeon,let’sgoforawalk!Bringnotthebicycle. Jecroisqu’ilexagere,saysMarguerite.Then,twoo-twoo,outsidehearabell. UptolunchfromthewallaboutwhichIwroteThepoem“Bricks.” StandinginthesunlightandthinkingOrdoingsomethinglikethat. FirstgettingupanddownthehillWalking,untilIsmelledthefields,ontwolegs. IntheMorning Inthemorningtheonlythingmovingwasthegarbageonthewater.Intheafternoonthefellaheenstormedtheirtents.Weboughtcoldcreamandlayinthesun. Thebirchesagainsttherisottoareclimbingthearches.Ah,well,it’sayoungtree’sprivilegetoclimb.Theseoldertorchesarescalingtheflagonsofthenight. GoingtopartiesoftenmeantawelcomeTosomenew,dear,oroldandtrustedfriend.Oftenitmeantthechancetomakenewfriendshipssomewhatintransit. HefeltthenewcollarsandthecataloguesOfolddresses.I’lltakethisoneandthisone,saidhe.Meanwhileadarkredvelvetwasstaringhimintheface. BaronHaussmann,ClaudeDebussy,andSherwoodAnderson... Timetogetupandgooutandfeelone’snewcollarAndtheelevator’sfreshyoungsmellinthequietbuilding. Theratsfell,onebyone,fromthePontifTsapartment.Ithadnopoliticalsignificance.Thebuildingwasbeingcleaned.Musicblared,andsomeofthefaithfulweretouchedontheshoulderbyrats. Wemoveintotheapartmentsofday.Theyfoldandenwrapus.Thesteamrisesfromtheiredges.Ratrunspast.Pinkcloudsofdustjumpup.Hefeelsthecollar—it’salittlecold. Thereisn’tanythingthereexceptwhat’sreal.Hewalksoutfeelinghisnape.Thisissunnyweather.Suddenlytheelevatorrisestothefloorabove. GeorgeBernardShaw,theEmpressofRoumania,ImmanuelKant... Hepokesthetrees.It’sapleasuretoshowyoutheseruins.Thisinvitationadmitsone.Mysonissleeping. 182 Hewandersinthesenseofhavingonlyoneplacetogo.Theelevatorambianceiswaiting.Orchids,Impressionism,icemachines,daggers,andbends. Formshaveanattractiontowhichwegraduallyyield.JosephineBaker,Respighi,LaContessadiAlba.Hebelievedthatthecitywassteel,butitwasonlythesun.Iwanttoseeyou. Comeoverforbreakfast.Acoweatsagrassblade.Containers.Ourbabieswillneedplentyofmilk.Hesays,IamleavingParis.SohrabandRustum,ChildeHarold’sPilgrimage,theDybbuk,Titian’sAssumption. Aswirlofredrobesatthethroat.Goodbye...Are—?Speechless.Theasterisksdustonthepaper.WillIseeyouagain?BorisPasternak,AbrahamLincoln,Socrates,Orion... I’vewantedtoaskyouonequestion.Shehasababy.Roomfullofstarsandiridium,eyelidswhichdazzle.Whatcanalifebewithoutyou?Thewordsdidn’tsay. Idon’twantyoutobesoserious... Whenhegotback,shewasalreadyatthedoor.EleanoraDuse,EmilyDickinson,Job,KarlMarx,Atalanta.... 183 TheBoilingWater AseriousmomentforthewateriswhenitboilsAndthoughoneusuallyregardsitmerelyasaconvenienceTohavetheboilingwateravailableforbathortableOccasionallythereissomeonearoundwhounderstandsTheimportanceofthismomentforthewater—maybeasaint,Maybeapoet,maybeacrazyman,orjustsomeonetemporarilydisturbedWithhismind“floating,”inasense,awayfromhisdeepestPersonalconcernstomore“unreal”things.AlotofpoetryCancomefromperceptionsofthiskind,aswellasalotofinsaneconversations.IntensepeoplecansometimesgetstuckontopicsliketheseAndkeepyoufarintothenightwiththem.Still,itistrueThatthewaterhasjuststartedtoboil.HowimportantForthewater!AndnowIseethatthetreeiswavinginthewind(Iassumeitisthewind)—atleast,itsbranchesare.InordertoseeHiddenmeanings,onemayhavetoignoreThemostexcitingones,thosethataremostdirectlyappealingAndyetitisonlytheseappealingonesthat,often,onecantrustTomakeone’sartsolidandtrue,justasitissexualattractionOnehastotrust,often,inlove.Sotheboilingwater’sseriousnessIslikelytogounobserveduntiltheexactstrangemoment(AndwhatatemptationitistoendthepoemhereWithsomesecretthrust)whenitinvoluntarilycomesintothemindAndthenonecanwriteofit.Aseriousmomentforthispoemwillbewhenitends.Itwillbelikethewater’sboiling,thatforwhichwe’vewaitedWithouttryingtothinkofittoomuch,since“awatchedpotneverboils,”Andapoemwithitsendingfiguredoutisdifficulttowrite. Oncethewaterisboiling,theheaterhasachoice:tolookatitAndletitboilandgoonseeingwhatitdoes,ortotakeitoffandusethewaterfortea.Chocolate,orcoffee,orbeefconsomme.Youdon’tdrinktheproductthenUntilthewaterhasceasedtoboil,forotherwise Itwouldburnyourtongue.EvenhotwaterisdangerousandhasathornLiketherose,orahornlikethebabyram.Modesthotwater,andthetreeBlowinginthewind.TheconnectionhereishowseriousisitforthetreeTohaveitsarmswave(itsbranches)?HowdiditevergetsuchflexibilityInthefirstplace?andwhoputtheboilingpotentialityintowater?Atreewillnotboil,norwillthewind.ThinkofthedinnersWecouldhave,andthedreams,ifonlytheydid.Butthatisnottothinkofwhatthingsarereallyabout.Forthetree Idon’tknowhowseriousitistobewaving,thoughwater’sboilingIsmoredramatic,ismorelikeastorm,hightideAndtheshipgoesdown,butitcomesbackupascoffee,chocolate,ortea. HowmanypeopleIhavedrunkteaorcoffeewithAndthoughtabouttheboilingwaterhardlyatall,justwaitingforittoboilSotherecouldbecoffeeorchocolateortea.Andthenwhat?Thebodystimulated,thebrainalarmed,groundsinthepot.Thetree,waving,outthewindow,perhapswithalittlemoreelanBecausewesawitthatway,becausethewaterboiled,becausewedranktea. ThewaterboilsalmosteverytimethesameoldwayAndstillitisserious,becauseitisboiling.Thatiswhat, Ithink,oneshouldsee.Fromthismaycomecompassion.Compassionandaknowledgeofnature,althoughmostofthetime IknowIamnotgoingtothinkaboutit.ItwouldbecrazyTogivesuchthingsprecedenceoversuchaffairsofone’slifeAsinvolvemorefundamentalsatisfactions.ButisgoingtothebeachMorefundamentalthanseeingthewaterboil?Savingofmoney.It’swellknown,canresultfromanaestheticattitude,sincearockPickedupinthestreetcontainsalltheshapeandhardnessoftheworld.Onesidewalkleadseverywhere.Youdon’thavetobeinEstapan. 185 AseriousmomentfortheislandiswhenitstreesBegintogiveitshade,andanotheriswhentheoceanwashesBigheavythingsagainstitsside.OnewalksaroundandlooksattheislandButnotreallyatit,atwhatisonit,andonethinks.Itmustbeserious,even,tobethisisland,atall,here.Sinceitislyinghereexposedtothewholesea.AllitsMomentsmightbeserious.Itisserious,insuchwindyweather,tobeasailOranopenwindow,orafeatherflyinginthestreet. Seriousness,howoftenIhavethoughtofseriousnessAndhowlittleIhaveunderstoodit,exceptthis:seriousisurgentAndithastodowithchange.Yousaytothewater.It’snotnecessarytoboilnow,andyouturnitoff.ItstopsFidgeting.Andstartstocool.YouputyourhandinitAndsay.Thewaterisn’tseriousanymore.Ithasthepotential.However—thaturgencytogiveoffbubbles,toChangeitselftosteam.Andthewind.Whenitbecomespartofahurricane,blowingupthebeachAndthesanddunescan’tkeepitaway.Faintingisonesignofseriousness,cryingisanother.Shudderingalloverisanotherone. Aseriousmomentforthetelephoneiswhenitrings.Andapersonanswers,itisAngelica,orisityouAndfinally,atlast,whoanswer,mywing,mypast,myAngel,myflume,andmyde-control,myorangeandmygood-byekiss.Myextravagance,andmyweightatfifteenyearsoldAndattheheightofmyintelligence,ohCordilleratwoAndsandalsone,C’esttoiaI’appareil?IsthatyouatThetelephone,andwhenitsnows,aseriousmomentforthebusiswhenitsnowsForthenithastoslowdownforsliding,andeverymomentisatrust. AseriousmomentfortheflyiswhenitswingsAremoving,andaseriousmomentfortheduck 186 Iswhenitswims,whenitfirsttoucheswater,thenspreadsItssmileuponthewater,itsfeetbegintopaddle,itisinAndabovethewater,pushingitselfforward,aduck.Andaseriousmomentfortheskyiswhen,completelyblue.Itfeelssomecloudscoming;anotherwhenitturnsdark.AseriousmomentforthematchiswhenitburstsintoflameAndisallalone,living,inthatinstant,thatbeautifulsecondforwhichitwasmade.Somuchwentintoit!Themenatthematchfactory,themoodofThepublic,thesandcoveringthebarnSoitwashardtofindthephosphorus,andnowthisflame.Thispinkwhiteecstaticlightblue!Forthetelephonewhenitrings.Forthewindwhenitblows,andforthematchwhenitburstsintoflame. Serious,allourlifeisserious,andweseearoundusSeriousnessforotherthings,thattouchesusandseemsasifitmightbegivingclues.TheseriousnessofthehousewhenitisbeingbuiltAndisalmostcompleted,andthenthemomentwhenitiscompleted.Theseriousnessofthebeewhenitstings.Wesay.Hehastakenhislife.Merelytosting.Whywouldhedothat?AndwefeelWearen’tconcentratedenough,notpure,notdeepAsthebuzzingbee.ThebeefliesintothehouseAndlightsonachairarmandsitsthere,waitingforsomethingtobeOtherthanitis,sohecanflyagain.Heisboiling,waiting.SoonheisforgottenAndeveryoneisspeakingagain. Seriousness,everyonespeaksofseriousnessCertainheknowsorseekingtoknowwhatitis.AchildisbittenbyananimalAndthatisserious.Thedoctorhasaseriouslife.Heissomewhat,inthat,likethebee.Andwater!water—howitisneeded!anditisalwaysgoingdownSeekingitsownlevel,evaporating,boiling,nowchangingintoiceAndsnow,nowmakingupourbodies.Wedrinkthecoffee 187 AndsomewhereinthismomentisthechanceWewillneverseeeachotheragain.ItisseriousforthetreeTobemoving,theflexibilityofitsmovingBeingthesignofitscontinuinglife.AndnowthereareitsblossomsAndthefactthatitisblossomingagain,itisfillingupwithPinkandwhitishblossoms,itisfullofthem,thewindblows,itisWarm,though,somuchishappening,itisspring,thepeoplestepoutAnddoorsswingin,andbillionsofinsectsareborn.YoucallmeandtellmeYoufeelyourlifeisn’tworthliving.IsaythatI’mcomingtoseeyou.I putthekeyinAndthecarbeginstoclatter,andnowitstarts. SeriousformethatImetyou,andseriousforyouThatyoumetme,andthatwedonotknowIfwewilleverbeclosetoanyoneagain.SerioustherecognitionoftheprobabilityThatwewill,althoughtimestretchesterriblyinbetween.ItisseriousnottoknowAndtoknowandtotrytofigurethingsout.One’slegsCross,footswings,andacigaretteisblooming,agraybouquet,andThewaterisboiling.Seriousthebirth(whataphenomenon!)ofanythingandThemovementsofthetrees,andfortheloversEverythingtheydoandsee.SeriousintermittentlyforconsciousnessThesignthatsomethingmaybehappening,always,today.Thatisenough.Forthegermwhenitentersorleavesabody.Fortheflywhenitliftsitslittlewings. ToMarina Somanyconvolutionsandnotenoughsimplicity!WhenIhadyoutowritetoitWasdifferent.Thequiet,dryZLeapeduptothefrontofthealphabet.Yousit,stillingyourspoonsWithonehand;youmovethemwiththeother.Radiosays,“Godisapostmaster.”Yousaid,Zissislawflee.AndintheheatOfwritingtoyouIwrotesimply.IthoughtThesearethebestthingsIshalleverwriteAndhaveeverwritten.Ithoughtofnothingbuttouchingyou.Thoughtofseeingyouand,inaseparatethought,oflookingatyou.Youwereconcentratedfeelingandthought.YouwereliketheoceanInwhichmypoemsweretheswimming.IbroughtyouEarrings.Yousaid.Thesearelawflee.WewentTosomebeach,wherethesandwasdirty.JustgoinginTothebathinghousewithyoudroveme“outofmymind.” Itiswisetobewitty.Theshirtcollar’sfaraway.Mentrampupanddownthecityonthiswindyday. Iamfeelinga-politicalasashellBroughtoffsomefish.Twenty-oneyearsAgoIsawyouandlovedyoustill.Still!Itwasn’tplentyOftime.ReadAnatoleFrance.Bored,alittle.ReadTolstoy,replacedandovercome.YoureadStendhal. Itoldyouto.WherewasreplacementThen?Idon’tknow.Heshushedusbackintoourselves. IusedtounderstandThehighestexcitement.SomeonediedAndyouweredistant.IwentawayAndmadeyoudistant.Whereareyounow?IseethechairAndhangontoitforsustenance.GoodGodhowyoukissedmeAndIheldyou.YouscreamedAndIwasn’tbotheredbyanything.Wasnearestyou. 189 AndyouweresorealisticPreferringtheSovietBookstoreTomyliterarydreams.“Youdon’tlikewar,”yousaidAfterreadingapoemInwhichI’dsimplysaidIhatedwarInawholelistofthings.ToyouItseemedaposition,tomeItwasallaflux,especiallythen. IwasinanUnexpectedsituation.Let’stakeawalk Iwrote.AndIloveyouasasheriffSearchesforawalnut.AndAndsounlessI’mgoingtoseeyourfaceBiensoon,andyousaidYoumusttakemeaway,andOhKennethYoulikeeverythingTobepleasant.IwasburningLikeanarchMadeoutoftrees. I’mnotsureweeveractuallytookawalk.Weweresodamnednervous.Iwasheadingsomewhere.AndyouhadtobeAtanappointment,orelsebefoundout!Illicitlove!It’snotathingtothinkof.Norisitwhenit’slicit!Itistoomuch!Anditwasn’tenough.Theachievement IthoughtIsawpossiblewhenIlovedyouWasthatreallyachievement?WereyoumyLastchancetofeelthatIhadlostmychance? IgrewfaintatyourvoiceonthetelephoneElectricityandallcolorsweremine,andthetopsofhillsAndeverythingthatbreathes.Thatwasafeeling.CertainArtisticcareershadnotevenstarted.AndI Couldhavesurpassedthem.IcouldhaveIthinkputthe 190 wholeworldunderourfeet.Youwereintherestaurant.ItWasChinese.Wehavewalkedthreeblocks.Orfourblocks.ItisNewYorkInnineteenfifty-three.NothinghasasyethappenedThatwilleverhappenandwillmeanasmuchtome.Yousmile,andturnyourhead. WhatrocketingtherewasinmyfaceandinmyheadAndbombingeverywhereinmybody IlovedyouIknewsuddenlyThatnothinghadmeantanythinglikeyou Imusthavehoped(crazily)thatsomethingwouldAsifthinkingyouwerethepersonIhadbecome. Mysleepisbeginningtobebegun.Andthesheetswereonthebed.Aclockrangabird’ssongrattledintomytypewriter. Ihadbeenthinkingaboutsongswhichwereveryabstract.Languagewasthechampion.ThepaperslaypiledonmydeskItwasreallyatable.Now,thetelephone.Hello,what?Whatismylifelikenow?Engaged,studyingandlookingaroundThelibrary,teaching—ItookitrathereasyAlittletooeasy—wewenttotheballetThendarkbecomesthelight(blinding)ofthenexteightydays.OrchestracupbecameAsbeautifulasanorchestraoracup,andLockedclimbsbecomesIfwewerelocked,wellnotquite,ratherOhpennilesscouldIreallydie,andIunderstoodeverythingWhichbeforewasrunningthiswayandthatinmyhead Isawtitles,volumes,andsunsIfeltthehotPressureofyourhandsinthatrestaurantTowhich,alongwithglasses,plates,lamps,lusters.Tablecloths,napkins,andalltheotherjunkYouaddedmylifeforitwasentirelyinyourhandsthen — MylifeYours,MySisterLifeofPasternak’sbeautifultitleMylifewithoutalife,mylifeinalife,mylifeimpureAndmylifepure,lifeseenasanentity OnedeathandavarietyofdaysAndonlyonelife. Iwasn’treadyForyou. IunderstoodnothingSeeminglyexceptmyfeelingsYouwerewhirlingInyourlife IwaskeepingEverythinginmyheadAnartistfriend’sapartmentFiveflightsuptheLowerEastSidenineteenFifty-somethingIdon’tknowWhatwemadelovethefirsttimeI AlmostdiedIhadneverfeltThatwayitwaslikebeingstampedoninHellItwasrosesofHeavenMyfriendsseemedturnedtometoemptyshell Ontherailroadtrain’sredvelvetbackYouputyourhandinmineandsaid“Itoldhim”Orwasitthetimeafterthat? IsaidWhydidyouDothatyousaidIthoughtItwasover.Why?BecauseyouweresoNervousofmybeingthereitwassomethingIthought IreadTolstoy.Yousaid Idon’tlikethewayitturnsout(AnnaKarenina)IhadjustlikedthestrengthOfthefeelingyouthoughtAbouttheend.IwantedToIdon’tknowwhatneverleaveyou 92 FiveflightsuptheJuneStreetemptiedoffans,cups,kites,cops,eats,nights,noThenightwasthereAndsomethinglikeairIloveyouMarinaEighty-fivedaysFourthousandthreehundredandsixty-TwominutesallpoetrywaschangedFormewhatdidIdoinexchange Iamselfish,afraidyouareOverwhelminglyparade,back,sunshine,dreamsLaterthousandsofdreams YousaidYoumakemefeelnawble(noble).IsaidYes.IsaidTonothingness.Thisisallpoems.Anotheronesaid(later)ThatissoAmerican.YouwereRussian.Youthoughtofyourfeelings,onesaid,notofher.Notoftherealsituation.Butmyfeelingswereapart.Theyweretheforceoftherealsituation.TruertosayIthoughtNotofthewholesituationForyourhusbandwasalsoapartAndyourfeelingsaboutyourchildwereapartAndallmyotherfeelingswereapart.WeTurnedthiswayandthat,up-StairsthendownIntothestreets.DidIdiebecauseIdidn’tstaywithyou?OrwhatdidIloseofmylife?IlostYou.IputyouIneverythingIwrote. IusedthatpreciousmaterialIputitinformsAlsoIwantedtobreakdowntheformsPoetrywasarealoccupationTohellwiththenorms,withwhatisalreadywrittenTwenty-nineinlovefindspureexpression 193 Twenty-nineyearsyoumywholelife’sdigressionNottakenandOhKennethEverythingafterwardsseemednowherenearWhatIcoulddotheninseveralminutes — Iwrote,“IwanttolookatyoualldaylongBecauseyouaremine.” Iamtwenty-nine,pocketflapfoldedAndIamsmilingIamlookingoutataworldthat Isignificantlyre-createdfrominsideOutofcontradictoryactionsandemotions.IlooklikeasillychildthatPhotographthatyear—bigglasses,unthought-ofclothes,Asuit,slightmessingeneral,croppedhair.Andsomeonelikedme.Lovedmealot,Ithink.Andsomeoneelsehad,youhad,too.IwasUndrenchedbythetearsI’dshedlateraboutthiswholethingwhenI’dtelephoneyouI’dbeallnerves,thoughinfactAlllifewasafactorandallmynerveswereinmyhead.IfeelPeculiar.OrIfeelnothing.Iamthinkingaboutthispoem.Iamthinkingaboutyourraincoat, Iamworriedaboutthetactfulness.AboutthetruthofwhatIsay. IamthinkingaboutmystandardsformyactionsAboutwhattheywereYouraisedmystandardsforharmonyandforhappinesssomuchAnd,too,thesenseofacenterWhichdidamazingthingsformytasteButmytasteforaction?forhonesty,fordirectnessinbehavior? IbelieveIsimplyneverfeltthatanythingcouldgowrongThiswasabjectstupidity IalsowascarelessinhowIdrovethenandinwhatIateAnddrankitwaseasiertofeelthatnothingcouldgowrong Ihadthosefeelings.I Didnotthosethings.IwasinvolvedinsuchandsuchAsituation,artisticallyandsocially.WeneverspentanightTogetheritistheNewYorkof 194 AquamarinesunshineandtheLoew’sTheater’sblazingswingoflightInthemiddleoftheday Let’stakeawalkIntotheworldWhereifourshoesgetwhiteWithsnow,isitsnow,Marina,Isitsnoworlight?Let’stakeawalkEverydetailiseverythinginitsplace(Aristotle).LiteratureisacupAndwearethemalted.Thetimeisaglass.AJunebugcomesAndacarpenterspitsonaplane,theflowersruffleearrings. Iamsodumb-looking.Andyouaresobeautiful. SittingintheHudsonTubeWalkingupthefuskystreetAlwayswaitingtoseeyouYoutheoriginalcreationofallmyYou,youtheyouIneverypoemthehiddenonewhomIamtalkingtoWorkedatBamberger’sonceIwentwithyoutoCerutti’sBar—onMadisonAvenue?IheldyourhandandyousaidKennethyouareplayingwithfire.IsaidSomethingwittyinreply.ItwasthetimeoftheMcCarthytrialHotsunlightonlunches.YousquirtedRedwineintomymouth.MyfeelingswerelikeafiremywordsbecameveryclearMypsycheorwhateveritisthatputstogethermotionsandemotionsWasunprepared.TherewasagoodpartAndanalarminglybadpartwhichdidn’tcorrespond — Noletters!noseemingconnection!yourslimpalehandItactuallywas,yourblondnessandyourturning-around-to-melook.Good-byeKenneth. No,Marina,don’tgoAndwhathadbeenbeforewouldcomeafter 195 Nottobemysteriouswe’dbetogethermakeloveagainItwasthewildestthingI’vedone IcanhardlyrememberitIthasgottenbynowSomixedupwithlosingyouThetwoalmostseeminsomewaythesame.YouWoresomethingsoft—angora?cashmere? Irememberthatitwasblack.YouturnedaroundAndonsuchaspringdaywhichwentonandonandon IactuallythinkIfeltthatIcouldkeepThestrongestofallfeelingscontainedinsidemeProducingendlessemotionaldesigns. WiththeincomparablefeelingofrisingandofbeinglikeabannerTwentysecondsworthtwenty-fiveyearsWithfeelingnobleextremelymobileandveryfreeWithTakingaWalkWithYou,WestWind,InLoveWithYou,andYellowRosesWithpleasureIfeltmylegmusclesandmybraincouldn’tholdWiththeEmpireStateBuildingtherestaurantyourwristboneswithGreenwichAvenueInnineteenfifty-onewithheathumidityadogpissingwithneonWiththefeelingthatatlastMybodyhadsomethingtodoandsodidmymindYousitAtthewindow.YoucallMe,acrossParis,Amsterdam,NewYork.Kenneth!MySovietGirlhood.MySpring,summerAndfall.DoyouKnowyouhaveMissedsomeofthem?Almostall.Iam 196 WaitingandIAmfadingI AmfaintingI’mInadegradingstateOfinactivity.AballRollsinthegutter.IhaveTwohandstoStopit.IamAflowerIpickThevendorhisClothesgettingupTooearlyandWhatisitmakesthisroseIntowhatismorefragrantthanwhatisnot? IamstunnedIamfeelingtorturedBy“Amanofwordsandnotamanofdeeds” IwaswaitinginataxicabItwaswhitelettersinwhitepaintsitwasyouSpringcomes,summer,thenfallAndwinter.WereallyhavemissedAllofthat,whateverelsetherewasInthoseyearssosandedbyourabsence. Ineversawyouforaslongashalfaday. YouwerecryingoutsidethebusstationAndIwascrying — Iknewthatthisreallywasmylife — IkeptthinkingofhowwewerecryingLater,whenIwasspeaking,driving,walking.Lookingatdoorwaysandcolors,mysteriousentrancesSometimesI’dbepiercedasbyaneedleSometimesbefeverishasfromawordBooksclosedandI’dthink Ican’treadthisbook,IthrewawaymylifeTheseheldontotheirlives.Iwas 197 Excitedbypraisefromanyone,startledbycriticism,alwayshatingitTravelingaroundEuropeandbeingexcitedItwasallinreferencetoyouAndfeelingIwasnotgraduallyforgettingWhatyourtemplesandcheekboneslookedlikeAndalwayswiththissecret. LaterIthoughtThatwhatIhaddonewasreasonableItmayhavebeenreasonable IalsothoughtthatIsawwhathadappealedtomeSomuchaboutyou,thewayyourespondedToeverythingyourexcitementaboutMe,Ihadneverseenthat.AndthefactThatyouwereRussian,verymysterious,allthatIdidn’tknowAboutyou—andyoudidn’tknowMe,forIwasasstrangetoyouasyouweretome.YouwerelikemyfirsttriptoFranceyouhadMadenoassumptions.IcouldbeClearlyandpassionatelyandNobly(asyou’dsaid)whoIwas—attheouterlimitsofmylifeOfmylifeasmylifecouldbeIdeally.ButwhataboutthedarkpartallthisliftedMeoutof?Wouldmybadmoods,myuncertainties,myDistrustofpeopleIwascloseto,theTwistypartsofmyambition,myEnvy,allhavegoneaway?AndifTheyhadn’tgone,what?Fordidn’tIneedAllthestrengthyoumademefeelIhad,todealWiththedifficultiesofreallyhavingyou?Wherecouldwehavebeen?ButIsawsomanynewpossibilitiesThatitmademeratherhaterealityOrIthinkperhapsIalreadydid Ididn’tcareabouttheconsequencesBecausetheyweren’t“poetic”weren’t“ideal” 198 AndohwellyousaidwewalkalongYourwhitedressyourbluedressyourgreenBlousewithsleevesthenonewithoutSleevesandwearespeakingOfthingsbutnotofverymuchbecauseunderneathit IamravingIamboilingIamafraidYouaskmeKennethwhatareyouthinkingIfIcouldsayItallthenIthoughtifIcouldsayExactlyeverythingandhaveitstillbeasbeautifulBillowingover,ridingoverbothourdoubtsSomekindofperfectionandwhatdidIactuallySay?Marinait’slate.MarinaIt’searly.Iloveyou.Orelse,What’sthisstreet?YouweretheperfectionofmylifeAndIcouldn’thaveyou.Thatis,Ididn’t. Icouldn’tthink.Iwrote,instead.IwouldhavehadTothinkhard,tofigureeverythingoutAbouthowIcouldbewithyou.Really,whichIcouldn’tdoInthosemomentsofpermanencewehadAswewalkedalong. Wewalkthroughtheparkinthesun.Itistheend.Youphoneme.Isendyouatelegram.ItIstheend.IkeepThinkingaboutyou,grievingaboutyou.Itistheend.IwritePoemsaboutyou,toyou.TheyArenolongersimple.NolongerAreyoutheretoseeeverydayorEveryotheroreverythirdorfourthwarmdayAndnowithasbeentwenty-fiveyearsButthosefeelingskeptorchestratingImeanrehearsingRehearsinginmeandtuningupWhileIwasdoingathousandotherthings,thebandIsready,Iamoverfiftyyearsoldandthere’snoyou — Andnome,either,notasIwasthen. 199 whenitwastheRenaissanceFilteredthroughmynervesandweaknessOfnineteenfifty-fourorfifty-three,WhenIhadyoutowriteto,whenIcouldseeyouAnditcouldchange. 200 fromDaysandNights i * t' m-9 InBed MORNINGSINBEDAreenergeticmornings. SNOWINBEDwhenwegotoutofbedItwassnowing. MENINBEDAlloverParisMenareinbed. BEAUTIFULGIRLINBEDWhyIamhappytobehere. LONGRELATIONSHIPINBEDThespringsandthebedpostsArereadytheminutewecomein. DOLLSINBEDWithlittlegirls. HAMMERANDNAILSINBEDTomakeitbetterTheyaremakingitabetterbedAndabiggerbed,firmerandlargerAndfinerbed.SothehammerandnailsinthebedAndthecarpenter’sfingerAndthumbandhiseyesandhisshoulder.Bang!Bang!Smap!Thehammerandnailsinbed. SHEEPINBEDThesheepgotintothebedBymistake. 203 BUYINGANEWBEDOneofthefirstthingsyoudidWasbuyanewbed. WINDOWINBED IlookedatyouAndyoulookedback. MARRIEDINBEDWe’llbemarriedinbed.Thepreachers,thewitnesses,andallourfamiliesWillalsobeinbed. POETRYBEDWhenasinbedThen,then OTHERPOETRYBEDShallIcompareyoutoasummer’sbed?Youaremorebeautiful. ORCHIDSINBEDsheplacedorchidsinthebedOnthatdarkbluewintermorning. LYINGINBEDBedwithSpaininitBedwithGibraltarinitBedofart! LOVERSINBEDAreloversnomoreThanloversonthestreet. 204 (SeePicasso’s“PairofYoungMountebanks,”FC533,Greuze’s“Noces,”orhearMozart’s“Fleichtscausenmusik,”Kochel427) SOMEBEDOnceHeldThisAll GODINBEDChristWasnotBorn(AnddidNotdie)Inabed. LEGERINBEDAboveourapartmentIn1955LivedFernandLeger. SHOUTINGINBEDWewakeupTothesoundofshouts. FRIENDSINBEDSleepwell. ANGELICCEREMONYINBEDPuttingonthesheets. MYSTERYOFBEDShetakesitforgrantedThathewillstayupallnightlong. 205 WORKMENINBEDWithworkmen’swivesAndworkmen’sgirlfriendsAndotherworkmenAnddolls. ACAPULCOINBEDInMexico,withblueshimmeringwater,Acapulcoisinbed. MYINTOXICATIONINBEDWasnotlong-lasting.Wasfantastic.Didnotleadmetobeverywell-mannered.Wasn’tcompletelyromantic. BASKETBALLINBEDThebasketballisthrownonthebed. EXPENSIVEBEDAttheLutetia500francsanightIntheHopitalSt-Antoine1000francsanight THEATRICALBEDExceededexpectationsAndreceivedapplause. SIRENSINBEDMyfaceisplasteredtothewindowWhenthesirenscome. COURTSHIPINBED“Please.Tellmeyoulikeme.”“Howdidyougetinthisbed?” 206 WETDOGINBEDThereisnothinglikeawetdoginbed. DOGBEDInthedogbed Icannotsleep. ATOMICBEDBillionsof—uncountable—electronsComposethisbed. BEINGINBEDBelongstoeveryoneBedwithSpaininitBedofart! SNOWINBED(later)whenitstoppedsnowingWestillhadn’tgonetobed PHILOSOPHYINBED«PlatosaysthisbedIsn’ttherealone.WhatdidPlatoknowAboutbeds? ('•)SpinozaconstructedabedWhichwassleptinbyAlfredNorthWhitehead. (xLiv)Yousay,“Let’sgotobed”Butthosewordshavenomeaning. 207 SOUTHAMERICAINBEDBrazil,Argentina,Ecuador,andPeruAreinbed.ThefirstthingyoudidWastobuyanewbed. ASWELAYINBEDWesawthestarsstartingtocometogetherAswelayinbed. POLIZIANOINBEDAngeloPolizianoNeverwenttobedWasitheorCastiglione — TheperfectRenaissanceman?LUNCHINBED It’slate!Getup!TheroseatefruittreesAreblushingwith.thenapeofnew-frockedday!Awake!ThemodernbreezeofspringIspulsativethroughnest-caromingbranches! COWARDSINBEDAfraidtoturnover.Comeon.Comeon,turnover.Cowardsinbed. Chopin’setudesinbedHereisthebedOfChopin’sEtudes;OverhereishisPreludes’bed;AndhereisthebedofhisMazurkas. PRELUDESINBEDTherearenopreludesinbedToday. 208 let’sgotobedwhenthetreeIsblossoming.ItwillbeAlongtimeBeforeitisblossomingagain. STONESINBEDInthebedarestonesFromEgyptandEtruriaAndsomemagazinesandapouchoftobacco. BED I’dwakeupeverymorningAndlookoutthewindowacrossthepark. WOODENMECHANICALFIGUREINDICATINGABEDWithamightysmileAndamightygestureHedisclosesthebed. Y.SICKINBEDSaid,Ifthereisaheaven IwantittolookLikewhatisoutthere. MORNINGSINBEDArepensivemornings. SUICIDE IwasunabletotellyouanyreasonTogetoutofbed 209 ABLUEANDWHITEBEDBecameayellowandgoldone,Thenwasgreen,palegreen.Thenviolet,thenonyx.Yesonyx,thenitwasanonyxbed. BALCONIESINBEDWhenyouleanoverWhenyoufallWhenyouspeak BEDSINTHEGARDENSOFSPAINTothesoundofaguitarWhenyouentertheroom. POETRYINBEDDoyourememberhowthisstarted — With“MorningsinBed”and“SnowinBed”? RISPETTOGood-byetobed.TheceilinglosesitschanceToseeyousmileagainInjustthatway. LUXEMBOURGBEDThebedfliespastLikeaswing. ADVANCEBEDAdvancearm.Advancestairs.Advancepower.Advancebed. 210 CHILDBEDYouhadtwobabiesBeforewemetABSTRACTBEDThereispaintOntheabstractbed. ORCHIDSINBEDsheplacedorchidsonthebedOnadarkredwinterafternoon. ATENDEBEDAtEndebedImettyouYougouponthelift,no,yesThenwehearingfromsoundsofguitarsAmericansstrollingbingohatrackinthelake. ENEMIESINBEDEnemiessleepinseparatebedsButinthesamepartofthecity. PRIMAVERAHemakesupthebedAndfollowsherhome. ESTATEThebedliesintheroomThewaysheliesinthebed. SAWBEDInthebedofthesawThesawdustisdying. 211 WINDOWBEDFromhennatoblueallvioletisinbed. ZENBED Ican’tgettobed.ShowmethebedandIwillshowyouhowtogettoit. LARGESUNDAYBEDDomingo.Domenica.Dimanche. SATURDAYBEDSabato. SNOWINBEDWhenwegetoutofbedThereisnomorebed. WOMENINBEDEverywhereinParisWomenareinbed. MARRIEDINBEDWedidnotgetmarriedInbed. FALSEBEDThereareEastereggsRedblueyellowandwhite-pinkInthefalsebed. 212 INVITINGSOMEONEFROMBEDCome,letmehelpyououtofbed.Thesunisshining.Thewindowisopen.Look!Fromthebalconythereisthestreet,whichislikeabed. THEFUTUREBEDWillbelilacincolorAndintheshapeofanLoraZ. GUITARSINBEDwhenwegetoutofbedWehearguitars. POST-MODERNISMINBEDKandinsky,Arp,Valery,Leger,andMarinettiArekickedoutofbed.Then,foralongtime,nobodygetsbackintoit. THEHOLIDAYSOFBEDArewhennooneisthere. GEORGICSINBEDPlantingwheatandryeandoats—explaininghowtodoitAndwhen,whatkindofsunlightisneededandhowmuchrain. STRANGEBEDFELLOWSThebeargotintobedWithhisclaws. CHAIRMANBEDThereisalittleredbookInthebed. 213 SHOWERBEDForherengagementtheygaveherashowerAndforhermarriagetheywenttobed. MANTEQUILLABEDButterbed,beurrebed,burrobed. THESMOPHORIAZUSAEINBEDEuripidesputtheThesmophoriazusaeinbed;ThenhealsoputinbedElektra,Jason,andSophocles.Aristophanessaid.Here,letmeputyoutobed.No!Euripidesscreamed.ButAristophanesdidPutEuripidesintobedwiththeThesmophoriazusae. POETRYBEDTohaveitallatonce,andmakenodecisions.Butthatisadecision. OLIVETREEBEDAlongthesideofthehillAmidthegreenandgraytreesThereisaplacethatlookslikeabed. IAMSORRYIdidn’tEXPECTTOFINDYOUINBEDWithmeImusthavemisdialedthetelephoneohWaitaminute—damn!Ican’textricateMyselffromthesesheetsyesI’mgettingupwhatDidyouexpectaftersuchalongnightatthefactoryOfunexplainedphenomenawithyourheadandshouldersBeautifulasatelephonedirectorybutpleasedon’ttalktomeaboutlove IhaveanappointmentwithmyheadwiththedeadwithapheasantWithasongI’mnervousgood-bye.Itwastheendofbed. 214 STREAMBEDInthestreambedThesnailsgotosleep. PHILOSOPHYOFBEDAmanshouldbelikeawomanandawomanshouldbelikeananimalInbedisonetheory.Anotheristhattheybothshouldbelikebeds. WENEVERWENTTOBEDListen,Kenny,Ithinkit’sagreatidea!saidMaxineAndshehelpedmesellmybooktoChelseaHouse.Itwasspring,withjusttheslightesthintofwhiteandpinkinthebranches. MALLARMESBEDAnangelcame,whileMallarmelayinbed.Whenhewasachild,andopeneditshandsToletwhitebouquetsofperfumedstarssnowdown. PSYCHOANALYTICCRITICISMINBEDWhatareyoutryingtoavoidtalkingaboutWhenyoutalkaboutbed? STORMINBED ItwassuchabadstormThatwewerehurledoutofbed. FLEURUSBEDTherewereflowersonthewallpaper,Therewaslossandpresentexcitement.Therewashopeforthefuture,anxietyaboutthepast.Doubtsandhopesaboutmywork,andmuchtocome.AsIlayinmybedontheruedeFleurus. 215 CARTOONBEDThedoorswingsopenandthebedcomesinMakingatremendousracketandbumpingaround.. OWLINBEDTheowlflewintobedBymistake. DAYBEDwhenIlovedyouThenthatwholetimeWaslikeabedAndthatwholeyearWaslikeadaybed. DENIEDBEDWewerenotinbedWhensummercame. LEFORMATDUMOULINAGAZINBEDTheconvictofthegasmillisinbed. SNOWINBEDVanishingsnowflakes,rooftopsappearingAndsidewalksandpeopleandcarsaswegetoutofbed. DISCOBOLUSINBEDThediscusthrowerIsstillinbed. 216 GirlandBabyFloristSidewalkPramNineteenSeventySomething Sweepingpasttheflorist’scamethebabyandthegirl Iamthegirl!Iamthebaby! Iamthefloristwhoisfilledwithmood! Iamthemood.IamthegirlwhoisinsidethebabyForitisababygirl.Iamoldstyleoflife.IamthenewEverythingaswell.Iamtheeveninginwhichyoudockedyourfirstkiss.Anditcametothebaby.AndIamtheboyhoodofthegirlWhichsheneverhas.Iamtheflorist’sunknownbabyHehasn’thadoneyet.ThefloristisinawhirlSomuchexcitement,section,outsidehisshopOrhers.Whoishe?Wheregoesthebaby?SheIsimmenselygoingtogrowup.HowmuchDoesthisrentfor?It’smorethanapenny.It’smoreThanamillioncents.Mydear,itislifeitself.Roses?Chrysanthemums?Ifyoucan’tbuythemI’llgiveThemfornothing.Ohno,Ican’t.Maybemybabyisallergictotheirspores.Sothenthegirlandherbabygoaway.FloriststandswhistlingNeitherinsidenoroutsidethinkingaboutthemountainsofPeru. 217 WithJanice Theleaveswerealreadyonthetrees,thefruitblossomsWhiteandnotruinedandpinkandnotruinedandweWereridinginaboatoverthewaterinwhichtherewasaseaHidingthemeaningsofalloursaltywords.AduckOragooseandaboatandastoneandastonecliff.TheHardnesses—and,withalittlesmile—oflife.SittingEarlierorlaterandforgottenthewordsandthebeesAtsuppertheywereaboutinhowyoualmostgesturedbutstoppedKnowingtherewereonlyoneortwothings,andthattherestWeremerelycomplications.ButoneinatrenchcoatsaidIt’sreversible.And,It’sasout-of-dateasareversiblecoat.AndMagnaBearandMinorOrseweresleeping.ThesoapWasclimbinginitsdishbutrelaxedandcamedownwhencoldwaterstoppedRushinginandthebathroomwasflooded.Isaid.ItisnotaboutThingsbutwiththingsI’dliketogoand,too.WillitlastOrwillallbecomeuniformagain?EvenasshegoesPotteringaroundtheisland’speripheriesshethinksOftheobligations.Andthesympathies,farstrongerthanbears. Iwasabushthere,ahatonaclothesdummy’shead.ReceivinglettersSatdown.Iavoidedbeingpunished.Isaid.It’scuttingthelimbsoffatreebuttherewasnoTreeandIhadnosaw.IwasplanningtohaveinfiniteegressWhilekeepingsomefactoryonthesurfaceexceedinglycold.ItwasAgoodsourceofevening.Sweating,asleepintheafter-Noons,laterthemorningofthumps,unwhittledquestions,thefreezinghead.AtnightDrinkingwhiskey,thefishermenwere,everyonesaid,away.AchrysanthemumthoughstillfullofsplashesitHaslostsomelittleofitsodorformynostrilsandagirlInachalk-pink-and-whitedressishandingonthecliffAglassofemeraldwatertoapin,orisitachicken,asyougetCloseryoucanseeitisamirrormadeofthebrawnOfwatermusclessplashingthatwhichhasbeen.Myself,liketheconnectionsofanengine—rabbitsandthenewyear — Havingpuzzledoutsomethingincommon,abluestoneduckAsifHomerHesiodandShakespearehadneverlivedatall 218 Andweweren’tthedeposit.WeinsteinputsonhishatAndthewomengocrazy.Somefaltertowardthesea.Wein-Steincomeback!Butheisleaving.HesaysLeonard!Good-bye!SoLeonardinvitesusTocomeandtosee,wherethewhitewaterbucketisadashboardOfthisplacetothat.Youwillwanttogoswimming,andyouwillwanttomeetThesesnobbishabsurdAmericanswhoinhabitThegessoincalcationsonthecliff.AndwewentlikeanoseToaneighborface.SometimestiltingthegrappaOrinthiscasetheouzoitspillsonmyclothesoronyours,theworldwithoutus,theworldoutsideAswhenoneofuswassick,whichalsobroughttheoutworldin.AndtheartworldmeanwhileWasstrummingalong.IndividualstrugglesWilllongberemembered,ofXXX’sdoingthis.OfYYYY’sdoingthat.Soapwhichwillstartlazilyupfromthosetypes.ThenWeremembertoleaveandalsotostay.JanicesaidItmaynotbehookedonright.WeinsteinhasbeenwalkingDownafloweryway.Good-bye,naturelovers!hecrescendoed.Alockedsail.Thebulletofthisbuttonisn’tright.AndthetrainlaughedAndpulledoutpullinghalfofthestationwithit.ThedustWasindifferenttoAmericansastoGreeks.WhatsimplywashappeningWasbeyondtherusticationofideasintotheelementsbutessentiallythesame.Meanwhile,grassesmatted.Theleaveswinced,ideasonehadhadinearliestchildhooddaysWeresurprisinglybecomingsuccinct,maybejustbeforevanishingOrturningintosomethingyouwouldfeellikeabelt.Circlingbutnotinhand.IwouldfindtheseandsetthemdownOnthesizzlingwhitepaperthatwasslipperierthanthekneesThatmademefeelguilty,andsometimesheavierthantheovercoatswhichthereweneverhadForsomeone’schest’sattention.ItwasalwaysdistractionButitwasalsoachair.Andachairismerelyacivilizeddistraction.IfCharacterwasn’teverything,itwassomethingelseIdidn’tKnowlessthangeography,whichistosay.Surprise,Wonder, 219 Delight.YoustoodthereandthestonesOfOldGreeceandourlives,thosecollegiatestones,Harvard,Emory,andMarymount,withtheblueexegesisofthetideAgainstwhichtofallwasaheadline—Don’tstand.Yougivethiswishtome—Apollo,insomemanneroftime,liveson.InsideyourmindThingsarebeingwashed.EverythingwasdockingAndwewentdowntoseeit.MemoriesofwomenmadeexactlythesameKneelingdowninthehotraftofdaisiesItalsogotraggedformywalks.WhenarewegoingToreallyhavethetimetohavetime?ImakelovetoyouLikearopeswingingacrossastonewallandyouArelilacsreflectedinamirrororseenthroughawindow.Goingout.YousaidIlikethisone.ApalepinkdressThesudsweredrivingthroughthewater.MovingfairlyfastagainsttheJustplainoxygenweendeduplookingAlittlebitovercome.ButIgotupYougotup.WewentaroundSpillingthingsandputtingafewofthemonracks.ThoseweretheimportantthingswenevergotdoneBecausetheywerebehindusorSurpassingus,otherwiseunavailable—cherryBlossoms,claviclesofgirlswhichIcan’ttouchIntheinnocuousness,beetles,burringandscamperingaroundarose Iseeisnolongerthere.Blossomsonthewalkwewerehere,werethereAsmuchastheheatwas.IdriedmyearatthesinkThendriedtheotherandquietedmylipsandmynoseWithabrinydrytowelandyousliduponyourshoesAndKatherinejumpedup,ranaround.SoonshewillbeOutasusual,downtheroadwayformallyunopenedFormyapproach,asifnottobedrunkWereaconfidencevotefromtheleavesfortheturmoilinsideTheouzo-fedenginesofourselves,when,seatedonslabsofwoodAsrosesontoughgroundaseggswereonthemorning,decidingtoleave.Weoversleeptheboat,ashirt,awhiteshirtgleaming 220 Onthephotographicexceptionofthetide.Anairlaneofstyles.Ifitwassaid,It’shopelessAndyousaid,ThegardensaregoingoverTheedgeoftheoversidesidewalk.Well,Maybeandmaybenot.Afoot,Ithought(notveryintelligently)Inashoeofnewspapers,eveniceunstackedaboutbyprocess — Ilovedthetextureofyourtalk,andanotherwoman’sBreasthadatextureotalatesummerday,whileyourEyeswerewalkingbothinsideyourheadandinme,ineachofmyactivitiesWhileyoubothfoundthecatandhewasseated,alive.Beyondants,onsomeanthillpebblesandorgravel.Thebarwasn’tclosedOropen,itwasdaylight-surprised.Plateglasswasnowherearound. Ilookedup.Iputonmyglasses.TherewerealltheseartistsHotwiththeprayersofnineteensixty-one — Letusbepotters,orskunks,butnotBusinessmen!IsatdownonastoneAndlookedaround,mylastchanceToneverbeadoctor,asifitmeantsomething,andafatheroffour — Intheseminutes,offataldecisions.Decisions!Fatal!Lazy,Aircomesin.WhatcouldithavebeenTobesoexciting?AndtheScotchtapejumpedintotheairWithLeonardooutinaboat,and,mileslater,acropolesofbonesthedeadDinosaursandcities,tiedtosubjectsAllofuspresenthaveforgotten—women,failingtheWeinsteinOftheseason.RatherinformP.M.whileyouarere-estimatingbuttons’Lifebyleavingthemlong-ungone-forinthemidstOftheveryshortwalkswetakedownthelongBitenarrowstreet—AtnightelectricityiskissingTheemasculatedstars—Thenewthingswehaddone,inpencilatthesideofthenapkin.Itwashot.Cequiveutdirewe,acatsittingOnabalconyaplantwaswilting.Whatdialectareyouspeaking.You,wearingtheloafersofthesea?Icouldn’tcare 221 Foreverythingsimultaneously.Amatwasexcitingenough.ThebathcameseparatelyFromthedawn.YouwalkaroundSimplylookingforstrawberries,sun,ourbaby,oxygen — “Alwaysnotquiteunbeginningtobeorhavebeenbegun.”Leonardoeratother.Irashaecperturbat.Letthatbe.AnotherwasAbsentinahabitfidget.IwasInarush.Someonesaid,hush!Calmdowninthis—knife—patternsofthings — Whereisthemusicthat’sfittingforsuchanoccasionInthosemilesofhotelCorridorfollowedbyWeinstein’sweepingatthebeachGirlswhofollowedthatforloveofhimAndwhyistherenotmorepeacefulmeltinghereIntothewidewoodstoryofthewallHowIlovedthosemadeofstone.AndyetpoetryhasMessages,interrogationsofmusicsthathavebeenusedInthevariousislandsofacts,stayinggenuinelystill.Andseeing—apieceoflifeandseeing — It’sawallinsidemeWhydancerswerealwayscomingoutinapageantWreckingtheplaceanimalswereintheretooAsnow,soformusicfit?ThepinkspotyoutrottedmeouttoseewithunderthesighwhichSomethingandthegreatwriterswereallstillaliveMuchoftheworsthadhappened,theenvelopewasstillunpeeled. Iamstampingonthepath.Alone.Nothingissoessentialasthis — Moment.Andaredfanwingspast—flower?TransatlanticsystemsourselvesThedoorunopened,themailcameeveryday.Thegrassissoft.Matted,andthentherewasanenclosure,taronmyleg,onyoursThecultureallarounduswasinfragments,insomechestssureInothersfragments,insomenograspatall,whichIcouldn’tEasilyperceive,thusmakingeverybodyequal.Almostatleastenoughtobearival—perception.Inspiration—toocloudtocare.Voices Iheardonrooftopsandcul-de-sacsofmeditativesex222 ScurriedbeyondtheinvisiblebarrierofyouwashingTheblouse.Brilliant.Infact,havingmoremeaningBecauseofallimpulsions.YouwereAbluecoat—itwasn’tExactlyyoursormineorthatplace’sButastinginessoflifeinpacketflyingthroughEventually,signingawaylikepapersAmomentofthebeach,whenthetidedriedtheinvincibleByelbowsincomparisontothenudeinside — Lookat—it’sfinished;thisrockWillcomewithme!Weinstein,walkinginhissleepThefirstafternoonwhenIarrivedcoolingbeestheyhaveahiveAgainstthecliff,who’vekeptthingsin—theartSchool,slacks.NormaltheMediterraneanFlowsonwardandon,boat, IworeLeonard’sjacketandmyclothes,thenshoesMeetyours,advancing,sowalkaboutthebestFinalofbeach,tonotnoticenumbersExceptwhentheyarespeaking,aswestoppedlessWhenallthiswasaround. 223 DaysandNights I.THEINVENTIONOFPOETRY ItcametomethatallthistimeTherehadbeennorealpoetryandthatitneededtobeinvented.SomerecommendeddiscoveringWhatwasalreadythere.Others,Takingaviewfromfurtherupthehill(remnantOfoldpoetry),saidjustgoandstartwhereveryouare. Itwasnotthekindofline IwantedsoIcrosseditout“TodayIdon’tthinkI’mveryinspired” — Whatanexistence!HowhardtoconcentrateOnwhatisthebestkindofexistence!What’ssureishavingonlyoneexistenceAnditsalreadyhavingashape. Extasedemesvingtans—FrenchgirlwithpuregoldeyesInwhichshineinternalrhymeandnewkindsofstanzas WhenIsaidtoF,Whydoyouwritepoems?Hesaid.LookatmostofthepoemsThathavealreadybeenwritten! AllalonewritingAndlackingself-confidenceAndinanotherwayfilledwithself-confidenceAndinanotherwaydevotedtothebrickwallAsafloweriswhenhummedonbyabee IthoughtThisistheoneIamsupposedtolikebestThetotallyindifferentoneWhosimplylovesandidentifieshimselfwithsomethingOrsomeoneandcaresnotwhatothersthinknoroftimeTheonewhoidentifieshimselfwithawall. 224 Ididn’tthinkIwascrazy IthoughtOrpheuschasmstriremehunchcoatsmelodyAndthenNothatisn’tgoodenough IwrotepoemsontheedgesofthethistlesWhichmywalkingcompanionscouldn’tunderstandButthat’swhenIwasababycomparedtonow “Thatissomuchlikeyouandyourpoetry.”Thisputsmeinaself-congratulatorymoodWhichIwantto“feelout,”sowesittogetherandtalkAllthroughthewinterafternoon. IsmokedAfterwritingfiveortenlinesToenjoywhatIhadalreadywrittenAndtonothavetowriteanymore IstopsmokingUntilafterlunchItismorningItisspringThedayisbreakingTen—eleven—noon Iamnotsmoking Iamasleep Senseofwhatprimitivemanis,incaveandwithprimitivelifeComesovermeonebrightmorningasIlieinbedWhoosh!tothetypewriter.Lunch!AndIgodown.WhathaveIlost?TheColeridgeJoke,asWwouldsay. WilliamCarlosWilliamsIwroteAstheendwordofasestina.Andgrass 225 sleepy,hogsnout,breath,anddream. Ineverfinishedit. Icomedownthehill—cloud Ilikelivingonahill—headYouaresoluckytobealive—JokesItchimesateverymoment—stung SomuchofitwasbeyondmeThewindingofthenationalhighwayThefragmentsofglassintheconventwallTosaynothingofthehabitsofthebourgeoisieAndallthosepleasures,theneatcoat,Theboughtwine,andtheenablingofthepronouncements. ForChrist’ssakeyou’remissingthewholedayCriedsomeoneandIsaidShutup IwanttosleepandwhatheaccomplishedinthehoursIsleptIdonotknowandwhatIaccomplishedinmysleepWasabsolutelynothing. Howmuchisinthepoetandhowmuchinthepoem?Youcan’tgettotheonebuthegivesyoutheother.Isheholdingback?No,buthisexperienceislikeabubble.Whenhegivesittoyou,itbreaks.Thoseleft-oversoapdotsarethework.Ohyou’vedoneplentyIsaidwhenhewasfeelingdespondentLookatXandLandM.Buttheydon’tdoanything,hereplied. AtthewindowIcouldseeWhatnevercouldbeinsidemeSinceIwastwelve:purebeingWithoutdesirefortheother,notevenforthenecktieorthedog. 226 2.THESTONESOFTIMEThebathtubiswhiteandfullofstripsAndstripesofredandblueandgreenandwhiteWherethepainterhastakenabath!NowcomesthepoetWrappedinahugewhitetowel,withhisheadfullofimagery. TrybeingreallyattentivetoyourlifeInsteadoftoyourwritingforachangeonceinawhileSometimesonedayonehouroneminuteohI’vedonethatWhathappened?Igotmarriedandwasinagoodmood.Wewrotesomuchthatwethoughtitcouldn’tbeanygoodTillwereaditoverandthenthoughthowamazingitwas! AthenagavePopeyeaButterfmgerfilledwithstarsIsthekindofpoetryZandIusedtostuffinjars WhenwetookawalkhewasafraidOfthedogswhocameinparadeTosniffleatthefeetOftwoofthegreatestpoetsoftheage. ThestarscameoutAndIwasstillwritingMyGodwhere’sdinnerHere’sdinnerMywife!IloveyouDoyourememberinParisWhenIwasthinnerAndthesuncamethroughtheshutterslikeaknife? Isaidtosomanypeopleonce,“Iwritepoetry.”Theysaid,“Oh,soyouareapoet.”Ortheysaid,“Whatkindofpoetrydoyouwrite?modernpoetry?”Or“Mybrother-in-lawisapoetalso.” 227 NowifIsay,“IamthepoetKennethKoch,”theysay,“IthinkI’veheardofyou”Or“I’msorrybutthatdoesn’tringabell”or“Wouldyoupleasemoveoutoftheway?You’reblockingmyviewOfthatenormouspieceofmeatthattheyareloweringintotheBayOfPigs.”What?Or“Whatkindofpoetrydoyouwrite?” “Taste,”IsaidtoJandhesaid“Whatelseisthere?”buthewaslookingaround. “Allthesame,sheisn’tmadelikethat,”Margueritesaid,uponmeetingJanice,ToherhusbandEddie,andsinceJanicewaspregnantthishadaclearmeaningLikethepoetryofRobertBurns. Youmustlearntowriteinformfirst,saidthedumbpoet.Afterseveralyearsofthatyoucanwriteinfreeverse.Butofcoursenoverseisreally“free,”saidthedumbpoet.Thankyou,Isaid.It’sbeengreattalkingtoyou! SweetaretheusesofadversityBecameSweetheartcaboosesofdiversityAndSweetartcowpapoosesattheuniversityAndSeabarCalpurniaflowerhavens’re-noosedknees Abookcameout,andthenanotherbookWhichwasunlikethefirst.WhichwasunliketheloveAndthenightmaresandthefisticuffsthatinspireditAndtheotherpoets,withtheiregosandtheirworks.WhichIsometimesreadreluctantlyandsometimeswithgreatdelightWhenIwaswritingsomuchmyself Iwasn’tafraidthatwhattheywrotewouldbothermeAndmightevengivemeideas. 228 IwalkedthroughthespringfountainofspringAirfountainknowingfinallythatpoetrywaseverythingSleep,silence,darkness,coolwhiteair,andlanguage. 3.THESECRETFlamingTheyseemTocome,sometimes.FlamingDespitealltheoldFamiliareffectsAnddespitemyknowingThat,well,reallythey’renotflamingAndtheseflamingwordsAresometimesthebestonesIwriteAndsometimesnot. ThedoctortoldXdon’twritepoetryItwillkillyou,whichisaverylateexampleOftheideaoftheimmortalkillingtheman(NotsinceHectororoneofthosepeoplepractically)Xeitherwroteordidn’tIdon’tremember — Iwaswriting(whatmademethinkofit)AndmyheartbeatsofastIactuallythoughtIwoulddie. Ourideaissomethingwetalkedabout,ourideaOurideaistowritepoetrythatisbetterthanpoetryTobeasgoodasorbetterthanthebestoldpoetryToevade,avoidallthemistakesofbadmodernpoetsOurideaistodosomethingwithlanguageThathasneverbeendonebeforeObviously—otherwiseitwouldn’tbecreationWesticktoitandnowIamalittlenostalgicForouridea,weneverspeakofitanymore,it’sbeen 229 Absorbedintoourwork,andevenourfriendshipIsanold,ratherfragile-lookingthing.Maybepoetrytookthelifeoutofbothofthem.Ideaandfriendship. Ilikethenewstuffyou’redoingShewroteandthenshequotedsomelinesAndmadesomefunnyreferencestothepoemsAndhesaidhaveyouforgottenhowtowritetheotherkindofpoemsOr,rather,shesaiditIforgetwhichIwasasinspiredasIhaveeverbeenWritinghalf-consciousandhalf-unconsciouseverydayAftertakingawalkorlookingatthegardenOrmakinglovetoyou(asweusedtosay) Unconsciousmeant“grace”ItmeantNomatterwhoIamIamgreaterthanIamAndthisisgreaterAndthis,sinceIammerelythevesselofit.Maybethetruth ThenIreadAriostoIfelltomykneesAndstartedlookingforthepins IhaddroppedwhenIdecidedtobeunconsciousIwantedtofasteneverythingtogetherAshedidandmakeanenormouspoetryRoseWhichincludedeverythingAndwhichcouldn’tbecomposedbythe“unconscious”(Atleastnotbythe“unconscious”alone) Thisrosebecameabandanna,whichbecameahouseWhichbecameinfusedwithallpassion,whichbecameahideawayWhichbecameyesIwouldliketohavedinner,whichbecamehandsWhichbecamelands,shores,beaches,nativesonthestonesStaringandwildbeastsinthetrees,chasingthehatsof 230 Losthunters,andallthisdeservesatoneThatItrytogiveitbywritingasfastasIcanAndassteadily,pausingonlytoeat,sleep,andasweusedtosay,makeloveAndtakelongwalks,whereIwouldsometimesencounterasheepWhichgavemerhymingmaterialandoftenafloweringfruittree.PearapplecherryblossomthingandseelongpathswindingUphillsandthendowntosomewhereinvisibleagainWhichIwouldimaginewasatown,inwhichanothersceneofthepoemcouldtakeplace. 4.OUTANDIN CitvofeternalflowersAndAsaidWhynotmakeitpaternalflowersAndZsaidOrsempiternalTherewerebananasLyingontheclosetshelfbythecouchFortyfeetfromwhereyourmiscarriagebeganAndweweretalkingaboutthisnonsenseWhichmeantsomuchtous,meantsomuchtousatthetime. PonteVecchiogoingovertheArnoWhatanimageyouarethismorningIntheeyeofalmightyGod! Iamtheoldbridgehesaidshesaid IforgetifitwasaboyoragirlAsexlessthinginmylifeLikesidewalkscouchesandlunch WalkingaroundnervouslythengoinginthehouseTheentireproblemistositdownAndstartwriting.Solved!NowtheproblemIstogetup.Solved!NowtheproblemIstofindsomethingequallyworthwhiletodo.Solved!Thankyouforcomingtoseeme.ButThankyouforlivingwithme.And 231 Thankyouformarryingme.WhileThankyoufortheargumentsandthefightsAndthedeadlyinterpellationsaboutthemeaningsofthings! YourblueeyesarefilledwithstormsToalterandmildlydisarrangeanimageofsomeone’s,hesaiditabouttheeyelidButyouarecrying.Ihaveapaininmyside. TheideaofMallarmeThatWellthatitwassoVitalPoetry,whateveritwasIsinspiringIsIfindevenmoreinspiringThanhismorefamousideaOfabsenceAndhisfamousideaOfanuncertainrelationshipofthewordsInalinetomakeitmemorablyfugace. AbsenceandIwereofteninmyroomComposing.WhenIcameoutyouandabsencewerewieldingabroomWhichwasataskIhadn’tthoughtofinmyabsenceFinallyabsencetookoverYou,me,thebroom,mywriting,mytypewriter,Florence,thehouse,Katherine,everything. Well,Idon’tknow—thoseweregreatmomentsSometimesandterriblemomentssometimesAndsometimeswewenttotheoperaAndsometimelatertheautomobilesqueakedThereisnosuchthingasanautomobile,thereisonlyaMercedesoraFerrariOraRenaultDeuxChevauxisthataCitroenThereisWhatdowecarewhatkindofcarbut 232 ofteninthesunshinewedid.That’sWhenweweretravelingIwasn’twriting. You’vegottositdownandwrite.Solved!ButwhatIwriteisn’tanygood.Unsolved!Tryharder.Solved!Noresults.Unsolved!Trytakingawalk.Solved!Anintelligent,pliable,Luminous,spurting,quiet,delicate,amiable,slenderlineLikesomeonewhoreallylovesmeForonesecond.Whatalife!(Solved!)Temporarily. WhatdoyouthinkIshoulddoWithalltheseoldpoemsThatIamnevergoingtoevenlookatagainOrthinkaboutorrevise—Throwthemout!ButifIraisemyhandtodothisIfeellikeAbraham!Andnosheep’saroundtheretopreventme.SoItakeanotherlook. WeaskedthebadpoettocomeanddineThebadpoetsaidhedidn’thavetimeThegoodpoetcameandactedstupidHewenttosleeponthecouchButgrandioseinspirationhadarrivedforhimwiththewineSuchwastheoccasion. Longafternoons,whenI’mnottoonervousOrdriven,IsitAndtalktothesourceofmyhappinessalittlebitThenBabygetsdressedbutnotinverymuchit’sWarmoutandoffwegoFortwentyminutesorsoandthencomeback. EveryoneintheneighboringhousesAndintheneighboringorchardsandfieldsIsbusilyengagedindoingsomething(SoIimagine)asIsithereandwrite. 233 5.DAYSANDNIGHTSABCDFIJLMNRYandZwerethefriendsIhadwhowrotepoetryNowABandCaredead,LNandYhavestoppedwritingZhasgottenbetterthaneverandIaminaheavymoodWonderinghowmuchlifeandhowmuchwritingthereshouldbe — Forme,havethetwobecomemostlythesame?Mostly!ThankGodonlymostly!Lastnightwithyou IfeltbythatshakenandupliftedInawaythatnowritingcouldeverdo.Thebodyafterallisamountainandwordsareamist — Ilovethemist.Heavenhelpme,Ialsoloveyou. WhenthelifeleavesthebodylifewillstillbeinthewordsButthatwillbealittleandfunnykindoflifeNotincludingyouonmylapAndlookingatmethenshadingyourbeautifuleyes. DoyouwantmetokeeptellingYouthingsaboutyourPoemordoyouwantmetostop?OhTellme.What?Idon’tthinkYoushouldhavethatphrase“burnup”inthefirstline.Whynot?Idon’tknow.ItSeemsalittleunliketherest. OwonderfulsilenceofanimalsIt’samongyouthatIbestperhapscouldwrite!Yetoneneedsreaders.AlsootherpeopletotalktoTobefriendswithandtolove.Togoaboutwith.AndThistakestime.Andpeoplemakenoise.Talking,andplayingthepiano,andalwaysrunningaround. Nightfallsonmydesk.It’sanunusualsituation.UsuallyIhavestoppedworkbynow.ButthistimeI’minthemidstofathrillingevasion. 234 SomethingIpromisedIwouldn’tdo—sneakinginashortpoemInthemidstofmylongone.Meanwhileyou’repatient,andtheveal’scold. FreshspringeveningbreezesovertheplatesWefinisheatingfromandthengoout.PersonallifeiseverythingpersonallifeisnothingSometimes—click—onejustfeelsisolatedfrompersonallifeOfcourseit’snotpubliclifeI’mcomparingitto,that’snonsensevanity — Sowhat’spersonallife?theoldmom-dad-replayjokeorSexelectricity’sunlastingphenomenon?That’sright.AndonThisspringeveningitseemssensational.Longmayitbelasting! IthelpsmetobewritingithelpsmetobreatheIthelpsmetosayanythingitgivesmeI’mafraidmorethanIgiveit IcertainlyhavelostsomethingMywritingmakesmeawareofitItisn’tlifeanditisn’tyouthI’mstillyoungenoughandaliveIt’swhatIwroteinmypoemsThatI’velost,thewayKatherinewouldwalkAsfarasthetreeline,andhowthefruittreeblossomsWouldseemtopoketheirwayintothewindowAlthoughtheywerealongwayoutside YessexisagreatthingIadmireitSexislikepoetryitmakesyouawareofhandsfeetarmsandlegsAndyourbeatingheart Ihaveneverbeeninspiredbysex,alwaysbyloveAndsowetalkabout“sex”whilethinkingalittleaboutpoetry ThereareveryfewpoemsComparedtoallthethoughtAndtheactivityandthesleepingandthefallinginlove 235 AndoutofloveandthefriendshipsAndallthetalkandthedoubtsandtheexcitementAndthereputationsandthephilosophiesAndtheopinionsabouteverythingandthesensitivityAndthebeingalonealotandhavingtobewithothersAlotandthegoingtobedalotandgettingupalotandseeingThingsallthetimeinrelationtopoetryAndsoonandthinkingaboutoneselfInthissomewhatpeculiarway Well,producingalot,that’snotwhatBeingapoetisabout,saidN.ButtryingtodosoiscertainlyoneofthesomethingsItisabout,thoughtheproductsImustsayaremostnuminous — Wispsofsmoke!whilenovelsandpaintingscloudsgobelchingovertheway! Poetry,however,livesforever.Words—howstrange.ItmustbethatinlanguageThereislesscompetitionThanthereisinregularlife,wheretherearealwaysBeautifulpersonsbeingbornandgrowingtoadulthoodAndreadytolove.Ifgreatpoemswereaseasytocreateaspeople — Imeanifthecapacitytodosowereaswidespread — Sincethere’snothingeasyaboutgoingthroughapregnancy — Isupposewecouldjustforgetaboutimmortality.Maybewecan! ZsaidItisn’tpoetryAndRsaidIt’sthegreatestthingIeverreadAndYsaidI’msick.IwanttogetupOutofbed.ThenwecantalkaboutpoetryAndLsaidThereissomewineWithlunch,ifyouwantsomeAndN(thebadpoet)saidListentothis.AndJsaidI’mtiredandMsaidWhydon’tyougotosleep.WelaughedAndtheafternoon-eveningendedAtthehouseinbellaFirenze. 236 * « IndexofTitles AliveforanInstant103TheArtoflx)veij8TheArtofPoetryiijTheArtist28AuseinerKindheit9 TheBoilingWater184TheBrassiereFactory5TheBricks6TheBurningMysteryofAnnain1951iy6 TheCircusigTheCircus99CollectedPoems24 DaysandNights224TheDeparturefromHydra67DesireforSpring7DownattheDocks47 Fate172FreshAirJ7 GeographyGirlandBabyFloristSidewalkPramNineteenSeventySomething217 Hearing78 InBedInLovewithYouijIntheMorning182 Locks4gLunch55 MaProvence81TheMagicofNumbersloj OnBeauty12^OntheGreatAtlanticRainway3OurHearts167 Permanently46ThePleasuresofPeace87Poem/Thethingtodo80 TheRailwayStationery64 TheSimplicityoftheUnknownPast175SleepingwithWomen82SomeGeneralInstructions106Spring11SummeryWeather4 TakingaWalkwithYou60ThankYou32Thanksgiving44ToMarinai8gToYou8 VariationsonaThemebyWilliamCarlosWilliams31 WestWind77WithJanice218 YouWereWearing48 239 AbouttheAuthor KennethKoch’sbooksofpoetryincludeDaysandNights,TheBurningMysteryofAnnainig^i,TheDuplications,TheArtofLove,ThePleasuresofPeace,ThankYouandOtherPoemsandKo,orASeasononEarth.Heisalsotheauthorofabookofplays,AChangeojHearts;anovel,TheRedRobins;andfourbooksoneducation — Wishes,Lies,andDreams;Rose,WhereDidYouGetThatRed?;INeverToldAnybody;andSleepingontheWing(withKateFarrell).HelivesinNewYorkCityandisProfessorofEnglishatColumbiaUniversity. V ' BOSTONPUBLIC 399990017058£ library III selectedpoems19500kochselectedpoems19500koch BostonPublicLibrary COPLEYSQUARE catesthedateonorbeforewhichthisbooksliouldbereturnedtotheLibrary.Pleasedonotremovecardsfromthispocket. AHOlTniKUTHOKK\NNKl'MKodll'sbooksofpoetryincludel)(iy'sandllwliurninf;}1y'steryofAnnain795/,I'lieDuplications^TheArtofIawc,Thel*lcasurcsofTeace^Thank\ouandOtherToerns^andKo,orASeasononEarth.Heisalsotheauthorofahookofplays,AChangeofHearts;anovel.TheRedRobins;andfourhooksonedneation — Wrs/ie.s,IdesandDreams;Rose,RhereDid)ou(ietIhatRed?;IISeverToldAnybody;andSleepin^onthe4(withKateFarrell).Helivesin!\ew^ork(^ityandisProfessorofEnglishat(^olinnhiaLiniversity. Jacket(fcisijiiil)yKathcruieKochFrontcover:PortraitofKeniietfiKochf)yFairfieldl^orter.hsedhvpermissionoftheFairfieldl\)rterF]state. RandomHouse,Inc.,INewYork,IN.Y.10022PrintedinH.S.A.3/85©1985RandomHouse,Inc. “Thislong-awaitedcollectionshouldatlastestablishKennethKochforwhatheis:oneofourgreatestpoets.” —^JohnAshbery -3Sli-5l,3ql-2 PHOTO: COJ’YRIGHT ©1985 BY THOMAS VIGTOK Collected Works of Velimir Khlebnikgv volume HI Selected Poems Collected Works of Velimir Khlebnikgv volume hi Selected Poems translated by Paul Schmidt edited by Ronald Vroon Harvard University Press Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England 1997 Copyright © 1997 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America Publication of this book has been aided by a grant from the Julia A. Whitney Foundation. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data (Revised for vol. 3) Khlebnikov, Velimir, 1885-1922. Collected works of Velimir Khlebnikov Translated from the Russian. Vol. 3- edited by Ronald Vroon. Includes bibliographical references and indexes. Contents: v. 1. Letters and theoretical writings— v. 2. Prose, plays, and supersagas.—v. 3. Selected poems, i. Khlebnikov, Velimir, 1885-1922—Translations, English. 2. Khlebnikov, Velimir, 1885-1922—Correspondence. 3. Poets, Russian—20th century—Correspondence. I. Schmidt, Paul, 1934- . II. Douglas, Charlotte, 1936- III. Vroon, Ronald, 1948- IV. Title. PG3476.K485A23 1987 891.71'? 87-8399 ISBN 0-674-14045-1 (v. 1) ISBN 0-674-14046-X (v. 2) ISBN 0-674-14047-8 (v. 3, cloth) ISBN 0-674-14048-6 (v. 3, pbk.) Frontispiece: Velimir Khlebnikov, 1916 Page 274 constitutes an extension of the copyright page. Designed by Given Fmnkfeldt Contents Frontispiece · Khlebnikov, 1916 Translator's Preface · vi Abbreviations · xi "The Poet and His Voices," by Ronald Vroon · 1 Longer Poems · 129 Notes · 237 List of Poems · 260 Russian Index of Titles · 267 English Index of Titles · 270 Credits · 274 • 23 Translator's Preface This volume includes 192 of Velimir Khlebnikov's poems, of which eleven are "longer poems" (poemy in Russian). This figure does not include some fifty lyrics included in the various plays and supersagas, already translated in the second volume of this edition, published in 1989. It is difficult to arrive at a total number of Khlebnikov's poems. Approximately 650 texts contained in the original Russian editions of the collected and unpublished works (1928-1933 and 1940), as well as in Works (1986) and various periodicals and anthologies, can be considered separate texts, but this number includes many different versions of previously published poems. More than a third of this number are rough drafts and fragments, some no more than four lines long, but in these cases as well, many are simply variants of others. Khlebnikov had the habit of revising previously published poems, he had incon- sistent views on their readiness for publication, and even his fairest manuscripts are quite raw. Given all this, a precise canonical figure is impossible to come by. Even the very notion of "canonicity" seems questionable. The present selection is drawn from all the available texts, and is intended to provide a broad sampling of Khlebnikov's styles, themes, and subjects. Khlebnikov is known to English and American readers mostly for his early work as an experimenter with new forms, so I have tried to include here a sizable selection of those later poems—by far the majority—that are somewhat more conventional in form, and that also illuminate many episodes in the poet's life. Khlebnikov (1885-1922) ranks with Mallarme, Joyce, Pound, and Stein among the great innovators of literary modernism. He blurred the distinction between verse and prose and between one literary genre and another. His experiments helped to break the hold of traditional verse patterns in Russian—although he made extensive use of them himself. But in general he worked with irregularities, unequal line vi Translator's Preface lengths, meters that varied from line to line in a single poem, variable stanza lengths, irregular rhyme patterns. He made use of patterns and tropes from folklore and from chants, incantations, and shamanistic language. He managed to create an entire poetics in the area of lan- guage that the Anglo-American tradition tends to belittle as "play"— neologisms, palindromes, riddles, puns. Khlebnikov's writing displays a perpetual willingness to allow form to form itself. He allows accidents to happen. A primary note in Khlebnikov's writing as I read it is the sense of wonder at the play of language, of sound allowed to move freely in search of its own sense, and yielding what Khlebnikov and his contemporaries called "beyon- sense" (zaum in Russian). For Khlebnikov, the shift in sound that produces a shift in meaning was a shift in the structure of the universe. That sword becomes word when a consonant vanished gave him a vertiginous sense of the power of language to influence the natural world. The shift of a consonant was all that distinguished inventors from investors or explorers from exploiters—and suddenly there appears the image of a struggle between Ν and S, between R and T. The movement of consonants becomes a metaphor for political and eco- nomic conflict. This kind of writing must give any serious translator pause; it certainly did me, and it was a while before I came to see my task as the creation of process rather than result. Instead of merely attempting a simulacrum of any given text, I would have to work upon American English the same sorts of transformations that Khlebnikov works upon Russian, and see what kinds of texts resulted. This approach helped me to avoid fetishizing the text of the original; it had the advantage of seeing translation as transaction, as a cultural and temporal response to the original text. The translation thus becomes a self-sufficient text, a product of response in its own time and place. When a poet translates a familiar poet into American English— Baudelaire, for instance—he enters immediately into a literary dialogue with translators who have preceded him. He is able—probably he is required—to offer us his Baudelaire: the French poem refined through his particular sensibility and style. But when the work of a poet is offered for the first time to an audience almost totally unfamiliar with it, as is the case with Khlebnikov, the translator is less free. Rather than assimilate the writer to himself, he must assimilate himself to the writer. The translator must perform the part of the poet in somewhat the same vii Translator's Preface way that an actor prepares, through a similar language act, to create a character on the stage. When I began translating, some forty years ago, I was much enamored of "theories of translation," and of various methodologies. I have since come to believe that for the act of translation—the trans- lation of poems, anyway—there really is no useful theory, and "meth- ods" are only occasionally helpful. Every poem here poses unique problems, and each is translated in a way that offers a solution to those problems. Each translation is a record of a fresh encounter between two languages, two worlds. Inspiration as well plays a large part, and the muse of translation is as willful as the muse of poetry. Some of the translations in this volume are very free—variations, if you will, on the theme of the original. "We chant and enchant," for instance, expands Khlebnikov's ten lines to nineteen. But in general I have translated line for line. Some translations—"Venus and the Sha- man," for example—follow the metrical and rhyme patterns of the original as closely as possible, when these seemed to me to be the basic determinants of the poem in question. For some poems—such as "Harsh hush bends bow" and "The Tangled Wood"—I have made a conscious attempt to use the alliterations and syntactic patternings of our older Anglo-Saxon tradition, since these seem to me somehow to reflect Khlebnikov's attempt to reach the ur-forms of poetry, "to find— without breaking the circle of roots—the magic touchstone of all Slavic words, the magic that transforms one into another ..." The cadences of our own Walt Whitman, Khlebnikov's "old Walt," find occasional echoes here. And of course Khlebnikov's invention of neologisms posed delightful challenges. The plural of mouse is mice? Then surely, some- where in the backwoods of language, the plural of house is hice. All this is of course very subjective. My final standard for each of the translations in this volume is that it be a poem in American English. The single most important source for the texts translated here is Tvoreniia (Works, 1986) textually the most accurate volume published to date. For poems not contained in this volume, I turned to the original Sobranie proizvedenii (Collected Works, 1928-1933) and the supplementary Neizdannye proizvedeniia (Unpublished Works, 1940). These collections also served as the principal source for annotations. Tvoreniia in particular contains a wealth of background material illu- minating difficult and obscure passages in Khlebnikov's oeuvre. This volume also contains Khlebnikov's own variants of many of viii Translator's Preface the poems from the supersagas "War in a Mousetrap" and "Asia Un- bound," translated in volume II of the Harvard Collected Works (Prose, Plays, and Supersagas, 1989). The source texts were drawn from the miscellanies and collections in which Khlebnikov's works originally appeared. Ronald Vroon also chose a number of works, including the long narrative poem "Chairman of the Cheka," which have appeared only in periodicals. Some of these pieces could not have been published in Russia prior to the momentous political changes of the past decade. Though their place in the Khlebnikov canon has yet to be determined, they are of extraordinary interest for the light they shed on the poet's attitude toward the Revolution and Civil War. The date and source for the original Russian text are indicated at the end of each translation. Transliteration throughout follows the U.S. Library of Congress system slightly simplified. In the text we have used the normal spelling for proper names where English common usage has been established—the Russian -skit ending for example, has been rendered -sky. Places in the text marked "[Illegible]" are so marked in the Soviet editions. The reader should be aware that the translations of texts previously published in The King of Time have been revised, sometimes significantly. A concise biography of Khlebnikov can be found in volume I of this edition (Letters and Theoretical Writings, 1987). Those who wish to explore the critical literature in greater depth should consult the bib- liography appended to volume III of Velimir Khlebnikov, Sobranie sochenenii (Munich: W. Fink, 1968-1972) and the bibliographies in three recent studies of Khlebnikov's works: Raymond Cooke, Velimir Khleb- nikov: A Critical Study (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987); Viktor Petrovich Grigoriev, Slovotvorchestvo i smezhnye problemy iazyka poeta (Word Creation and Other Problems Relating to the Poet's Language; Moscow: Nauka, 1987); and Ronald Vroon, Velimir Xlebni- kov's Shorter Poems: A Key to the Coinages (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Michigan Slavic Studies, 1983). This is the final volume of Khlebnikov's Collected Works in English, a project that was conceived and consistently supported by the Dia Art Foundation, New York. Ronald Vroon and I would like to express our special thanks to Heiner and Philippa Friedrich and to the directors of Dia for their vision and commitment. Our work on this volume was also supported by a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. Our deepest gratitude is due Thomas P. Whitney: at a difficult moment ix Translator's Preface in the completion of this sixteen-year project, a grant from the Julia A. Whitney Foundation ensured the publication of this volume. In Russia we received important and sympathetic help from Alek- sandr Parnis, Valentina Morderer, Mai Miturich, and the late Vasily Katanian. Special thanks go to Henryk Baran, Charlotte Douglas, Nikolai Khardziev, Vladimir Markov, Stephen Rudy, and Katherine Theodore. We are also grateful for general assistance from the administration and staff of the Russian State Archive of Literature and Art, Moscow. And we are especially grateful to Maud Wilcox, for her faith in this project when she was editor-in-chief of Harvard University Press. Finally we wish to thank Maria Ascher for editorial help with this volume; and Joyce Backman, the original editor of the series, for her patience, her stamina, her sense of humor, and her friendship during all the years of working together. χ Abbreviations BM Bez muz: Al'manakh. Nizhny Novgorod, 1918. D Velimir Khlebnikov. Stikhotvoreniia: Poemy, Dramy, Proza. Ed. R. V. Duganov. Moscow, 1985. DP R. V. Duganov. "Velimir Khlebnikov, 1885-1922." in Den' poezii, 198s. Moscow, 1986, 216-217. LO A. E. Parnis. "Velimir Khlebnikov: Iz neizdannogo." Literaturnoe obozrenie 7 (1988), 109-112. NM A. E. Parnis. "Velimir Khlebnikov: 'Predsedatel' Cheki'— Novoe ο poete." Novyt mir 10 (1988), 149-152. NP Velimir Khlebnikov. Neizdannye proizvedeniia. Ed. N. Khardzhiev and T. Grits. Moscow, 1940. Numerals Volume (roman) and page (arabic) of Sobranie proizvedenii. Ed. Nikolai Stepanov and Iury Tynianov. Leningrad, 1928- 1933· OS Velimir Khlebnikov. Oshibka smerti. Moscow [Kharkov], 1917. Τ Velimir Khlebnikov. Tvoreniia. Ed. V. P. Grigor'ev and A. E. Parnis. Moscow, 1986. TS Vtoroi sbornik tsentrifugi. Moscow, 1916. VRi Ronald Vroon. Velimir Xlebnikov's "Krysa": A Commentary. Stanford, 1989. VR2 Ronald Vroon. Velimir Xlebnikov's Shorter Poems: A Key to the Coinages. Ann Arbor, 1983. VR3 Ronald Vroon. "Velimir Khlebnikov's Ί esli ν 'Khar'kovskie ptitsy' . . .': Manuscript Sources and Subtexts." Russian Review 42 (1983), 249-270. VR4 Ronald Vroon. "The Calendar Poems of Velimir Xlebnikov." In Velimir Chlebnikov: Myth and Reality. Ed. Willem Weststeijn. Amsterdam, 1986. Selected Poems The Poet and His Voices Ronald Vroon You still have not understood that my word Is a god howling in a cage. —Velimir Khlebnikov (1885-1922) Velimir Khlebnikov's biography is surely one of the most seductive in the history of Russian letters. At virtually every stage he seems to fulfill one or more of the archetypal roles that modern culture assigns its poets. If we were to reduce his life to a series of tableaux, we would see him first as a naive young man from the remote provinces of southern Russia coming to St. Petersburg with visions of glory, a sheaf of half-finished manuscripts in hand. Drawn into the literary life of the capital, this lanky, stammering youth is lionized by his colleagues and finds himself in the forefront of the most radical poetic movement of the day. Accepting their adulation with a disingenuousness bordering on the absurd, he produces poems of extraordinary strangeness and beauty. At the same time, he cultivates a wide variety of eccentric in- terests, publishing articles on ornithology, Pan-Slavism, language uni- versal, and the periodicity of historical events. He spends days at a time in the public library checking on dates and working out their correla- tion in complex mathematical formulas. These odd preoccupations, together with his remarkable gift for manipulating words, lead his Futurist colleagues to proclaim him a genius and the "King of Time." The next tableau finds Khlebnikov swept into the maelstrom of political and military conflict. Following the outbreak of World War I, he is conscripted into the Imperial Army; we see him languishing in an army camp outside Tsaritsyn, suffering the typical indignities of a sensitive intellectual in a crowd of boors and philistines. To a Petrograd colleague he writes, "I am a dervish, a Yogi, a Martian, anything you want, but I am not a private in a reserve infantry regiment." Freed from military service by the timely outbreak of the Revolution, he pursues a nomadic way of life, traveling the length and breadth of ι The Poet and His Voices Russia, publishing poems in obscure newspapers and miscellanies, fall- ing into the hands of both the Red and White armies when the front lines happen to intersect with the axes of his wanderings. All the while he continues to pursue various Utopian projects, developing his theories of a universal language and his laws of time in essays that, for the most part, accumulate haphazardly in notebooks and scraps of paper he carries around with him. Toward the end of the civil war, at the end of October 1920, we see him approaching the Caspian port city of Baku. In the words of a recent biographer, he is "dressed in a quilted jacket with long lacings instead of buttons, carrying in his hand a sack that contains a crust of bread and a large ledger [ Grossbuch], which the poet used as his notebook." In the closing months of the year, working feverishly on his historico-mathematical calculations, he makes his most important discoveries about the laws of time. Meanwhile a revolution has broken out on the southern coast of the Caspian, in the Iranian province of Gilan. The poet insinuates himself into the service of an expedition- ary force sent by the Bolsheviks to aid their Iranian confreres; his sole purpose is to book passage to Asia, thereby fulfilling his life-long dream of experiencing first-hand the oriental wellsprings of Russian culture. Arriving in the port city of Enzeli, the poet now assumes the guise of a Russian Rimbaud. He has escaped the bonds of philistine European civilization and comes face to face with Islamic Persia. His responsibili- ties are minimal, and he is more or less free to wander about at will. His hair has grown long, as has his beard. He is dressed in tatters. The locals call him a Russian dervish because of his unkempt appearance and otherworldly manner. Wandering along the Caspian coast, he continues to make entries in his notebooks, reconstructing lost poems, writing sketches for new works, and elaborating the historico-mathe- matical theories first articulated in Baku. Evacuated back to Russia in August following the collapse of the revolutionary movement in Iran, he makes his way across the Caucasus to the resort towns of Zhelezno- vodsk and Piatigorsk. His sojourn there coincides with the horrific Volga Basin famine of 1921. Working as a watchman at the local propa- ganda offices of the Russian Telegraph Agency, he subsists largely on bread and tea, working through the long autumn nights on his poems and treatises. The concluding tableaux are the most tragic. He returns to Mos- cow in late December on a train filled with epileptics, entering a hungry, 2 The Poet and His Voices snowbound city that is just beginning to emerge from the horrors of revolution and civil war. With the help of friends, he finds lodging in a student dormitory and is once again drawn into the literary life of the new capital. He spends most of his time preparing fair copies of his works and searching for publishing outlets. The years of wandering and deprivation have taken their toll, however; weakened by malnutrition, typhus, recurring bouts of malaria, and symptoms associated with advanced syphilis, he determines to return to his family home in Astra- khan to rest and regain his strength. The avant-garde artist Pyotr Miturich, his patron and closest friend, persuades him to leave the city and spend a few weeks with him in a small village in Novgorod province, where food is more plentiful and he can work undisturbed. Several days after his arrival, his health takes a sudden turn for the worse: paralysis sets in and he becomes progressively more edematous. Cut off from the world and deprived of adequate medical attention, Khlebnikov eventually sinks into a coma and dies in his sleep on June 28, 1922. Such a life, as Vladimir Markov has noted, could not fail to generate a legend, one that has permanently entered Russia's cultural conscious- ness. Its uses, however, are decidedly ambiguous. The earliest purveyors were Khlebnikov's own Futurist colleagues. As early as 1914, when the poet was still virtually unknown, his friends David Burliuk and Vasily Kamensky contributed prefaces to his first book of poems in which they declared him to be a veritable Leonardo: "He is a mathematician, a philologist, an ornithologist. All forms of literature are accessible to him," writes Burliuk, adding in bold script, "Khlebnikov is our epoch." Members of Vladimir Mayakovsky's Left Front of the Arts took similar advantage of the poet shortly after his death, promoting him as the founding father of modern Russian literature, feeding the legend by publishing Dmitry Petrovsky's extensive—and faulty—memoirs, and making him out to be a standard-bearer of the Left Front cause avant la lettre. But the legend could also be used against Khlebnikov. As early as 1922 a perfectly honorable critic like Ivan Aksenov could diagnose the poet as suffering delusions of grandeur and/or paranoia, or at the very least feeble-mindedness, and dismiss his work on that basis. Within two years Georgy Vinokur, secretary of the famous Moscow Linguistic Circle, would write: "The landscape of ancient cultures to which Khleb- nikov was so highly sensitive, his unique linguistic metaphysics which 3 The Poet and His Voices serves as the background for his sometimes extraordinary neologistic conjectures, the diary of Maria Bashkirtseva and the quasi-mathematical calculations about the fate of humanity, the Trumpet of the Martians and the Presidency of Planet Earth, beyonsense and prophecy—in all this Khlebnikov's personality ran like some puzzling ink spot, like some sickly shadow, and lost its contours. Here is a landscape without a horizon, a face with no profile." Such views would be amplified in later years through the loudspeakers of official ideology. In 1948, to cite the most painful example, the orthodox Soviet critic Boris Iakovlev hacked out a misanthropic essay entitled "A Poet for Aesthetes: Notes on Velimir Khlebnikov and Formalism in Poetry," in which he tried to turn the tables on those responsible for the Khlebnikov legend. What his admirers took to be signs of his genius—his neology, for example, or his utopianism—are taken by the critic as signs of snobbism, mysticism, and sick fantasizing. "We know now why it was necessary to create the legend of Khlebnikov," he says. "The legend was needed by Formalist poets to justify their own sterile tricks and ... to inculcate young writers with . . . the traditions of reactionary bourgeois art." No wonder, then, that many admirers of Khlebnikov's works tried to divert attention from the biography and the legend it had generated, hoping thereby to protect both the poet's memory and his legacy. Nikolai Stepanov, his editor, warns us that "just as Khlebnikov's ex- perimental pieces have overshadowed his central works, so too the anecdotal aureole that has been created around his personality, the image of an 'eccentric' and a 'dervish' often replaces the study of his work and ideological development." The Formalist critic Iury Tynianov writes in the same vein: "No matter how strange and striking the life of this wanderer and poet, no matter how terrible the circumstances of his death, his biography should not overwhelm his poetry. We should not be satisfied with the study of a man's biography. In Russian litera- ture there are many such cases. Venevitinov, a curious and complex poet, died at the age of twenty-two, and ever since people remember only one thing about him—that he died at the age of twenty-two." This view has been seconded by most succeeding Khlebnikov scholars, but on more theoretical grounds. The Dutch scholar Willem Weststeijn, for example, disputes the presumption that Khlebnikov's poetic "I" "can be identified with the concrete poet who exists outside the text," insisting that in certain poems "a connection between the author and the lyrical Ί' exists, but only in the sense that an autobio- 4 The Poet and His Voices graphical element is projected in the lyrical Ί.'" Barbara Herrnstein Smith has provided perhaps the most ingenious defense of this neo- New Critical view in an essay entitled "Poetry as Fiction" (On the Margins of Discourse, 1978), where she suggests that poetic utterances are representations of discourse rather than real, historical utterances. In other words, they are not real speech events, but imitations of what a particular sort of person might say under a particular set of circum- stances. As applied to Khlebnikov, this approach would oblige us to acknowledge that the lyrical "I" of his poems refers not to the real Khlebnikov but to a "potential" Khlebnikov, or any figure who might fit into the pronominal shell of the poet's "I." The decision to read a text as a fiction rather than a historical utterance neatly solves the problem of the Khlebnikov legend by setting it in its proper Active domain, but the link between the legend and the biography can subvert this critical strategy. Consider, for example, the message Khlebnikov inscribed on a postcard and mailed to his friend Dmitry Petrovsky shortly after being drafted. He wrote: "The king is out of luck, the king is under lock and key. Infantry Regiment 93 will be the death of the child in me. Address: Viktor Vladimirovich Khleb- nikov, Co. 2, 93rd Inf. Reg. (Res.)." If we choose to read these lines as a poem, we automatically activate a particular set of literary conven- tions: we mark out a quatrain by virtue of the meter and rhyme, ignore everything from the word "Address" on, and posit a finished lyrical miniature replete with allusions to the imprisoned king of fairy tales and to a variety of literary texts. The poem is rich enough to create the contexts we need, not only to make sense of the poem but to make the poem satisfy us aesthetically. There is no need, in other words, to identify the lyrical "I" with the historical Khlebnikov outside the text. On the other hand, a nonfictive or "historical" reading is equally plausible. Petrovsky writes in his memoirs that when he received the postcard he gasped with surprise and ran off to his friends to see what could be done to get Khlebnikov discharged as soon as possible. Clearly he read the poem as nonfictive discourse, taking the poem's lyrical subject to be a real person with a serious problem on his hands. His was undoubtedly an impoverished reading of the text, but not without merit. Normally the decision to read a text Actively or nonfictively does not even arise, because in accepting a text as a poem we naturally accept the conventions of fictiveness that this attitude implies. Yet the text 5 The Poet and His Voices itself may be structured in such a way that a Active reading becomes problematic. This, I believe, is a central issue we must face when we read Khlebnikov's poems. Here one can distinguish a series of lyrical "I"'s that correspond in very direct ways to the personae of the Khleb- nikov legend, culminating, I believe, in a group of texts that seriously compromise the reader's ability to read Actively. Knowing how and why this happens may help us in coming to terms with a poet who, for all his notoriety, remains one of the most difficult and enigmatic in the pantheon of twentieth-century poetry. Even the most casual reader is bound to be taken aback by the multi- plicity of personae encountered in Khlebnikov's verse. Probably no other twentieth-century poet can match him in this regard. Among the poems in the Collected Works the lyrical subject assumes the identity of a megalomaniac, a shy lover, an infantry commander, a preacher of pacifist homilies, Cleopatra's paramour, a Promethean demigod, and a host of other personae. All of these lyrical "I"'s are presented without the benefit of an explicit dramatic context, something that would allow us to fix the historical or mythical identity of the speaker as one might, say, in Browning's dramatic monologues. And this diversity of personae only hints at the true complexity of the picture, for in addition to the poems in which the lyrical "I" is nominally present, we find almost as many in which it is merely implicit, or disguised as a plural "we," or encased in the shell of dramatis personae ranging from Carthaginian war heroes to Galatian witches to the very letters of the alphabet. This multiplicity of voices and the identity of the "implied poet" who adopts them are both a function of the worlds Khlebnikov chooses to address in his verse. By "worlds" I mean not simply themes or objects of discourse, but those cultural matrices by which we model the uni- verse around us—the matrices of language, time, and cosmos. To delineate them so baldly is to risk a kind of reductionism, but it is an exercise uniquely appropriate for Khlebnikov, as we can see from the large body of nonfictional works he left as glosses on his own works. A poet who could engage in abstract discourse on topics like "The Word as Such," "The Head of the Universe: Time in Space," and "The Tables of Destiny" could equally well set his verse in dialogue with the word, time, and the cosmos. Each of these matrices demanded a particular voice, a subject ideally suited to the discourse at hand. These voices sometimes blend with each other, as do the matrices themselves, 6 The Poet and His Voices but at certain periods one voice or group of voices is likely to assert itself over others. In his earliest lyrics Khlebnikov seems to be most preoccupied with the matrix of language. This is not surprising for the leading repre- sentative of Cubo-Futurism, a movement that, in Vladimir Markov's formulation, focused on the word, laying bare its inner structure and making its texture felt. What is surprising is that this preoccupation does not appear to be related specifically to the influence of the Sym- bolist school which dominated Russian poetry at the time, or to the influence of the Western literary avant-garde. Indeed, it does not even appear to be primarily a literary preoccupation. Rather, it seems to be an outgrowth of scientific curiosity and reveals Khlebnikov's typically analytic and classificatory approach to the world—a consequence, per- haps, of his upbringing in the home of a naturalist and ornithologist. Paging through Khlebnikov's early notebooks and drafts, one finds scores of verbal experiments organized in the following manner: a headword is set down, followed by several neologisms based on the form of the word and created according to a particular paradigm—add- ing a prefix, for example, or replacing one morpheme with another. These word lists in turn give rise to short poems that provide just enough context to illustrate the meanings of a particular neologism. Such experiments seem to have a dual purpose. The first is to explore the "hidden" meaning of phonemes, morphemes, and lexemes, mean- ings that Khlebnikov believes to have been lost during centuries of use and misuse. The second is to test how the mechanisms at work in the generation of words can be applied in the creation of new texts. Beyond what appears to be a disinterested, scientific attitude to- ward the structure of language, however, lurk teleologies of another order. In a seminal early essay entitled "The Burial Mound of Sviato- gor," Khlebnikov gives several reasons for engaging in this sort of exploration. He speaks of "the land within us" that cries out for a voice. He sees Russia's mouth "bewitched by the evil will of neighboring islands" and hails the coming of "the first Russian who dares to speak Russian," one who will break the spells of the West, to which even Aleksandr Pushkin fell prey. He likens the corrupted, conventional language of the people to Euclid's geometry, and the product of neological discourse to that of Lobachevsky, with its potential for remodeling the world. Adopting a Nietzschean tone, Khlebnikov sug- gests that in realizing the secret powers of language "we now extend 7 The Poet and His Voices our law over the abyss; we no longer distinguish ourselves from God; even the creation of worlds is within our power." In his introduction to Creations (1914), Khlebnikov's first collec- tion of poems, Vasily Kamensky underscores the nationalistic impulse underlying Khlebnikov's verbal experiments. He claims that they open the way for a poetry that could most adequately reflect what was unique in the Russian—and, more broadly, the Slavic—character. Khlebnikov himself indicated as much in his retrospective "Self-Statement," declar- ing that his first approach to the problem of language was to find the "magic touchstone of all Slavic words, the magic that transforms one into another, and so freely to fuse all Slavic words together." The poet's scientific impulse, his Slavic orientation, and his keen awareness of the supranational power of language to remodel reality within human consciousness combine to project a strong extra-aesthetic dimension in his verse, which in turn helps to explain its etiology. The extra-aesthetic dimension makes us aware, above all, how programmatic much of the early verse is: these lyrics, regardless of their denotative value, are meant to be demonstrations of discoveries Khleb- nikov has made about his own language. Though translations tend to disguise this particular aspect of his poetry, they do not render it entirely opaque. For example, in "Neward, we praise thee" the appear- ance of "wizard" in the last line reveals the neological model and the primary motivation for the poem. Less transparent, but similarly deci- pherable, is Khlebnikov's lovely little quatrain about a "fly"—not the insect, but the word itself: Fly! Little three-letter wordlet busily washing your winglet, what could be sweeter or better than watching you swallow my letter? The key to the fly's bath lies in the structure of the Russian word for fly—mukha—which Khlebnikov links through a process of false ety- mology to the very word for washing or bathing (my?). In the English translation an analogous act of paronomastic play associates the let-ters of the word with the diminutive suffix in world-let and winß-let. What sort of poetic voice is appropriate for poems that are so preoccupied with language as such? In some instances, it is safe to say, no voice at all, or rather, no voice identifiable with a particular persona. In poems of this sort the poet's "I" simply disappears altogether, or 8 The Poet and His Voices functions as a convenient pronoun on which to hang the poem. "I am futurity's silent ebb, /1 am silentium's future flow," says the poet, reducing his identity to the ebb and flow of the very words he uses. Inevitably, however, an image of the "I" occasionally emerges that identifies the speaker specifically as a neologizer, a wizard of the word. In this role he can assume either of two identities. One is that of primitive man in his Edenic environment, creating language in a dy- namic response to the world he encounters. This is the "I" (or "we") that we encounter in many of the early primitivist poems, the "I" who discovers that migratory birds spell the passage of time ("Where the winking waxwings whistle"), and that the "benefolent" woods are sometimes indistinguishable from the green creatures who inhabit them ("A goblin grabbles in the greeny forest"). It is also the "I" of the man turned shaman: he has discovered that words properly formed and conjoined can influence the human psyche, and exercises this power to induce laughter ("Incantation by Laughter"), to enchant ("We chant and enchant"), or to address deities and demigods ("Neward, we praise thee"). The other identity is that of the shaman displaced in time, the modern Futurian and wordwright; recognizing the relationship be- tween language and power, he is convinced that his nation is emascu- lated because its language is held prisoner by the conventions of the past—many of them Western in origin—and sees himself as an insur- rectionist battling for the restoration of his language's, and therefore his nation's, natural rights. This is the voice that addresses us in such poetico-political tracts as "We want to get close to the stars" or "I swam across the Sudak Gulf." To a Western ear it may sound chauvinistic, and rightly so, but the chauvinism will not be a cause of offense if we recognize that the ultimate goal of the persona addressing us is not simply the renovation of Russian poetry or the Russian language; it is to show the way for the liberation of language itself from the death of convention. This is the Khlebnikov that David Burliuk had in mind when he said, "Khlebnikov has created works like no one has ever written in Russian or any other poetry . . . He is the distillation of every contemporary literary idea." The persona of the revolutionary wordwright is, of course, pro- jected not only by the poetry but also by the public relations surround- ing its publication and promulgation. The Russian Futurists were eager to use Khlebnikov to demonstrate that they, not the Italians, were the 9 The Poet and His Voices first to liberate the word from its bonds to tradition, and their primary evidence was incontrovertible: Khlebnikov had, indeed, begun his radi- cal verbal experiments before the Italians Futurists were known or dis- cussed in Russia. But the creation of a literary persona as an act of public relations was bound to have an effect on the poet's image of himself. Let us imagine him reading the introduction to his own Creations, where he encounters the following panegyric: "Khlebnikov is the most remarkable of personalities who, in his otherworldly isola- tion, achieves a kind of legendary sanctity and who, in his brilliant immediacy has managed, with convincing simplicity and rigor, to re- create all of Russian poetry in the name of contemporary art." It is difficult to measure the effect this sort of idolization had on Khleb- nikov, but we cannot ignore the fact that the literary myth created around him gradually became part of the persona he projected in his verse and—as we shall see—was eventually merged with that of the historical figure of the poet. Khlebnikov's interest in the matrix of time and history dates back at least to 1905, when, according to his own testimony, he heard that Russia's naval forces had beeen decimated by the Japanese in the Straits of Tsushima and vowed that he would unlock the mysteries of time itself so that such disasters might be averted in the future. He took his vow seriously and, judging from his correspondence and the testimony of contemporaries, was constantly engaged in pursuing this Utopian goal. "I spend all my time working on dates and on the fates of nations as dependent variables of numbers," he wrote to Mikhail Matiushin in 1911. His first published book was a little brochure entitled Teacher and Student, which presents some preliminary hypotheses concerning the hidden order of human history. The utter seriousness of this project is conveyed in a letter to his father, who thoroughly disapproved of his son's Utopian enterprise. "I am convinced the day will come when you will be proud of me," he writes, "for I will have spread out a magic tablecloth upon which will appear a spiritual feast for the whole of humanity." Khlebnikov's theories of time as set forth in his Tables of Destiny and other essays are incorporated verbatim into only a few of his poems, and their importance for an understanding of his oeuvre is not univer- sally acknowledged. Nikolai Stepanov insists that his "historical and philosophical hypotheses are not only the themes of his longer poems, 10 The Poet and His Voices but also the semantic skeleton supporting all their images and themes . . . One must have a general idea of his theoretical hypotheses in order to understand the meaning of his works." Certainly this is the case with such pieces as Zangezi, where whole sections are devoted to an elabo- ration of the Laws of Time. One could also argue that longer poems like "Night Raid" and "The Stone Woman" cannot be adequately appreciated without a knowledge of their idiosyncratic socio-philo- sophical underpinnings. In the former, for example, the events de- scribed are consciously plotted to validate Khlebnikov's theories of historical retribution. In the latter the intersecting axes of the ancient past and present-day reality, the macrocosmos of the heavens and the microcosm of the earth, provide coordinates for the poet's theory of temporal progression. But perhaps the main issue is not the significance of such theories as organizing principles in Khlebnikov's poetry. We can, after all, read "The Stone Woman" as a fantasy and "Night Raid" as a dramatized meditation on the horrors of civil war, rather than as exempla for arcane hypotheses about the structure of time. Of greater consequence, ulti- mately, is the effect that Khlebnikov's interest in such matters had on personae he projected—not only in those pieces with an explicit theo- retical underlay, but in all the poems that deal in some way with the representation of historical realia. By "historical realia" I mean not just "canonical" history—events deemed of sufficient consequence to become part of a textbook re- cord—but also current events whose "historical" significance is imme- diately apparent to contemporary observers. In this sense, no period was more "historical" for Russia than the first two decades of the twentieth century. The members of the intelligentsia perceived them- selves as actors in a drama of universal dimensions. The present was a period of catastasis leading inexorably to the double catastrophe of revolution and civil war. Khlebnikov, like many of his confreres among the avant-garde, also felt that he was witnessing and chronicling events of a magnitude equal to that of the great events of history. This is why, in his historico-mathematical tables, he equates the defeat of Russia in the Russo-Japanese War with that of the Spanish Armada, the battle of Mukden with the decimation of Attila the Hun's forces, or the actions of the Petrograd Soviet with those of the Paris Commune. The perception of history in such dramatic terms finds its correla- tive in the adoption of dramatis personae. One of the most striking II The Poet and His Voices aspects of Khlebnikov's "historical" poems (in the sense indicated above) is that, in Robert Browning's words, they are "dramatic in principle, and so many utterances of so many imaginary persons." One of the earliest of these is a sailor who has perished with Rozhdestven- sky's fleet in the Straits of Tsushima ("Things were much too blue"). Several are encountered in the sixth section of "Otter's Children": Scipio and Hannibal; Jan Hus; Russia's two great peasant rebel leaders, Stepan Razin and Emilian Pugachev; and other figures representing opposition to the established imperial order. The voice of the imperial order, in turn, is heard in "The people raise the rod of sovereign power," a monologue of Tsar Nicholas II following his abdication. What most of these figures have in common is that they are hostages of history, victims of the historical process. This is also true of the imaginary personae who take over the poet's voice in "Night Raid"—the marines and their captives. It also characterizes the voice of the poet, who seems to be speaking in his own person as he confronts the real world of war and revolution. In "Bad News, April 8, 1916" he presents himself in several of his already legendary guises: the orni- thologist "tangled in the brightest of birdsong," the prophet in pos- session of "visions of our ancestors," the dreamer "Who wrote all these poems, / their lines a ladder / to the silver moon." "I'm bitter," he says, "I'm the hostage of crazed elder statesmen: / I'm only a scared rabbit they want to tame / and not at all the King of Time." He is, of course, the King of Time—he has not abdicated—but "The King is out of luck, / the King is under lock and key," subject to "An unknown fate, an unknown fight / where bow-strung trees obscure the light." This same persona, however, takes on other characteristics that relate directly to the Khlebnikov legend. In most of the poems where the speaker addresses the issue of his own victimization, he also takes on the role of a spokesman for his generation and the leader of a rebellion against the established order. This attitude necessarily requires a more highly rhetorical stance that tends to manifest itself in apostro- phic form. Beginning around 1915 we see a marked increase in poems written in the second person addressing either the poet's own comrades or those against whom they are rebelling. To the former he cries, "Let's muzzle the universe, keep it / from biting us, who are young" ("Herd of hoofsteps, ingots of elephants"). To the latter he says, "Woe to you, you dwellers in plenty, / sunk deep in wrinkles of wholesale murder" ("Young girls, young men, remember!"). This apostrophic moment marks the beginning of a transformation 12 The Poet and His Voices in the lyric subject that will complicate our Active perception of the text. It is clear that the poet has begun to assign his persona a special role, one that involves the transformation of the wordwright into a warrior. In fact, the two roles may merge into one, as they do in one of the poet's loveliest quatrains: I'm going out again today Into life, into the marketplace, To lead a regiments of songs Against the roar of rat and race. As long as the warrior is leading a regiment of songs we can deal with him comfortably as a Bard—that is, as a figure whose conventionality is assured by the metaphor he employs for himself. But eventually he comes to see himself as more than just a songster. He is a fomenter and leader of rebellion. Usually he identifies himself as part of an unidentified brotherhood, calling on us to advance in his company to free both men and gods from the tyranny of physical and metaphysical oppression. Occasionally, however, he singles out his own persona and begins to make extravagant claims about himself and his own consti- tution. In "Wind whose song" he is "the people's guide"; in "My elbow brushed" he presents himself as a combatant ready to smother the Amazon called Death. These sorts of impersonations are more difficult to accommodate because there is no obvious prototype with which we can associate the speaker. Mayakovsky's hyperbolic "I" comes to mind, and perhaps Severianin's Universal Ego, but they are ultimately too self-conscious to serve as antecedents. This "I" takes himself far more seriously, forcing us to ponder his identity and that of his company. The "we" remains, for the most part, anonymous, but it is named, for example, in "Lightland," were we read: We have followed the path of rebellion, and our losses at last are but little. The Presidents of Planet Earth advance in a group, ready for anything. For thirteen years we Futurians have kept alive, at heart, in sight, before our eyes, in our retreat at Krasnaia Poliana, the burning spark of Nosar's revolution. It is in the name of the "Presidents of Planet Earth" and the brother- hood of Futurians that Khlebnikov urges us, his readers, to "Bury the 13 The Poet and His Voices remains of time / and drink from the starry glass of freedom." Outside the corpus of the poems we find, of course, real Futurians and a real Utopian society known as the Presidents of Planet Earth. It is not a ludic organization like the Flat Earth Society, nor is it an esoteric lodge, nor, most decidedly, is it a fiction: it is a group of men whom Khleb- nikov believed to be true visionaries capable of guiding the Planet into a new world and a new age. The leader of such a society is the historical analogue of the person who addresses us in such poems as "Liberty," "When Freedom comes, she comes naked," "Beast + Number" and scores of other poems written in 1915 and after. The first real breach in the line dividing Active from nonfictive discourse occurs in the text "An Appeal by the Presidents of Planet Earth." As the title suggests, it is clearly a manifesto, and was conceived as such according to the testimony of Khlebnikov's friend and poetical ally Dmitry Petrovsky. The first draft was composed in prose, as befits a serious political manifesto. Nonetheless, it was ultimately reworked and published in verse form. The concluding lines read: And so the gauntlet is thrown down in these words: The Government of Planet Earth. Ripped by red lightnings the blue banner of unrule, the banner of windswept dawns and morning suns, is raised and waves across the face of earth. Here it is, my friends! The Government of Planet Earth. The reader is left to ponder whether the text should be taken at face value, as the manifesto of some new revolutionary group, or as a poem written from a very idiosyncratic point of view. This ambiguity is symptomatic of a tendency that will become more and more pro- nounced in the late poetry. At the beginning of January 1921, while still in Baku, Khlebnikov wrote to his sister: This year will be the year of a great and final battle with the serpent. Everything my consciousness contains—black nighttime windows, the hissing of the breathless firewood as it hastens to cinder—I raise it all to salute my victory over the dragon. These past days I have forged a spear for my combat with him: the ability to foresee the future. I pos- sess equations for the stars, equations for voices, equations for 14 The Poet and His Voices thoughts, equations of birth and death. I am the first to set foot on a new continent—a place that commands Time. The letter is remarkable for a number of reasons. Written only a few weeks after Khlebnikov had discovered those equations that he be- lieved described the periodicity of historic events, it reveals the breadth of his exploratory studies in other areas relating to the structure of the cosmos. It was possible, he believed, to find comparable equations for the motions of the planets and for the shifting moods of an individual. Human biology as well as human culture bore the imprint of the Laws of Time. It was no coincidence that Petrarch wrote 317 sonnets in honor of Laura or that the human body has 317 pairs of muscles, because this number was itself implicated in the periodicity of historical events. Similarly, one might expect that the ratio of the circumference of a drop of blood to that of Planet Earth would reflect the mathematical rela- tionship between a day and a year, because the cosmos itself is a kind of living organism whose parts are rationally conjoined. These "discov- eries" or, more precisely, the spirit that informs them, can be traced in a large number of works, most obviously "The City of the Future," "Lightland," and other Utopian pieces that convey the poet's sense of the "harmony of the spheres" and how it might be realized in the realm of human culture. Aside from its mention of actual discoveries, the letter is remark- able for providing a self-portrait of the discoverer. Here, in private communication with his sister, Khlebnikov unabashedly presents him- self in two roles: as a modern Saint George engaged in combat with the dragon of fate and as a twentieth-century Christopher Columbus. These are not idle hyperboles. They represent two of the many roles Khlebnikov projected in real life, and Mayakovsky acknowledged both of them when, in his eulogy, he called Khlebnikov "a Columbus of new poetical continents" and "the most magnificent and noblest knight in our poetical combat." Later in the letter, Khlebnikov mentions two other roles that he played in Baku: in presenting his findings to a university audience, he says, he introduced himself as "Marx squared" and as a successor to Mohammed. Both the discoveries and the discoverer are relevant for our under- standing of Khlebnikov's postrevolutionary personae. The discoveries speak of an extraordinary connection between the microcosm of the individual and the macrocosm of the universe, and their correlation can 15 The Poet and His Voices bring about very strange transformations in the speaker who represents that microcosm. It allows him, for example, to impersonate the universe itself, as he does in "You whose mind flowed," where he wears Planet Earth like a signet ring on his little finger. He can undergo a variety of physical transformations, as in "I am a wave," where he is a bundle of water molecules that complete a full ecological cycle and eventually ascend to a distant star. In "A Vague Memory" he is a demigod in the guise of a mad poet who can crush and refashion the universe simply by virtue of his control over words. "The One, the Only Book" starts out innocently enough with a neutral "I" who tells us how "the black Vedas, the Koran and the Gospels and the book of the Mongols" have all given way to a grander book, the book of nature. The elaboration of this Renaissance conceit, however, soon evolves into a rhetorical diatribe in which the speaker addresses all of humankind: Race of Humanity, you are Readers of the Book whose cover bears the creator's signature, the sky-blue letters of my name. Yes you, careless reader, Look up! Pay attention! You let your attention wander idly, as if you were still in catechism class. Soon, very soon you will read these mountain chains and these enormous oceans! They are the one, the only book. Most remarkable here, as Willem Weststeijn has pointed out, is that the speaker defines himself not as another reader, or as an interpreter of the book of nature, but as the book's author. The logic of the conceit is such that the poet takes on the role of God himself. This kind of impersonation, notable particularly in Khlebnikov's late verse, is built into the poetic vision that grew out of his extrapoetic discoveries. But there is another kind of manipulation of the lyrical subject that is far more common, and far more disquieting. In the post-civil war period, we encounter a disproportionately large number of texts which, because of certain historical and personal references, call attention to the correspondence between the lyrical "I" and the real "I" of the poet. This autobiographical "I" occurs earlier, of course, but it is far less common in the prerevolutionary years. Now we see it frequently: in "Easter in Enzeli," "A Stream of Icy Water," "Night in Persia," "The Chairman of the Cheka," "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet" 16 The Poet and His Voices and many others. In some of them Khlebnikov unapologetically intro- duces his own name in the poem. The fact that most of these texts were written in the last year and a half of Khlebnikov's life suggests that the adoption of such a lyrical subject was precipitated by an evolution in his poetic and philosophical Weltanschauung, something that would have had a profound effect on his vision of himself. This phenomenon is discussed at some length by Boris Tomashevsky in a seminal essay, "Literature and Biography," written in 1923. Tomashevsky points out that there are certain authors who, at some point in their development, tend to make literary use of their biographies, cultivating a particular image of themselves, both in life and in literature, that will ultimately enter into the structure of their works. Pushkin, for example, during the period of the "southern po- ems," "poetically fostered certain facts of his life" to create the "image of a young exile with a hidden and unrequited love," because that was the subject most appropriate for the Romantic works he was compos- ing. Aleksandr Blok is another poet who modeled his life to coincide with the image he had begun to project, and which his readership had come to expect, in his verse. The same is true for Khlebnikov. This tendency became more and more pronounced after he had achieved those goals which, as his letter to his sister indicates, he believed made him worthy of legendary status. Like Blok or Pushkin, Khlebnikov was intent on projecting an image of his own life and self that would provide his readers with a model for the lyrical subject of these verses. The image grew equally out of his writings and his personal behavior. The publication of his poems alter- nated regularly with the publication of essays and brochures on the laws of historical progression, the structure of a potentially universal language, and the organization of Utopian societies; they contributed to the composite image of a radical poetic experimenter, political visionary, and scientific revolutionary. His eccentric life style contrib- uted to the legend of the poet-philosopher who had forsaken the bourgeois pleasures of the world in pursuit of a loftier calling. As Kornely Zelinsky notes, "The impression created by the personality of the poet and the circumstances of his life . . . played a significant role in establishing the Khlebnikov cult. A dreamer, a visionary monoma- niac importunately pondering the destiny of poetry and the universe, Velimir Khlebnikov created in his essays, proclamations, letters, and verses a whole world of poetic mythology." 17 The Poet and His Voices None of this would be problematic if, as in the case of Blok or Pushkin, we were dealing only with a "world of poetic mythology." In many of the late autobiographical poems, however, Khlebnikov gives us to understand that we are not to read his "I" as a "mythological" Khlebnikov but as the real thing—that is, when he treats the legend of himself literally. The farther we move chronologically into the poems of 1921 and 1922, the more this shift becomes apparent. In several key poems of the late period, including "Suppose I make a timepiece of humanity," "To You All," "You feel my summons," "Russia, I give you my divine / white brain," "Who is he, the Voronikhin of the centuries," "I'm not just some carnival devil," and numerous others, I believe, Khlebnikov engineers our crossing the boundary from fictive into nonfictive discourse, despite the fact that they bear such traditional markings of poetic speech as line and rhyme and regular rhythm. He is asking us to believe that the voice in these poems is not merely one that speaks as a prophet might speak under comparable circumstances, but the voice of the singular historical figure who, in December 1920, in Baku, discovered a series of truths about time and space and chose to express those truths in verse form. The evidence that Khlebnikov did indeed view these works as something more than poetry is quite striking. There is, in the first place, the close correspondence between them and a variety of explicitly nonfictive texts. The Persian poems and personal letters, for example, constantly paraphrase each other. Large sections of Zanßezi, "Minin of Nizhny Novgorod," and other poems present the same historical data and mathematical theories as the Tables of Destiny. There is absolutely no difference in the point of view of the speaking subject: in both cases he is the discoverer of the Laws of Time who is attempting to convince his readers that his vision is true and salvific. The fictive/nonfictive distinction is even more seriously com- promised by the authoritative voice of these poems, which frequently resembles that of prophetic texts. I am referring here not simply to Khlebnikov's self-characterization as a prophet in such poems as "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet" or "I saw the young man, the young prophet," but to his attempts at reifying that role by making claims one typically associates with sacred texts. For example, in a long, unfinished poem entitled "Who is he, the Voronikhin of the centuries," he presents and concludes a mysterious parable in a manner typical of the Gospels: 18 The Poet and His Voices I remember the duel of the centuries, their faces behind a net of blue numbers, as though they were bitten up by bees, where Voronikhin erected centuries like a tower at the Khitrovo Market, and read them by their powers. You do not understand these words and their secret sense. One is reminded here of nothing so much as Christ's manner of addressing his audience and his postscriptive remark, "I speak in par- ables so that, though seeing, they may not see, though hearing they may not understand" (Matthew 13:13). Not coincidentally, the words of Christ that Khlebnikov chooses to paraphrase are themselves the reit- eration of words uttered by the prophet Isaiah. The role of the prophet is also reified in the kind of claims the speaker makes in these poems, claims about his own powers, his mis- sion, and his knowledge of the future. He speaks of his own uniqueness ("I was the only one to notice that time until today / was a vassal to space") and his own ability to tell the future. Like all prophets, he is without honor in his own country. He warns his followers of impending catastrophe if they do not heed his message, and promises them that his words will direct them to a promised land free of war and want: ... I tell you, the future is coming, and upon it my superhuman dreams. The force of my thoughts will inundate the structure of existing states— I'll reveal the drowned city of Kitezh, risen by magic, to serfs blinded by the old stupidities. Such claims, like those made by the nonfictive speaker of the Tables of Destiny and the letters, are based on the discoveries of Khlebnikov himself, and there can be little doubt that he wishes us to acknowledge their validity. Khlebnikov, I think, was not unaware of the discomfort his audience faced in confronting such claims. He had tried out many of these ideas on his contemporaries and had met with expressions of incredulity. As 19 The Poet and His Voices he wrote to his sister, "Those whose self-esteem goes no further than getting a pair of boots for loyalty and good behavior have drawn away from me and now watch me with terrified eyes." To another friend he added, "If people don't want to learn my art of predicting the future (and that has already happened in Baku, among local thinkers), I shall teach it to horses." Khlebnikov was also, I suspect, a sensitive enough poet to realize that he could not break down the barrier between Active and nonfictive discourse without risking the impoverishment of his own poetry. His response to this dilemma was to create doubles of himself who could act as his spokesmen—Zangezi, for example, or the Son in "Cracking the Universe." He placed these doubles in dramatic frames, creating a closed imaginary world around them. It is a dramatis per- sona, not the poet, who says: I established white temples of Time, filled them with poetry and the life of young men, temples chiseled from the dead sea. I discovered truths, majestic and straightforward, and like divinities they entered my temples, greeted me with outstretched open arms, and filled the empty white temples with their breath. And it is a Active listener, not a historical reader, who exclaims, "Our souls are a floor beneath your feet. Brave comer! We believe you! We await you!" This is the same sort of framing we see in Plato's dialogues and Nietzsche's Also sprach Zarathustra, both of which Khlebnikov imitated in his early work. The difference is that Khlebnikov's spokesmen not only take on the same ideological position as their creator, but assume concrete elements of his biography. Zangezi, for example, is presented as a wandering sage and the author of Khlebnikov's own Tables of Destiny. The Son in "Cracking the Universe" claims, as did Khlebnikov in the Tables, that he vowed to discover the Laws of Time upon learning of the Tsushima debacle. The creation of doubles would thus seem to be a transparent subterfuge, but it has a very important function: to protect the real speaker from the dangers implicit in historical discourse. The creation of a dramatic frame is equally important, because it generates a Active audience to stand in for the historical reader. Zangezi can excoriate his 20 The Poet and His Voices audience, and his audience can throw eggs at Zangezi, without injur- ing either Khlebnikov or his real audience. The Son can argue with his teacher and set out on a mission to save his people without the poet's being laughed out of the auditorium where he is reciting his poem. Khlebnikov's vision, however, is too expansive to be entirely con- tained by such dramatic structures. Beyond the mise-en-scene of Zan- gezi, he continues to demand a direct confrontation with his readers. More often than not, he proceeds on the assumption of an adversary relationship, ordering, cajoling, entreating, scolding, and reproving his listeners for their obstinacy. The poet presumes that we know the legend he has made of his life and, by resorting to direct address, puts us in the role of his historical audience, compelling us read the texts as real entreaties. Nowhere is this strategy employed more effectively than in "Once more, once more," among Khlebnikov's last and most mov- ing poems: Once more, once more I am your star. Woe to the sailor with level and compass whose angle is false. He will wreck on rocks and hidden shoals. Woe to you without love or compassion who angled me false. You will wreck on rocks and the rocks will laugh at you the way you did at me. This is dangerous poetry. If we accept the invitation to read it as a real, historical utterance in the guise of verse, we lose the safety net of poetic convention and find ourselves face to face with the figure of Khleb- nikov; we must then decide whether he is mad, or feebleminded, or merely a misguided genius. It is a decision not many readers feel comfortable making. The alternative is to interpret the voice as an impersonation, making the speaker a type for the disillusioned poet 21 The Poet and His Voices confronting an insensitive world. By choosing this alternative, however, we confirm what the speaker has said about us—that we are blind to the truths he has proclaimed. Khlebnikov thus forces us to confront either his person or his vision of ourselves. No matter what our choice, we are never wholly free to contemplate his work as art alone. 22 Lyrics Harsh hush bends bow against the clamor-call of dawn. Night nests in dark souls, scatters shouts of "Burn!" Clamor-call began to shudder, took up silence as a shield; stalking into dark to slaughter— hundred-hacker, hundred-head. Bow falls, felled from hands— stillness speaks of what will be, and through clash of power-welter flies away. [1908: Τ +2] Where the winking waxwings whistle in the shadows of the cedars, where the branches shake and shiver the mockingbird minutes fly away; In the shadows of the cedars a flock of flickers flutter, where the branches shake and shiver the swallows turn to seasons as they fly away. In the tatters of the shadows, in the darkest deep of day, there they wheel above and whistle like a flock of floating hours that, fleeting, fly away. 25 Lyrics You are sun and song and siren and you touch our souls with sound, make our hearts a wave of wonder, little singers of all seasons, and you fly away. [1908: Τ 42] Here I praise the brutal flight of those wings, they carried me into distances, to Freedom's signifying blue dimension domed by the sun with rings of light, high, high, to that absolute height— the snowy egret of song eternally. [1908: Τ 44] Came a rush of whistling, birds descended from the sky. Like rustling leaves they would not fly. And like a giant wing above me I watched the swan-storm grow. The cloud was some enormous bird that trailed twilight on the place below. Mysterious feathery shadows drifting in the wing's wide arc. I fled the science of hypocrisy and hurried headlong into the dark. [1908: II 41] The echoing gull planes over empty water. I am futurity's silent ebb, I am silentium's future flow. The reeds are unsteady, unsteady. The small boats fly. The fishermen cry. [1908: NP 94] 26 Lyrics The streams of time on stone dreams, the rush of streams on time's stones. Rustling sedge at the lake's edge— reverent hush, reverberant rush. [1908: Τ 44] Cloudarias floated all forlorn over the far high hills away, Cloudarias cast their canopied shadows over the desolate far away. Cloudarias tumbled their canopied shadows over the desolate far away . . . Cloudarias floated all forlorn over the high far hills away. [1908: NP 115] Snowfellow, tallfellow, bright beacon, what has become of your mother? Snowfellow, tallfellow, bright beacon, Where have they buried your mother? [1908: NP in] You are my song, my dark-blue dream of doves, of winter's drowsy drone, and sleighs that slow and golden go through gray-blue shadows on the snow. [1908: II 227] Languor-wing flies in the middle of fable, made breathless by a girl's charms; tangled in nets of golden wool Let me die here in your arms. [1908: NP 103] His sweet lids close and shut away the moan of my young moon song. 27 Lyrics My darling, my dying, my light, my sight, my night my whole day long. [1908: NP 96] The freezing weather of debauchery has killed the languor-wing of dawn. The innocent age's light goes out and the firebirds freeze and fall. [190S: NP 108] Woe-mind, Slow-mind, and No-mind, three sisters, girls in bridal veils, danced together with wild wails. They circle, bend, and bind, with arms and legs entwined, and dissolve in a puddle of maniac curls. [}9o8: II 264] Wo-man and Wo-man. We're all alone in the drowsy woods. We're in love with each other. No lady-friends, no wives! We're in leaf with each other. Who cares if we're losers as long as we're lovers! We haven't married wives! We share each other's lives! We're all alone in a world of green. [ipo8: NP 99] My bag breaks and everything falls to the floor. It occurs to me the world is a grin that flickers on a hanged man's face. [1908: τ 44] The death-dole of an old skull, flickering with slippery mice. And the dole of an old delirium, 28 Lyrics to be wed above the roofs of the hice. That's all. [1908: II276-277] The bowl is banished from the long tables— someone has drunk the liquor of the gods. Divine wine is a beast-feast also— the oxen raise their blue-gray horns. [1908: NP 131] A herd of horses shod with hours jangling like thunder, wheel in a field. Their rugged bodies are rank with time, their flashing eyes ablaze with days. [1908: NP 119] Snow is a dream of earth, snow is winter's dream; drowse of seed-sprout in the tomb, arouse of seed-sprout in the womb. [1908: II 282] No now. I'm like everybody! Much pain. Such bitter seed. Who cares for cue? Am I loved you? Not no. You are. Star. No skies never ever well. Laughter sounds still. [1908: NP 127] The Dostoyology of racing clouds! Pushkincandescence of noon! Night resembles Tiutchev, filling the unfathomable full of the unknown. [1908-1909: Τ 5+] 29 Lyrics Incantation by Laughter Hlaha! Uthlofan, lauflings! Hlaha! Ufhlofan, lauflings! Who lawghen with lafe, who hlaehen lewchly, Hlaha! Ufhlofan hlouly! Hlaha! Hloufish lauflings lafe uf beloght lauchalorum! Hlaha! Loufenish lauflings lafe, hlohan utlaufly! Lawfen, lawfen, Hloh, hlouh, hlou! Luifekin, luifekin, Hlofeningum, hlofeningum. Hlaha! Uthlofan, lauflings! Hlaha! Ufhlofan, lauflings! [1908-1909: Τ 54] Bo-beh-oh-bee is the lipsong Veb-eh-oh-mee is the eyesong Pee-eh-eh-oh is the eyebrowsong Lee-eh-eh-ay is the looksong Gzee-ßzee-gzeh-oh is the chainsong On the canvas of such correspondences somewhere beyond all dimensions the face has a life of its own. [1908-1909: Τ $+] Who wants to hear a story about a little lady who lived very grand, oh, not a big-time lady really, just a sort of fat froggie: she was short and she waddled and she wore a dress, and had lots of significant friendships with pine trees, all of them princes. She goes visiting in springtime and you know which way she paddles by the bright reflecting puddles in her wake— that silly little lady of the lake. [Γ908-1909: τ 55] 30 Lyrics Grasshopper Glitter-letter wing-winker gossamer grasshopper packs his belly-basket with credo-meadow grass. Zin! Zin! Zin! sings the raucous racket-bird! Swan-white wonder! Brighter, brighter, bright! [1908-1909 Τ 54] Enormous arboreal monster, hanging high with rump of shocking size, grips a girl who fetched a pail of water, rolling at him her cajoling eyes. Diddled for a moment, she's an apple on the branches of his shaggy arms. Enormous monster—rather awful, really—lolls back and laps. Life has its charms. [1908-1909: Τ 56] On the island of Ezeli we got along easily. I went to Kamchatka where you were a hat-check girl. From the heights of Altai I smiled and said, "Hi!" On the shores of Amur, I'amour. Neward, we praise thee! Youngard, we praise thee! Joyard, we praise thee! Knoward, we praise thee! Grayard, we praise thee! Mightard, we praise thee! Wizard, we praise thee! [1908: II 38] [1908: II 271] 31 Lyrics We chant and enchant, oh charming enchantment! No raving, no ranting, no canting enchantment! This ranting enchantress has cast her enchantment— we see what her chant meant! Here rant! There cant! You charming enchanter, cast out her enchantment, uncast it, uncant it, discount it, discant it, descant: Decant! Recant! He can't. She can't. Why can't she recant? Why can't he uncant? Ranting chanting, no recanting. Discant, descant. A Foppish Proposal I find the weather absolutely enchanting— and give me leave—your darling little hand, to help transpose an accent—elegantly does it, So! Like this, then: death in a basket! En basquette! There by the roadside: what whiteness, looming in the gloaming? Is that a tree? Or merely my caprice Ah, permit me. Please. The word is so well-bred. I approach with an elegant step to present my affair. I bow and begin. "Assuming you too are attracted by love, you must join us. An elegant evening. Ladies, of course—and the glass they hand me will be bubbly. You do understand me?" The wind's fast grab at a cloud-curve slips, and she slaps his face! Was that meant for me? A message comes through from this dazzle I see, 32 Lyrics this glimmer of glow-worms: contact, they say, with the afterlife is effortless. [1909?: Τ 59] Brooding, dark, and elegant— Stranger, aren't you the man who frightened the children yesterday? "Mama!" they shouted, "he's wicked!" and ran. You went to visit my sweetheart where she took the evening air, said: "Permit me to introduce myself..." And laughed: "... how beautiful you are ..." She twisted the ring on her finger, smiled like any coquette, and said: "Sir, I've heard of your wicked adventures— but why is your glove stained red?" "Believe me, Lady, those stories aren't true— Do I look like an evil adventurer? I'm only as old as you." "Oh sir, I can hardly believe that . . . you have such melancholy eyes!" Strands of spider-glitter drifted in the water-mirrored skies. Two figures were seen on the pathway, the little boat was gone . . . And a long embrace of water silenced my sweetheart's moan. [1908-1912: II 28] OK, Graylegs, time to set the plow aside. Rainstorm lashes our faces. Time to turn back to the barn, to dinner, dreams, and darkness. [1909-1912: Τ 6?] 33 Lyrics I swam across the Sudak Gulf, I rode a wild horse. I shouted: "Russia has perished, is no more, partitioned now like Poland!" And people stared in horror. I said: "The heart of a modern Russian hangs like a bat." And people repented. I said: "Hlaha! Uthlofan, lauflings! Hlaha! Ufhlofan, lauflings!" I said: "Down with the Hapsburgs! Bridle the Hohenzollerns!" And I wrote with an eagle feather. Golden, silky, it swirled above the sturdy quill. I walked by the shores of a beautiful lake, in bast-bound shoes and a sky-blue shirt. And I was beautiful too. I had an old bronze bludgeon with a rugged round head. I once had a double-reed panpipe and a sawed-off horn. I had my picture taken with a skull in my hand. I saw sea serpents at Petrovsk. I went to the Urals with water from the Caspian, and poured it into the Kara Sea. I called the snows of high Kazbek eternal, but I prefer the soft brocades of autumn in the Urals. On the Greben Mountains I found the teeth of a manta ray and silver scallop shells large as the wheel of Pharaoh's chariot. [1909-1910: Τ 6i] The Tangled Wood The tangled wood was full of sound the forest screamed, the forest groaned with fear to see the spear-man beast his spear. 34 Lyrics Why does hart's horn hang heavy with the moving mark of love? Arrow's flash of metal hits a haunch, and reckons right. Now beast is broken to his knees, beaten to the ground. His eyes look deep at death. The horses clatter, snort, and chatter: "We bring the Tall Ones. Useless to run." Useless only your exquisite motion, your almost feminine face. No action can save you. You fly from rack and ruin, and searching spear-man follows fast. Panting horses always closer, branching antlers always lower, twangling bowstrings over and over, nor help nor hart from hurt and hazard. But he rears abruptly, bristles, roars— and shows a lion's cruel claws. With lazy ease he touches, teases— teaches the trick of terror. Acquiescent and still, they fall to fill their graves. He rises rampant. Regal roar. And around him everywhere lay beaten slaves. [1910?: Τ 6?] We want to be familiars of the stars— we've been too distant long enough. We've found the fun of acting tough. Be big, be bold, be like Baklanov, or Platov, or Ostranitsa— stop bending over backward before Mohammedan majesty! Let politicians sputter— spit in their eye! 35 Lyrics Be like Morozhenko— stand and testify! Sviatoslav shall be our model: "Here I come!" he cried to his enemies. You northern lions, give us back our tarnished pride. See Yermak, see Osliablia, our ancestors follow us—see! Flutter, flutter, Russian banner, lead us over land and sea! Restore our fathers' spirit to this dreary, doubtful land. Be bad as big Vladimir or Dobrynia's fighting band. [1910?: Τ 69] I see them: Crab, Ram, Bull, and all the world is only shell whose pearl and opalescence is my impotence. A knock, a chirr, container of whistle and rustle, and I realize then that waves and thought are kin. Here, there, in milky ways, women rise through darkness drunk on drowsy prose. On such a night, no grave is grim . . . and evening women, evening wine become a single diadem whose baby boy I am. [1909-1912: II30] Rutting elephants, battering ivory tusks that seemed white stone beneath an artist's hand. Stags in rut, with antlers intertwined: they seem embraced in ancient intercourse, in tugging ardors and adulteries. Rivers rushed each other into the sea: It seemed the hand of one strangled the neck of another. [1910-1911: Τ 72] 36 Lyrics People in love, casting long looks, long sighs. Beasts in love, raising dregs in their eyes, choked on their bits of foam. Suns in love, covering night with a weft of earth, dancing to meet, to mate. Gods in love, forming the trembling universe into verse, like Pushkin his passion for Volkonskaia's maid. [1911?: Τ 72] The eyes of the Black Sea into the distance. [1911-1912: Τ 74] A goblin grabbles in the greeny forest— Wood-willy, slurping his mouth-organ— where a clump of aspens quivers and benefolent spruces cascade. A smear of pungent forest honey licky on the tongue-tip of daylight; Oh! His grasping arms were icy: I was completely taken in. I couldn't stand his eyes' unblinking point-blank confrontation— his look, full of pleading promises, the icicle anguish in his eyes. Lawn-rake fingers crabbing at me from a shaky clump of catkins; he had dark blue sighters and a body all mush-flesh and flow. Lyrics I had missed a turn or two, tearing along in a juventy frenzy. Slying, the wood-wart winked and jostled me: "Which way where? And why?" [1912?: Τ ?s] Let us all be heads of lettuce; let us not let knives upset us. [1911?: Τ 74] I saw a tiger, he crouched by a wood and filled a bamboo flute with his sighs; his ferine forces contracted in waves, and mocking fires burned in his eyes. Beside him an elegant maid discoursed with an elegant tilt to her head: "Tigers and lions, as everyone knows, cannot carry a tune," she said. [1912,1922: III 46] When horses die, they sigh When grasses die, they shrivel When suns die, they flare and expire When people die, they sing songs [1912: Τ 75] The law of the seesaw argues that your shoes will be loose or tight, that the hours will be day or night, and the ruler of earth the rhinoceros Or US. [1912: Τ 76] The naked staghorn rising in the woods may seem a dead tree. When a heart of darkness bares itself in words they scream: he's mad. [1912: Τ 76] 38 Lyrics Qua-People A bird who wants to go higher flies into the blue. A lady who wants to go higher wears a high-heeled shoe. When I don't have any shoes I go to the market and buy some. Someone who's missing a nose can go get a false one. When a nation discovers it has no soul, it goes to the neighbors and buys one! Sold! . . . and unsouled! [1912: Τ 76] Numbers I see right through you, Numbers. I see you dressed in animals, their skins, coolly propped against uprooted oaks. You offer us a gift: unity between the snaky movement of the backbone of the universe and Libra dancing overhead. You help us to see centuries as a flash of laughing teeth. See my wisdom-wizened eyes opening to recognize what my I will be when its dividend is one. [1912: τ 79] The night is full of constellations. What advent, what intelligence of freedom or restraint shines in your wide pages, book above me, what fate must I make out in the wide midnight sky? [1912: Τ 83] 39 Lyrics I don't need much! A crust of bread, a cup of milk, the sky above and these clouds! [1912,1922: Τ 83] The sticky sky smells blue-gray, it's the odor of udder. Show me some loving, be good to me! I am bleeding. You are my fatality. I am nailed up to die on an old empty tree. [1912: Τ 6i] The moon begins to flow— reveals herself, conceals herself, then somebody squeals: oh! and disintegrates the sky. Gloss-face drapes herself in a chorus of clouds. Bread's set out on the table. Soup's on. They say a naked woman is beautiful by moonlight. Rough voices, red faces munching mushrooms; they drink, dribble, bolt about. I can't get away from you, ever. The sky takes scraps of blue, black, gray, quietly quilts them into evening. And they're busy gobbling the caviar. [1912: NP 1+7] Reflections of a Profligate But your glance is pale, horse-eye pale, silvered with a bluish streak. Your hair is all tangled. Shadows of vice weave a dazzling design. 40 Lyrics Oh, young men! Happy the man who has never known passion's fire, for he knows stars unseen by you in the dark blue steep of the sky. [1912: NP 142] In periwinkle potion, you earthworms, kindle two watery rocks in a black thread. I'm a charred log of obscure reputation; it's not that I'm empty or especially awful— I'm just worn out, I'm not hot anymore. I sit here. Warm me. Keep my face from moving on the cliff of my shoulders, but let the speech of someone's singing hands awake my own hands' hearing. For with this periwinkle water I will find out at last— did her scarf cut me off cold, like winter leaving the land? [1913: Τ 84] I am borne on the back of an elephant formed by the bodies of maidens. Everyone everywhere loves me—I am Vishnu anew, weaving this wintry vision. You elephant sinews, surely they show you in fairy-tale hunting processions to observe that gentle flow to the ground, that falling form, that amiable trunk. You black-shadowed visions in white, whiter, much whiter than blossoms, 41 Lyrics your bodies tremble beneath me slender as nocturnal tendrils. I am the Bodhisattva on a white elephant: as always, pensive and slender. Seeing me, one of these maidens replied with the fire of a grateful smile. Remember, to embody a mighty elephant is nowhere in no way dishonorable. You virgins, enchanted by dreams, weave yourselves warmly together. It is hard to repeat the wave of a tusk, to shape the form of a massive foot. The avowal of flutes, of garlanded songs proclaims: He is with us, upon us, the blue-eyed god! [1913?: Τ 87] The Song of One Come to Confusion I saw black pine-needles on a canvas of stone; her hand, I thought, thin as bone— then it knocks at my very vitals. So soon? So strange, now to stand beside you in the evening, a skeleton; to stretch out a long thin hand and conjure constellations into your room. [1913: τ ?ο] Rue A Fable You know the herb they use for doses; it grows at the edge of filthy places. This is a tale of ancient princes: Russia fought the Mongols here 42 Lyrics in the lighter days of a younger year. With a rough sack of sour complaints the New Year took the old one's place, with all his horde of helpmates hustling after joking, jostling, whistling lewdly into their country pipes and puffing out their piggy cheeks. But that same land no longer laughs since the swan-song sounded overhead, and the bones, the bones—"Rue," they madly cry beneath their shroud of spring-green rye. And the bones, they wail forevermore: "We will always remember war." Fly! Little three-letter wordlet busily washing your winglet, what could be sweeter or better than watching you swallow my letter? I'm going out again today into life, into the marketplace, to lead a regiment of songs against the roar of rat and race. A bunch of yellow buttercups. Lightning's evil eye. A woman drops a flower, and walks on by. And soon the eyes of the window bang beneath the hurly-burly hanging over our heads. The yellow-backed book gets soaking wet. The rumbling clouds are blue and black. In the kingdom of hearing two castles collapse and out jumps that powerful female cat, the thunderstorm! . . . who glowers at the drooping flowers. [1913: τ 84] [1913: NP 152] [1914: τ 93] [1915: NP 167] 43 Lyrics Black king dance out front of the crowd, and witch-doctors batter the tom-tom. Big black women laugh bawdy and loud, Pelele stain their mouths, and burn. The dirty cauldron bubble: some bird bones, and a child. Our Elder Father Helper Sun he hurt us unaware. Seven times the light go by, seven times to earth from sun. We look and see the dark turn cold. We look and we see Requiem. Black king dance out front of the crowd, and witch-doctors batter the tom-tom. [191+-1915: Ii m] Genghis Khan me, you midnight plantation! Dark blue birch trees, sound in my ear! Zarathuse me, you twilight horizons! Mozarticulate me, dark-blue sky! Goya, gloaming, glooming! Rops, you midnight clouds! But the storm of smiles vanishes in cackling and the shock of claws and leaves me to outface the hangman, to brave the stillness of the night. I summoned up you barefaced insolents, from rivers made the drowned girls rise. "Rosemary, stronger than remembrance!" I shouted to the sails of night. Again earth's axis splashes round, brings on the overwhelming evening. I dreamed I saw a salmon-girl beneath a midnight waterfall. Let storms turn pines to Mamai-monsters beneath the Batu-beating clouds; words come on, like Cains of silences, and all these sacred speeches die. 44 Lyrics And to stone entertainment with heavy footfall comes heaven-blue Hasdrubal, henchmen and all. [1915: Τ 99] A quiet perfume from the orchard, apple blossoms and acacia. The boyarina is fasting and afraid that she might fall. Dead men float. Last night. It was glorious, ecstatic. Dead men pull the oars. Cold glances above a white veil burn and sparkle, and sepulchral shadows hush the sweet salt savor of a kiss. As soon as midnight waters lap the descending steps, the vision slips away. They whisper simply, "Allah bismullah . . . " they slip their skulls beneath the surface and vanish in the murmur of the waves. White snow and tenderness descending everywhere, like the hand of Yaroslavna on the painted Pecheneg. [1915: π 219] These tenuous Japanese shadows, murmuring Indian maidens— nothing sounds so mournful as words at a last supper. Death—but first a flash of life again: unknown, unlike, immediate. This rule is the only rhythm for the dance of death and attainment. [1915: Τ 99] Tell your kitten not to bite, I'll angelize you when I die. 45 Lyrics Hokusai will paint your mouth, Murillo paint your virgin eye. [1915,1922: VRJ 64] Nations, faces, ages pass, pass as in a dream, an ever-flowing stream. In Nature's shifting glimmer-glass stars are nets, we their haul, gods are shadows on a wall. [1915: Τ 94] Beast + Number When the blue shimmer of the damsel-fly shines through the smoke of villages, A Thing appears, some new conception, and shipwrecks intellect on Number's shore. "Children, children!" the priest exclaimed, when he heard the Athenian envoy speak. About the austere neck of Number mind and matter hang like a cloak. When mortal minds tire pondering some equation—wine-dark, foam-born— their goal, remember, is to tower until they touch the sky. Replace the stake, the block, the cross! Think of Number as an iron device. Even the whirlwind slackens, confronting Number face to face. I write these lines in ink: Believe me, the day is near that glorifies us all! And the rough beast slouches in silence, a pair of virgin ciphers in his paw! 46 Lyrics But when he hears the tender tumult of these voices and these days, he will fall down as if struck upon the rocks, upon the rocks. [1915: τ ιοο] Autumn this year is a rabbit affair and no eye can distinguish the shivering season from the shaking beast. Shifty, all yellow, autumn-color dweller. Dead leaves and stubble on hillside and swamp-stump everywhere, and even the eye blinks blindly, not knowing one quick shiver of fear from another. [1915: VRi 76] A Vague Memory Remember? I ordered the shoeshine boy to scrape the Little Bear from off my shoes; I tossed a coin to the universe, then made an anxious hash of ancient words. Where the ragged fields of dawn are plowed by the horsemen of centuries, I ordered a crow to fly and said in passing to the sky: "Do me a favor. Die!" Later I got a better idea— always looking for bigger laughs— I smashed the matchbox race of men and started reading poetry. Planet Earth was an easy fit 47 Lyrics in the dark curve of a madman's mitt . . . Follow me now! What's there to be afraid of? [1915,1922: VRi 36] Herd of hoofsteps, ingots of elephants, let's crown the tiger as if in a dream, let's gallop together. Ourselves together, hordes of us, bodies with trunks. Ten is nothing! Lots of us—a unit of friends. Let us make doves transport artillery shells. Let us move like the world's first citizen, the wolf, and stampede the horses carved on the Chartomlyk vase. Let us outsmart the wolf, ur-scribe of the Russian land, and praise extinct incisors, murderous combat. Let's break the necks of dialects like baby geese. We are bored to death by their honking. Let's muzzle the universe, keep it from biting us, who are young; let's move among lean white hunting dogs flicking our riding crops, smearing the buttercups with blood from our fragile hands ripped by the tusk of the universe, the slaver-mouth of the universe. And let's cast a dream of cannons from cast-off literary canons. We who are young and wise will abandon the old, who are not, and establish world government for ourselves, and for our generations. [1915-1916: OS 9-10] My elbow brushed a warm breast: Awake, daughter of diversions! The bridge reached its claw into the fleeing footsoldier. The bridge was built of drowned men's bodies. Death sat combing her virulent hair +8 Lyrics and like swarms of gnats, expendable lives did what they could to attack her. Their thick cloud wreathed the gravestone pilings. Almighty Amazon! Your hair grows heavier, heavier. I'll collect your combings, make me a pillow, and someday I'll smother you. [1915,1922: VR1 73] Young girls, young men, remember! who and what we saw today . . . those hollow eyes and mouths don't smile as they did—remember?—yesterday. Woe unto you, you dwellers in plenty, sunk deep in wrinkles of wholesale murder! Men are dished up for you on platters of filthy diseases. Soldier leaps to combat, warlike, skilled. Unskulled by Death, his S falls off. Killed. Older, he sleeps. Sounder and sweeter than life. There's death in charge of war relief- supplying graveyard worms with food. Shame on you! Cut all the trees in Siberia— still not enough for the crutches you'll need. Why not bring experts from the Fiji Islands, Grim black teachers of the butcher's arts, and let them develop culinary institutes where we learn to eat man-meat, hands and hearts? I say no! Let's go find War, the Ogre-Wife, who flaunts the corpses in her clothes, let's shout, as men did once before: "Monster of Death, beware my spear! You've eaten too much man-meat stroganoff!" Don't come trampling down my continent! Do something undreamed-of, strictly new, you horses pulling the hearse of the world! Thunder along and keep the dark secret, bury it deep in your midnight ears. 49 Lyrics I firmly believe the day will come when Allah scrawls "Stop!" on a shovel of stars. [1915,1922: VRi 82] "Hey!" the wolf cries out in blood, "I eat the meat of strong young men!" And a mother says: "My sons are gone." But we are your elders! We decide! Anyway, young men are cheaper nowadays, no? Dirt-cheap, slop-cheap, coal-chute-cheap! Pale apparition, scything our man-crop, sinews all sunburnt, be proud of your work! "Come get your young men, your dead men," the city wails along its streets, wails like the barrow-boy hawking his birds— new feathers for all your caps! A man who once wrote "Last Deer Songs" now hangs beside a silver rabbit pelt, trussed up by the knees, in the larder next to the meat and eggs and cream! Consolidated's up and Petroleum is down but the young man is gone, the dark-eyed king of our talk after dinner is gone, and we loved him and needed him, understand? [1915: VRi 75] Bad News, April 8,1916 Who, me? Me too? This triumph of torpidity? This anti-Onegin? Me, offended that people are the way they are? Me, who watched the R depart from Russia, Me, reared up by all that is best in Russia, brightest and best, 50 Lyrics Me, tangled in the brightest of bird-song? I've got witnesses! You thrushes, swans, and cranes! Me, who dreamed my life away? Me too? You mean I'll have to grab a gun (a dumb thing, heavier than handwriting) and go marching down some highway, beating out 365 X 317 regular heartbeats a day? Knock my head to fragments and forget the government of twenty-two-year-olds, that attacks the madness of elder statesmen? Me, who wrote all these poems, their lines a ladder to the silver moon? No! Not me! I have a gift from the sky-eyed enchantress my sister. With it I track our human thread through the labyrinth: we haven't let slip from our fingers the prophetic visions of our ancestors. Though we have learned to fly. I'm bitter, I haven't got words to describe one I loved, who betrayed me. No, I'm the hostage of crazed elder statesmen; I'm only a scared wild rabbit they want to tame and not at all the King of Time that people call me. One small step, only add a and the i drops out, a tiny golden scepter lost on a slanting floor. [1916,1922: VRj 61] The King is out of luck; The King is under lock 51 Lyrics and key. Infantry Regiment Ninety-three Will be the death of the child in me. [1916: NP +10] I am in Tsaritsyn, where rivers run like maiden hair. An unknown fate, an unknown fight where bow-strung trees obscure the light . . . Infantry Regiment Ninety-three will be the death of the child in me. [1916: Τ 104] The too-often reviewed book of my face: white, white pages, two smudged moons. Behind me, like a dirty peewee, bed-sheet Moscow moans. [1916: Τ IOJ] Palm Sunday How many centuries have I had to wait for this discovery: the sky-blue enemy and dark familiar puffs of smoke? I have shut myself up under lock and key. You have abandoned me, gods: wings no longer shiver on your shoulders, you no longer look over mine as I write. We drown in filth, drag blind humanity in tangled nets behind us. We were children once, we were children— we are a priesthood now, and wear your wings. The drying palms are orphaned already in the hands of an addled old maid with no reason now to wave them. From the pen of war comes one full stop after another, graveyards grow suburbs like capital cities— different people, different dispositions. The whole wide world has bandaged its feet 52 Lyrics in ragged strips of young men's bodies; in the nacreous shell of my heart I bear the spiteful hiss of my whistle. Chains and bolts on ancient gates, a beggar, and a crooked stick. And the power of human shoulders shines beneath rags, Ο knowing astrologer! [1915-1917: OS 13-14] Cloaked in schools of flying fish, harsh, the fish-god frowns. Blast, boom, groan, moan, helter-skelter—and it's gone. Beyond red sheets in flames, men's bodies twist and blacken. The pounding waves shout death, grinding our faces in visions of graves. And some repellent trace of an inkwell falls, his ribs caught in death's webbing. Fallen, like an abandoned cannon. Now the deck rears on its hind legs, no longer steadied by anything. Mermaids, weave your seaweed helmets! Gather to bury the dead, washed clean of their mournful clay. Cover these waxy bones with kisses! And there in the sky, cloud-country, humanity sends plane surfaces up, steel to cut blue smoke to pieces. Where has this gotten you, people? You are trapped still in the whited graves of your ancestors: it is Death who wheezes and shivers in harness here, at the end of her tether. She is worn out at last. Pity her the voice that pesters, "Giddy-yap!" How painfully slow she moves. She falls, she stumbles in skulls. Someone who would not watch an iron wheel run over the eyes of a sparrow 53 Lyrics stares at the muzzle of a bestial snout that shoots with the strength of sorrow. He batters the staggering beast with a heavy beam of wood. The bloody hide drips freedom in the cup: though it be bitter, it will fill it up. [1916-1917: OS 15-16] Battle in the Comics Once Planet Earth goes up in flames, cools off and asks: "Who am I really?"— then we will create The Igor Tale— or something a lot like it. These are not people, not gods, not lives— these triangles hold the twilight of the soul! These are goblets raised in dim funereal feasts, full of Pythagoras' shadows and angles. The maiden of iron kept knitting her stocking, wearily, obstinately. Her shell of steel now flies through the air, and a gunner is gone, although he was handsome and young. Consider the suits and the face-cards in this deck of rumor, debt to idle talk! These dentists' drills set up at sea, the Bouvef s turrets—molars, crowned with towers! And the blear-eyed sea-foam Ancient looks up from his glass of beer, threatening us with destiny and shame as he shakes away the foam. [1916: TS 19] Someday I'll forget about Swanland, and the love of the trembling daughters of foam. I'll leave to my flute the songs I sing, 54 Lyrics songs of the Horse Kingdom, that's where I'm from. Where a purebred midnight stallion with his gaveled hoof passes sentence on ruthless killers of the young: they must chew the bitter metal of the bit. Where a wild-eyed white-maned stallion stands like a judge on his platform, and the tongue of the wagon is hitched to criminal fractions, one to a hundred. Where a purebred mane-shaker places his hoof in a cold but respectful hand—but whose it was, no one remembers. Where manes are air, and eyes are songs, far from the yahooing Nyam-Nyam tribe! We were better people, closer to heaven, when we let horses be our guides. "People"—why do we call ourselves that? You may hate me and beat me for saying so but it's always a wonderful thing to embrace a horse's hoof: they don't resemble us at all; they are smarter, more disciplined. The snow-white chill of their hides! Their sure-footed stride on the stones! We are not slaves, but you are masters. You are the elect of people! Handsome lieutenants neigh, they test us with the word "Do!" The race of horses sits in judgment on people, encircling Planet Earth with new lightning. War crosses a border, looking for blood. We shout: "This land's not yours!" And black, white, yellow—all of us abandon both barking and speaking. A different judge—your heavy step! A judge whose power isn't human! Prance, prince! Stud, steed! (See the cruel prophecies of language.) 55 Lyrics We share a single destiny. That yoke on us lies easy, like our middle names. [1916: TS 19] Oh, if only Asia could dry my face in her hair—her warm golden towel- after my swim in this cold stream! See me now, an awkward shepherd, braiding the Rhine, the Ganges, and Huang-Ho. And a cow's horn here beside me— a sawed-off horn and a piercing reed. [1916: Τ ΊΟ?] Tatlin! Poet of propellers, austere oracle of airflow! One of the Sun-catchers! His unmoving hand twists spider- rigging into a horseshoe curve! Giant forceps of imagination! Dumb-struck blind men stare at what he shows us. Inaugural, unheard-of, these tracings of metalwork miracles! [1916: Τ ICH] I When, in imitation of Tolstoy, I first read Caesar's Commentaries, his stultifying list of names buzzed in my Volga-fed imagination like swarms of flies. And I remembered then what the old Egyptians used to call all foreigners: the buzz-buzz people. Your time is over, Caesars! Pass on by! My voice has roused the buzz-buzz world! But I recall the woman carved in stone— the basin and the water jar she bore— 56 Lyrics the measured sweetness of her singing, the sea each morning sighted in her eyes. I rose to meet the Cyprian wave in you, the Virgin Sea. My secret rabbit heart— through snow-mad visions in your hands and curls that whirled in conversation like spinning flakes of snow it falls astonished at the idol's feet— see, it is no dying warrior-monk who recognized you in the statue's song. A stalk of rye, a ray of light, the fearless hive of goddess-golden bees, braided gently. Unbridled, mad, I read out loud and tore apart the roebuck dark while through your fingers, down your snowy neck, that innocent alignment flowed. You laugh at that! That— full of distance, blaze and distance, heavy, dark, foreboding, the iron ingots of your hair— that beauty. It's a bore. Any hot young Hun will say so. . . . but you are tall and slender, elegant, a rainbow radiant with smiles, you are sheaves of new-mown grain, a row of rye. Your glance is a ray of Danube sky, you shout: "The world surrounds me!" For you the ivy spells out salutations, and cherry blossoms fall when you appear— fabulous cousin to the family of flowers! You are all things delicate and beautiful— the shake and shimmer of the water reeds, the half-heard murmuring of half-hid lotuses, 57 Lyrics where swans in dreams by willow trees sing their exalted song. [1916: II 241] On a Hill You were exacting, and fired with spirit. I was the Danube, you were Vienna. You didn't know some things, you wouldn't tell others— you were waiting for some sort of indistinct omen. Faraway poplars flourished their shadows and summoned the fields to sessions of silence. A stream of crimson silk unrolled out of the evening and over the grass. Across Galicia on the backs of wolves, the shadows of night-riding demons. [1916,1922: VRi 59] Unbending as Boris Godunov's boyarina, you sailed on past today, swan on a lake, And I'd been expecting as much, I suppose. I hadn't read daybreak's letter over. But remember, once you were really divine, the goddess of this place, all-knowing and passionate, your braids like evening doves descending to perch on your suntanned shoulders. It really was you! You hid in the rye field, rusalka-likc, playing the lyre-strings of your braids. It really was you! To make yourself beautiful you oiled your body with honey, enchanting the bees . . . Their golden beads you wore like jewels, on face and eyes and hair. You taught your voice to punctuate 58 Lyrics with the commas of bee-bites, unwilling to quarrel with joy. Here Our Lady walks the rye field, moves at night through fields of rye; here I grew to feel as I feel and became no longer I. Here had no "yes," will have no "but"— what was is forgotten; what will be, who knows? Here the dove descends at teatime and Our Lady lays her washing out in rows. [1916,1922: Τ ioj] Is it the voice of the goddess of foam, a breeze in the poplars, or is it a dream? Or only the fatal word "him" beating against the wharf? Or a dove that beats its wings beneath a white dress, as the gloom-gray ghost of war drops to a vanishing point in the sea? It's the figure three, staring from storm-clouds! It's a flock of gray gulls! It's eider-ducks quacking! Full of strength and courage, he crosses the belted horizon. [1916,1922: VRi 54] The trumpets never squealed a signal for defeat: "Your comrades, your brothers and sisters, have fallen." I'll never be proof against your power— the cruel equation sings its song. Nations came willingly, swimming like Poland into my mansions; a sweet sight for the crow as it flies, the banner of the beautiful Savior! I will never hide behind . . . Follow him, follow him! 59 Lyrics To No-man's-land! To that green field in Niemandland, beyond the leaden Nieman river, To Nieman-land, to No-man's-land, follow, believer. [1916, 1922: VRj 60] Their faces by Maliavin, their flowers Korovin's color, these women have captured a flier, and scurry about. The downed sky-wagon sticks in their throats. They don't like the German, he is well-fed and fat. [1915-1919, 1922: VRi 74] You whose mind flowed like a gray waterfall over the pastoral life of early antiquity, whose numbers enchanted a serpent docilely rolling in hoops of jealousy, and the hoop and hiss and whistle of the dance and spasms of the snake in trance made you hear the sun's bright thistle more and more clearly as song. Who drilled a defiant hole in the skull of his father's son, and into the hole quietly stuck the fragrant twig of the Milky Way— among the blue pearls of the dew; in that skull, like a glass, lived the Russtic twig of the Milky Way— Ο sheaf of stars, you intimate of heaven, whose fires bear a grateful tribute, winged wonder, fly! I wear the whole of Planet Earth on the little finger of my right hand, and I speak to you. You! I shout out shout after shout 60 Lyrics and a wild raven, a sacred thing, builds her nest in my curdling shout and her nestlings grow, and the snail of centuries crawls across my hand stretched out to the stars. [1917,1922: VRi 48] People in washhouses rush to scrub their souls, rush to a mirror to powder their consciences, as someone, flaring his maniac nostrils, howls in their ears: "You know nothing?" So many people put on collars and then didn't know how to behave: stand on tiptoe and hang from a branch, or write down the names they ask for? [1917-1918: BM 34] Moscow's a crazed old skull of letter-eyed buildings, a slave who hangs from a sword, a slave of unwept evenings. I'd hone a stone and shear them clean away, these walls where kids hip-hop and die like late-lamenting leaf-fall. Night's lady casts no shadow, ever, with the black torso of her eyelashes— she moves away toward half-shut eyes while I stand dumb, and she forgives me. [1917?: Ill 28] Yesterday I whistled: Coo! Coo! Coo! and flocks of wars flew down to peck the grain from my hands. Unclean, a demon loomed above me plumed with slabs of stone, dangling a mousetrap from his belt 61 Lyrics and destiny's mouse in his teeth. His whiplike beard is bent and his eyes shine blue and mean. A swan-white bone stares wide-eyed from his basket. "Mouse-catcher!" I shouted. "Grief! Why keep destiny clenched in your teeth?" He answered: "I am the Destiny-Hunter, Bone-Breaker by the will of Numbers." Ghouly witches all in glowing garments, dripping their foul guts behind, do their horse-dance on our eyelids— and still we call them women. They whirl in a ritual witch-dance screaming, "Vele! Vele! Vele!" They grind their cigarettes out on the sun-disk and streak like specters out of sight. [1917,1922: VRi 32] The shining shower dripping from the oar exalts the water-sailors in its blue. Explorer, in your incorporeal crown! We watch and wonder, see and believe! Describe the man: hair bright as dawn, tawny as stalks of ripening rye; eyes like floes of ice in oceans where walruses dive. Like blue pearls, flames entwine to make an icy crown. His deeds forgotten now, he stands apart, remote. But he stands with his hand fixed at the helm. His weapon rests. Does he search for something on the sea? Does something somewhere search for him? 62 Lyrics The wind grows harsh, then harsher, the voice of ocean foaming at the mouth! Who knows the name he whispers, this man enthroned by storms? When the great unbroken stretch of blue swallowed the towering constellations, he cried: "I was expecting you, blue fleece! Now be my inspiration!" When Freedom comes, she comes naked and fills our hearts with flowers. We march in time to her music and talk to the sky like a lover. We are Freedom's fighters, we bang our fists on our shields, tough and unyielding— "Now let the people rule themselves, everywhere and forever!" Let girls lean out their windows and sing about wars our grandfathers went to, about freedom for us, the people victorious, faithful citizens of the Sun. The people raise the rod of sovereign power and bear it lordly through the city's streets. The people rise to act! . . . before, they dreamed The palace, like some wounded Caesar, stoops. Wrapped in my Imperial cloak, I fall slowly, and by infinite degrees. Their joyful outcry, "Freedom shall not fail!" echoes even in Vladivostok. Songs of Freedom, once again you sound! These hymns to bomb and bullet strike a flame. The people make a monument to Freedom in the railway car where I signed away my crown 63 Lyrics The winged spirit of that late-night council squints with an iron eye along the machine-gun barrel; but the fury of abuse, the shame— that wields the knife, and hurts me mortally. What have I done? Splashed the people's blood like dying robins across my fallen banners left in flames, while I lay back beside my harem-mistress and dressed her in a string of baby names. Days of abuse! The dreadful cry of dreadful pain, and now—corruption and malignancy! In every worn-out coat I see Danton, and Cromwell hides behind each tree! [1917: Τ 107] A hundred and ten thousand seals weep— their eyes are human seeming, these languorous deities of water, furred lamentation murdered in ocean while earth turned round in twenty-four hours, and closed their eyes. The encircling sea is Arctic. See, the humanoid descending from heaven might have been the seals' Buddha, might have been even Mohammed. Wasn't, and the floe is full of blood. I will weep with the seals, feel their pain. In a blood-filled puddle on the ice, humanity's heaven stained with earth. [1919-1921: V 64] Freedom Whirlwind of raging intelligence, onward! For the goddess' sake! 64 Lyrics The people raise their swan-wings, Labor's blood-red flag! The fire-bright eyes of Freedom— beside them, flame is cold! Hunger will raise new icons as soon as we topple the old! We are friends—let's move to the music! Forward! For Freedom's sake! Let us rise again from the dust of earth, all men at last awake! Let's advance on a marvelous journey to the sound of a thunderous march; if the gods are still in their prisons, we'll give Freedom back to the gods! [1918,1922: Τ iu] Wind whose song, wound whose wrong? Sweat of sword to turn to word. People fondle death like a flower. The East now plucks the strings of power. A shining-mountain magus may refurbish our pride: sheathed in reason like an iceberg, I become the people's guide! [1918-1919: Τ ii2] White horses, white hearses. Black dresses, shriveled faces. Just let my mind shoot straight, straighter than musket or flintlock. 65 Lyrics I've picked my target, the ragged deer. Follow me, Amerigo! Cortez and Columbus! Knight's men are moving, checkmate is near. [1918-1919: Τ 458] Warrior! You choose a cue from heaven's rack and break with the ball of the world. And a new Jan Sobieski barks out: "Make your shot!" to one who etches his gray helmet with the lines of Minkowski's equation, who flares against the darkening sky with Mayakovsky's poetry. [1918-1919: Τ +62] The land where Izanagi reads Monaßatori to Perun and Eros sits on Shang-ti's knees, and the topknot on the god's head looks like snow, a lump of snow; the land where Amor embraces Maa Emu and Tien and Indra sit in conversation; where Juno and Quetzalcoatl adore Correggio and admire Murillo; where Unkulunkulu and Thor with folded arms play peaceful games of chess beside Astarte, who worships Hokusai— take me to that land! [1919: IV 259] The sayings and sallies of spring poke through the pages of winter's volumes, and somebody blue-eyed reads the scribblings of bashful, blushing Nature. A little gold ball flies through the net of a budding poplar's branches. 66 Lyrics These days the golden coltsfoot moves like a huddle of golden turtles. [1919: Τ 113] Alive with glad tidings, a spring-green Koran, my poplar up early expects emissaries of dawn. Out to snare the sun-fish in the blue pond overhead, it tosses its meshes and neatly nets the bellow of bulls, a lazy-pacing thunderhead, and the clean fragrance of a summer storm. My poplar-angler, green-stand of Nature, you cast your green meshes high and wide from your trunk and there! the god of springtime gapes, a sun-fish astonished in the boat-bottom of every glistening leaf. Green mouth greets high heaven, eats it up! Snare for sun-gods, my high-flying poplar with horn-roar and wind-blow unleashes a wallop that washes the meadow in a wave of blue vodka. [1919: Τ π+] Why are these eyes forget-me-nots? It's also the month of Ay! Hear a woodling's flute in the nightingale's note, it's also the month of Ay! The little woodling runs away— Do the fauns still play? I sing to while away my day! It's also the month of Ay! 67 Lyrics And piping Pan is a rough and randy country man— it's also the month of Ay! [1919-1920: III 105] Water eats at the rippling roots, flows still near the shadowy trees. The wind wavers at odd or even. Nets hang still by the weir. Perspiration blurs the hazy air. In a place where they never heard of grief a brooding, sunburnt boy grew up; a girl grew up beside him. Nighttime reeds on the bank shiver and weeds in the water tremble, and some tall, white-faced figure stands near the trees, indistinguishable. [1919: Τ π6] Whorlen of the worldwide will, the otheren of gray grow time, stillfallen blanketing the field— the selven that are names of mine. [1919: Τ 627] This whole day is full of blue bears, they beat the bushes of unruffled eyelashes,. and beyond the blue water cupped in your eyes I foresee a sharp dictate: stop dreaming. In the silver spoon of your searching eyes the sea sends a stormy petrel toward me, and Bird Russia—see!—through uncharted eyelashes wings its way to the sounding sea. Yet love's black sea breeze overturns someone's sail, it sinks in round blue water 68 Lyrics and it's all over—spring storm, clear sailing— all of it now only a hopeless wallow. [1919: τ nj] A black crab on a white plate clutches a stalk of dark-blue rye. The conversation veers from weather to this sea of laziness and lies. But wait, an unexpected outcry— "Behold, we die before our appointed day." Like Caesar once, to hide his legs, draw the curtain. That's the way. Die, my dear. The people stare, but if their looks hit home, no matter. You lean back, eat your fill, and say: "Why worry? Looks can't kill." [1919: Τ π6] A congress of politic grackles, the grackles' autumnal assembly. A stretch of woven willow fencing, light rays drowsing in the wind. Their mindful mouths keep making mournful cries that drift in air. Backwaters idling in the river, snowy linen stretched along a line. Three girls were guessing fortunes— Who's the boy for you, who's mine? and the doves keep constantly flying, marking their too-brief time. Everywhere shadows are lengthening, spreading a pall of willow over me . . . . . . not yet! [ 1919-1920: Τ 117] Crawling crying craven stains the twilight sky falling where the raven turns the why-light of his eye. [1919: VR2 210] 69 Lyrics My Campaigns A herd of horses dressed in men wheels and runs when it sees the sea. Fear of the sea! It swells beyond estimate, spreading like measles among children. But the name Vera expands like Siberia waiting to confront her own Yermak— verdant, vernal land, where birds grow still, where the fabled fortress A will yield up all. The splash of nonexistence, beyond all faith in Vera's verity, reflects me like a mirror. Oh sorrowful deep of the sea, sounded with the swack of a bandit's bludgeon! [1919-1920: τ m] Now that the lilt of nightingales shrivels, and the cry of the first cranes fades from Birds of the Kharkov Region, written ... I think I'm right, by Sushkin . . . and autumn hangs like a hesitant comma, now I turn to you, whose strange cold hair invites me to taste the cold wine of those "Egyptian Nights" . . . by Pushkin. [1920: VRi 55] Where the sun like ready money shines alike on good and bad, I lie alone beside my gypsy, picking time and straw apart. Day is blue and night is black, two halves of a single whole; 70 Lyrics I am your slave, I kiss your feet, we embrace, one single, shining soul. [1920: VR; 270] It was in the merry month of Ay, the lackadaisical month of Ay. Listen, lad, you look away— Say when? The month of then? May nonny! May nonny! The first of May comes pouring down. The merry month of May! Now is a young maid's sweet hay-day! I chant and enchant, I call, I croon! I sing the jolly month of June! [1920: VR4 79] Tough Talk A fist in the face, that's how I kiss. Red, redder than the rough rowan-berry, splashing splashes, a shaft of red, cherry blossom bough— split lips. And the air all howl. [1920-1921: V 755] Sweet Talk Things today are soft and wise— sweet surrender sails the skies. [1920-1921: V 75] 71 Lyrics Night's color breeding darker blues drifts over everything, all of it worthy of love, and someone called out, the sound of it oppressive, sobbing, full of the anguish of evening. A moment once, when golden light, three stars, flamed in boats on the water, and a lonely juniper brushed its branches over a gravestone. A moment once, when giants bound scarlet turbans on their heads, and the wayward surge of the sea wind, wonderful, never knew why. A moment once, when fishermen's voices echoed the words of Odysseus, and beyond the swell in the distance an upward wing, above the sea wave hovering. [1920: Τ π8] You boot-stomping workers in the poetry factory, workplace where conveyor belts move thoughts, shoulder your cargo of words: heavy packing cases where wedding rings and maybe dead bodies are stored away in sawdust; cartons labeled "dead love" packed with bits of scrap iron— leftover angry ideas; the sigh of a dying girl as she falls back on her pillow; the universe gleaming on the double wings of damselflies by the lake, bubbles of joy in their mouths— shoulder them, ship them on underground roads— bales of rustling and noises, of clatter and whistlings, swarms of secret midnight sounds— to closed eyes. 72 Lyrics They lie there, such a smiling heap you almost want to run away, run back to where god is a brutal god and passion means arrows of pain, squinting again with the bleary drunk-at-midnight eyes of wornout paths and outgrown places. Leave the stamps and shipping labels: stuck-on signs that tell the world exactly how we got here. Devil, god, virgin, plague, birth and dying, faith and dirty words— knives in the belly of god. [1920: III 144] The City of the Future Here public dwelling-spaces, single fold, rise upright, like pages of glass; here they shouted, "No more stone!" once human reason took control. Glass blocks, transparent rectangles, spheres, angles, expanses in flight, transparent mounds, a concentrate of clear glass honeycombs, echoing streets built with these strange blocks, and towering ramparts, dazzlingly white— here we enter the City of the Sun, where all is balance, order, and expanse. Where the sky pours down from a beaker of blue held in rusalka hands in the open dark, and the scarlet sphere that domes the height wreathed in hairfrost of glass, gleams as its knowing eye probes night—now! and a gaze that pierces heaven flows ablaze into the ink of night. This palace of the people now commands 73 Lyrics the covering roof be rolled away to contemplate the ranks of constellations and amplify the law of retribution. Where a solitary needle-tower stands guard at a street corner, the glass-walled thoroughfare, chamber upon chamber, stands guard over silence; in a colorful, transparent swarm old wise men looked down from the walls. In a stream of gold, about the dome they watched, these wise old men, searched for the truth, testing the patterns of networks passed on from fathers to sons. And the murmur of swarming human beings was heard by this holy fraternity. Like a book of black pages the city cuts the sky in two, and night's encircling emptiness grows larger, and a deeper blue. Above the depths of these transparent streets of massive glass, within the deep, ranks of blessed figures stretch themselves, at one with the fire of heaven. Tearing the coarse cocoon of life, a mass of bright transparent windows beneath great spheres and domes will tell of herds of bygone visions, will tell the dreams of bygone time. Here in the sheer-walled, towering temple, the fathers of the race of mortals appear at the edges of the dome; but their faces, like windows, like a net, cannot hold back the light. On this black jut-out, chorus-like, the people of the new observance stand. Platforms of steel that move on rails and transport crowds in common heaps, 74 Lyrics a palace of glass, erect as an old man's staff, raises its own axis, alone against the dark clouds. Vibrant beltways transport dwelling spaces, sun-space after sun-space, a silver exaltation of smiling cloister-cells, easily fixed in place, blue strands of smooth glass homesteads. And, casting light into these canyons, the proud summit's florescence, tall pillar blossoming with dwelling-spaces. Wrapped in summer lightning-flash it rises, ascending flute for monumental music. Chorus of strands, strung perpendicular, cascade from your height! I will remember forever the joy of these transparent walls. Scour this city, you winds; move evenly over this network of cellules and meshes, over these glass books, opening their pages, over these axial needle-towers, over this forest of austere surfaces. Book-buildings, palace of pages, glassy volumes on display, the whole city is a sheet of reflecting windows, a flute in fate's uncompromising hand. And like the shoulder-strap of a barge-hauler wearily dragging the sky behind him, you cast glass canyons far and wide, you have cut the pages of this volume of glass and opened it, like some huge book. Waves of transparent weave you curl one on another, floor upon floor you pile beyond exhaustion; you speak, and words resound in lions' mouths; you multiply in mirror-fragment multitudes. [1920: Τ us] Asia, I have made you my obsession. As maidens touch their brows, I grasp at thunderclouds; I grasp your nighttime conversation as I would reach for tender vibrant shoulders. Where is he who prophesied a new day? 75 Lyrics If only Asia's hair in dark-blue streams would flood my knees, envelop me, and a maiden whisper secret reprehensions and then in silent rapture sob and with her braid-ends wipe away her tears. She has loved! Yes, and suffered! She is the dark soul of the universe! Then would feelings once more flood my heart and kindle there the jangling of catastrophe, of Maha-vira, Zoroaster, Sivaji, wrapped in riot and rebellion. I would become coeval with their dreams, become, like them, creators of a catechism, and you would bend to unbraid your hair like a heap of coins at my feet, and whisper: "Tell me Master, is not this the day we two will go, at last at liberty to seek the way?" [1920: III 123] Asia Always a slave girl, your breast bronze with the birthmark of kings; instead of an earring, your ear gleams with a government seal. A girl with a sword, innocent of conception, or an old woman, midwife of insurgency. You turn the pages of this book whose writing is the grip of ocean's hand. Human beings glitter in its dark ink! A tsar is shot—an exclamation point! Triumphant armies are commas, and lines of dots become a field where madness roars unchecked— the people's anger, no mistake— bracketed by gaps between centuries. [1920: III 122] 76 Lyrics The One, the Only Book I have seen the black Vedas, the Koran and the Gospels and the books of the Mongols on their silken boards— all made of dust, of earth's ashes, of the sweet-smelling dung that Kalmyk women use each morning for fuel— I have seen them go to the fire, lie down in a heap and vanish white as widows in clouds of smoke in order to hasten the coming of the One, the Only Book, whose pages are enormous oceans flickering like the wings of a blue butterfly, and the silk thread marking the place where the reader rests his gaze is all the great rivers in a dark-blue flood: Volga, where they sing the Razin songs at nighttime, yellow Nile, where they worship the sun, Yangtze-Kiang, oozing with people, and mighty Mississippi, where the Yankees strut in star-spangled trousers, yes, in pants all covered with stars. and Ganges, whose dark people are trees of the mind, and Danube, white people in white shirts whose whiteness is reflected in the water, and Zambezi, whose people are blacker than boots, and stormy Ob, where they hack out their idol and turn him to face the wall whenever they eat forbidden fat, and Thames which is boring, boring. Race of Humanity, you are Readers of the Book whose cover bears the creator's signature, the sky-blue letters of my name! Yes, you, careless reader, 77 Lyrics look up! Pay attention! You let your attention wander idly, as if you were still in catechism class. Soon, very soon you will read these mountain chains and these enormous oceans! They are the One, the Only Book! The whale leaps from its pages, and the eagle's pinion bends the page's edge as it swoops across sea waves, the breast of ocean, to rest in the osprey's bed. [1920: III 68] The Present Day Slogans hung like necklaces on walls say: ". . . will be shot on sight!" and flames of hate blaze up before the universal bride, and the farmer refuses to haul his hay into the exhausted city, then suddenly there's news: pills of Cossack lead prescribed for anything the past held dear. Death consumes our former games, our days of ready cash and instant profits. We have forgotten how to love, forgotten there were women once who kissed our fathers, while trains with their alarming eyes, the flaring midnights of their eyes, smash cattle-barns to pieces. Rumor follows rumor's heels, and in a deaf-mute's strangled call, one meaning vibrates: "Up against the wall!" Like whales spouting inspiration, Tagore and H. G. Wells appear, but reef your black sail, voyager: steer by the stars of the world. A century of rule by those we thought wise was only camouflage for killers' knives; 78 Lyrics all their talk was set in crooked type like one of Kruchonykh's editions. [1920: III 56] Two Moscow imagos, traveling mystery plays: The naked nailing-up of Marienhof. . . the transfiguration ofYesenin . . . ("And God brought forth a calf, and wrapped him in a fox-fur jacket!") [1920: Τ 122] To Alyosha Kruchonykh A Game in Hell, hard work in heaven— our first lessons were pretty good ones together, remember? We nibbled like mice at turbid time— In hoc signo vincesl [1920: Τ >26] Someone wacky, someone nutty. Time began to blow toward autumn. Gray cells compartmentalize, grille work set before his eyes. Hoopla, hype, and hip-hooray, a bigger blast than Judgment Day! And here, in a scrawl he now regrets, he 's drawn by his nemesis Gorodetsky. Tra-ta-ta! Get a load of that! The sound of another way to skin a cat! [1920: NP 177] Like a flock of sheep peacefully grazing they nestle asleep in their box. Matches. Once they were gods, puffed with divine fire. 79 Lyrics A twig, the dry drop of its sulfurous head— this was man's ancestral horror, the wild god of fire, the sad-eyed, red-haired hurricane. Lightning came down on our ancestors' straw-roofed houses, the oak tree splits and smoulders, women and children, old men and dark-haired girls, their flying braids, all of them flee to the forest, turning to look and crying, raising their hands to heaven, toward sharp teeth in the forest, toward the hiss and shudder of snake bite, a meal for swarming mosquitoes. The caves flare with wild fires: here gold-tongue and green-tongue and blue-tongue burn. The crimson god, green evil raging in his rabid red-rimmed eyes; once beaten out by a woman's stick, he raises now a twisted club: his anger destroys the settlement. Neighbors rush from their caves, ready to plunder the village. Spears and knives, cries of war! "God is with us!" the war-cry! And all as they pass snatch from the god his club and his long red hair. "God is against us!"—in the forest the burned out villagers weep. Our howling ancestor, wild as a wolf, watching his house become ashes. All gone, except for the coals, snarling and spitting, Except for a handful of cinders. Wolf-eyes gouge the darkness. Women weep. The good house, the house-goods, gone— the skins and the fish lines, the spears and the deer meat, delicious to eat. He flees to the hills, swift-foot escaping. And now their descendants sing war-songs— "We are with us!"—and have invented matches, which means they are equally godlike 80 Lyrics and stupid. To subjugate lightning by shutting it up in such narrow confinement! " We are with us!": hear their harsh cry even at the moment they die. Know that! Remember: we are with us! These are the men who invented matches— tame flock of divinities, the god of fire confined at last. The victory is a great one, and it is terrible too. They have brought down fire for stoves and machines from the storm-filled, threatening heavens, the original matchbox whose matches still threaten the world. Huddle of fire-sheep, golden fleece, they lie side by side in their box, peacefully sleeping. But once like a saber-toothed tiger they tore men to pieces and chomped them, horribly flaring their golden manes. I now myself, greedy to gather my victories, will engage as well in another austere task! I will invent the matches of destiny, safety matches of destiny! I will drench my mind with destiny, I will douse it and set it on fire! " We are with us!" Matches of destiny, matches of fate, matches of destiny. Who'll be my comrade? I'll strike destiny alight as often and as much as I must for this matter of life and death. The very first box of matches of destiny! Here it is! Right here! [1921: Τ 130] The Neva knows the look in those Last Supper eyes. Here, the blood of saviors commingled yesterday 81 Lyrics with the body of the North in stale black bread. Love lies like ashes upon the river, workingmen's love, a writer's love. The Neva knows the look in those Last Supper eyes— in her cast-iron horses, the austere stonework of her Stroganov Palace. The beds of dried seas rise as the river's banks. Cobwebs entangle the graves of the tsars. When the triple lamps burn on the bridges at evening, the stream runs red. A kiss on the mouth. [1921-1922: VRj 65] Girls are the ones whose black-boot eyes trample the flowers of my heart. Girls who lower their lashes like lances over the pools of their eyes, girls who wash their feet in the pond of my poems. [1921: τ 133] Evening darkens round the poplar stands its ground the sea has its say you're far away. [1921: Τ 135] Easter in Enzeli All these green gardens with golden eyes— the gardens of Enzeli. 82 Lyrics Here's the portojjhals, the ndranjes that showers dark branches with drops of golden dew, and the chinchona tree, whose pale-blue bark is a swarm of snails. There are no ndranjes in Baku, there's only the Nargin refinery that poisons the fishes, the sheatfish and sturgeons. Beneath wide-eyed skies I've heard stories of deep-sea divers driven mad. Darkness. Quiet. The sky is deep blue. The little gypsy sun appears and silvers a buttermilk sky. An Armenian goes by, hauling a barrel of ji-ji for somebody else. A bunch of buddies, arm in arm, howl a drunken chorus from the song about Razin's Persian princess— and they won't go home till morning. A clap of thunder, the singing stops. Listen, a boat-horn, the Trotsky: the Trotsky approaching the dock. Morning. They sleep, they snore, while singing waves beat on the shore. Morning. A crow perches high on the top of a portoßhal, cawing out to Mother Russia like a Kursk nightingale, splitting its wheezing sides. Back home, up north, they call them croakers; I remember a wild Kalmyk once, from the Volga flatlands, telling me crossly: 83 Lyrics "Gimme more money, some with the croakers on 'em." My feet, tired out in Kharkov, covered with cuts in Baku, laughed at by kids in the street and old ladies, I wash now in the green river-water of Iran, in stony reservoirs full of fish more gold than fire, that echo the orange trees in endless tame herds. In Zorgam's canyon I cut off my hair, grown long since Kharkov, since the Don and Baku—my dark wavy hair, a tangle of thoughts and desires. Iranian Song Down along the river, by the old Iran, by the cool green ripple by the deep dark bank where the sweet sweet waters flow, a pair of drifters one day walking, walking, waving pistols, talking, shooting fishes as they go. Hold it, honey . . . got 'im! Right between the eyes Two men walking, two men talking . . . I'm almost sure I remember this right. They made fish soup, but they didn't make it often. "Gotta believe, it's a tin-can life!" Way up high a plane is flying, magic carpet in the sky. Where's the carpet's second cousin, the magic tablecloth that covers itself with food? That tablecloth has been delayed in transit, or maybe even landed in jail. Now I always knew 84 Lyrics fairy tales could come true: today's hard fact was once a fairy tale. And of course I believe there's a great day coming, but by the time it gets here I'll be six feet under! When the great day comes and they gather over yonder and the flags start waving up ahead, I may wake up from the dead but by then I'll be a dusty bunch of bones. Should I throw all my rights in the furnace of the future? Hey you hayfield, blast and blacken! River, turn to stone forever! [1921: τ 141] Night in Persia The seashore. Sky. Stars. I lie back tranquil. No feathers for a pillow, and no stone; just a sailor's cast-off shoe. Like Samorodov wore in those Red days when he raised revolt on the sea and moved the ships of the Whites to Krasnovodsk— into Redwater. Getting dark. It's dark. "Comrade, lend a hand!" An Iranian calling, cast-iron color, gathering brush from the ground. I pulled his strap and helped him hoist his load. "Saool!" (Or thanks, as we would say.) He disappeared in the darkness. I whispered in the darkness the name Mahdi. Mabdi? A beetle flew out of the black and pounding sea, flew straight at me, 85 Lyrics turned twice above my head, furled his wings, and settled in my hair. He was calm and quiet at first but suddenly began to make his sound. He said distinctly what he had to say and we understood each other! A pact in night and darkness signed by beetle-sound. Then he hoisted his wings, his sails, and flew away. The sea erased his sound and the trace of a kiss on the sand. All this happened! Just as I've told it here. [1921: Τ 144] The Opium Smoker Work in blank wall eyeglasses squats over tomorrow's lessons. Eager to make the truths of work self-evident, secret corners of the sunstruck streets are full of shady stories, squalid lairs where a solitary shot rings out! . . . No, only groans that soon draw from the dreamer all intelligence of doing day-to-day what day must do. He sucks dry-mouthed, but sucks sweet honey, and with this venom as his pilgrim staff sets off to find the drowsy shore of dreams. Immediately the holy blaze of fire, the hammer beating on the soft red iron, everything vanishes. The armor-plate of fantasy seals up a sober mind. Upon these plains grow only chains, but he hears nothing now, not voices in the street, not evening, enchanting, flowers of words wasted yesterday, nor voices prophesying vanities, the slow sea-sound of daily cares. Forgotten, all of it. Work vanishes 86 Lyrics in thought-smoke, in familiar favorite dreams . . . but this captive in iron chains of smoke is caught in the cloud of his desires, and down his sleepy road he goes to paradise, the smokey rites of paradise, where people vanish. Adam is alone. It's almost day. Dawn blisters in a crack of night and see? A slave again. He goes to work. But that same shore still beckons, and in debts of iron chains he seems a boat adrift, upon some night-smoke Volga. [1921: V 34] An Oak Tree in Persia Set like an empty jug on a tablecloth of tangled roots, an oak tree spreads centennial leaves beside a hermit cave. Its rustling branches sound the accord of Mazdak and Marx. aHah-ma-00! Wah! Wah! Hah-gan!» Jackals run, urging each other like wolves. But the branches shiver with echoes of songs from the days of Batu. [1921: Τ 144] A wild old hank of hair, a dark plowed field—his forehead. Burnt stumps in swamp water—his lips. A wild goat's udder—his beard. an anchor rope—his moustache. Snow White with a black broom—his teeth. His blue eyes full of sleepless nights, like holes in an old blanket. [1921: LO no] 87 Lyrics I saw the young man, the young prophet, lying by the glassy strands of a forest waterfall. where moss-covered trees stood grave as old men in the twilight, telling their beads on the strands of overgrown vines. Like a mother-chord of glass, a chain fell into the chasm, a chain of mothers and daughters of glass born of the waterfall, where the mother of water changed place with her children. Below, the river murmured. Branches of trees like clustering candles filled the ravine's empty volume, and its cliffs were inscribed with the alphabet of the centuries. The monster boulders beneath the white water formed a forest-girl's shoulders, the one this naked holy man had come overseas to look for. He had sworn to be Razin in reverse! Will he throw the princess overboard again? Reverse-Razin fantasies! No. Never. As these towering trees are my witness! Dousing himself in the icy stream, learning the thoughts and speech of vital coldness, of an icy body, of another world, the young man sings: "I have turned the waves to women, and am wedded forever to Zorgam's rusalka. He could only turn a woman to a wave." The trees whispered the speech of centuries. [1921: τ i+8] I am a wave, I roll down the white face of Iranian mountains, I see myself reflected in the black stalk-eyes of a crab scuttling crossways as a mammal-eyed maiden rides by on her donkey, and her gray-haired father hides his head in a collar of net. I ran 88 Lyrics with the wave, divided now by a beluga's tail and sea jelly, and Einstein's radio about the sun's specters was printed out on the doubled . . . branding me with the letter A. A ray struck me and gave me P. I rose like a wisp of steam into the air, went up in smoke like a stalk, like a white tree, an innocent birch beside the sea. And the scheming Oriental wind washed me with wing-sound, sent me swirling northward. I tickled the crude American brush of an airman's moustache, and the wheel of the heavenly wagon echoed in my ears. Shadows of dew vanished in white puffs of night. A fire-tail moved itself heavily over a toothy snake of mountains. In Moscow I fell in the snow, awoke to the sound of shooting from an ammunition dump. Here I melted into a tear fallen in the snow from a girl's eyelashes. In the snow I left the poet Briusov's imprint. I sailed the Oka to Nizhny Novgorod. Fishermen followed me closely with their gray eyes, beyond me they followed the movement of pike 89 Lyrics along the net. In Nizhny I wound up willy-nilly, Volga-Volga, in a young man's mouth and traversed the stomach of one Khlebnikov, then I rose as a ray of light to a star, and there a scientist said: behold this fragment of an unknown star. Study him: you may thus decipher the entire process of life upon that star. There I found leaf-people (they were equilateral) with forked tails who move by bouncing, like balls. [1921-1922: V 101] The smell of night, inhaling stars into my frenzied nostrils, water broken on a bed of nails, babbling into foam. A figure passes, you, and on your head a green turban of dried grass— I recognize my teacher, your face burned bonfire black. And another approaches, exhausted as all Asia. See? He holds in his hand a small red flower. [1921: Τ 145] 9o Lyrics A stream of icy water where I splashed like a rattle-brained mullah and enjoyed it. The Cheka had sent for me, calling me thirty miles for an interrogation. On the way, we ran into some donkeys. The rider turned to look. We galloped about four miles. "Eat some!" the rider broke a golden-baked churek, some crumbly cheese, and a blue cluster of wine, passed them across to me as we rode. (A clutch of blue snake-eggs without the mother around.) We gallop again, chewing these heavenly gifts as we ride. The horses feel the rub of cut leather, the girths of the saddles. A smile brightens my comrade's face. "Eat, comrade, eat some!" Again as we ride he holds out his hand with the ocean-eyed cluster. So we went riding the two of us, off to an interrogation, over the foothills of mountains. The dry milk of buffalo crunched in my mouth, and then the pure wine-juice in its tiny balloons, and the golden-baked flour. Beside the trail stretched an overgrown forest and there stood an ancient tree-trunk, wound head to foot in the gloom of a hop-vine: only a wild boar could break it, and then going fast as a bullet. The remains of campfires, dark spots whitened by ashes, scattered bones. A shepherd and his flock of a thousand sheep now and then flooded our path, black waves of a living sea. Suddenly, twilight. A dark gorge loomed. The river ran dark beside us, stranding its blue lace on a thousand stones. It was dark, suddenly, and a net of scattered drops 9i Lyrics veiled us. That threatening gorge was suddenly a book of stone for some other reader, open to the view of some other world. The mountain village was thinly settled, the saklyas seemed like letters in a language we could not understand. A red rock there rose straight up into the sky, a quarter of a mile straight up, and someone had recendy been reading it. But I could see no reader now in the sky, though he might have been somewhere close by perhaps, wrapped in a turban of rain. The river below us chattered, doing what rivers do, and the heights above us were shadowed by lonely trees. Those stone proclamations of bygone multitudes of years were beautiful, standing there straight and uncrumpled. That petrified newsprint hung there in accurate lines. Does it speak of the bustle of commerce? Or describe some love both gentle and formless? White clouds above the stone gazette moved like fingers toward some multiplicity of centuries. A few days later the Cheka concluded its useless inquiry and I rode away. Ravines where I climbed, pits of an empty riverbed where shrines of the plant world lay concealed, and an old pear tree in a garden, covered with the flower of the gods, mistletoe, spreading its wide dominion, turbulent city, a great tree tormenting trees of another race made bloody with blossoms—goodbye to you all. Goodbye to you, evenings when shepherds, gray nighttime gods, led back their herds to the golden villages. Buffalo wheeled and ran, and the taste and odor of milk rose like a tree against the sky and dissolved into clouds. Goodbye to you, indigo eyes of the buffalo cow beyond the black mesh of her eyelashes; her maternal glance caresses a calf, and the people around her. 92 Lyrics Goodbye to the nighttime darkness when the dark and the buffalo both flowed as the same dark cloud and every evening I smoothed my hands across their pointed horns— vessels on the heads of sad-eyed women, their hesitant plod. [1921: D 107] Ra, who sees his own eye in the red rusty swamp water, envisions his dream and himself in the young mouse quietly nibbling the swamp grass, in the young frog blowing pale bubbles, signs of his manhood, in the grass-green field that cuts a red line on the figure of a girl who bends with her sickle cutting reeds for fuel and for home, in streams of fish that sway in the water grass, trailing small bubbles. His eye awash in the Volga. Ra, who extends into thousands of animals and plants, Ra, whose leaves have life: scampering, thinking, rusding, moaning. Volga-eye! Ra-zin! A thousand eyes regard him, a thousand zir and zin. And Razin, who was washing his feet, straightened and stared for a long time at Ra, until the crease in his neck became a blood-red line. [1921: Τ 148] Attentively I read the springtime thoughts of the Divinity in designs on the speckled feet of tree-toads, Homer shaken by the awful wagon of a great war, the way a glass shakes at a wagon passing outside. I have the same Neanderthal skull, the same curving forehead as you, old Walt. [1921: V 66] 93 Lyrics Russin and Me Russia has granted freedom to thousands and thousands. It was really a terrific thing to do, people will never forget it. But what I did was take off my shirt and all those shiny skyscrapers the strands of my hair, every pore in the city of my body, broke out their banners and flags. All the citizens, all the men and women of the government of ME, rushed to the windows of my thousand-windowed hair, all those Igors and Olgas and nobody told them to do it, they were ecstatic at the sunshine and peeked through my skin. The Bastille of my shirt has fallen! And all I did was take it off. I have granted sunshine to the people of ME! I stood on a beach with no clothes on, that's how I gave freedom to my people and suntans to the masses. [1921: Τ 149] Kruchonykh Little apparition with a London air, still a kid at thirty, wing collars and all, perky, brisk, and skillful. You keep that Siberian ending, that "chonykh," chained to your name like a prisoner on a rockpile. You take other people's ideas and repeat them till you beat them to death. The face of an "Englishman"— or maybe an indentured bookkeeper tired of his books. Skillful editor of scandalous texts, lazy, unshaven, and slipshod, 94 Lyrics but with eyes like a girl's full of tenderness, sometimes. Enormous gossip, tricky as they come, a lover of personal put-downs. You enchanting writer, negative double of Burliuk! [1921: Τ 165] Burliuk You galloped around with a big fat brush in your hand, and your red flannel shirt and red-cheeked face were a constant offense to the streets of Munich. Your painting instructor called you "A wild mare from the breadbasket of Russia." You just laughed, and your belly shook with storms of joy from the mighty breadbasket of Russia. You knew your strength, and that wild "Ha-ha" was the way you responded to everything. One-eyed painter, wiping your dark glass eye with a handkerchief, drawling "Well-1-1 ..." then fixing it behind a monocle with a tortoiseshell holder, and like a drill bit from behind your glass armor-plate, your trench, with a look and a disbelieving "Well-1-1 ..." you poked your interlocutor full of holes. You could turn instantly dark and distrustful. That single eye gave you enormous strength. You never revealed your secret: that lifeless crystal ball was your familiar, and helped you tell the future. 95 Lyrics Whoever faced you was under the spell of your will, instantly bewitched by those dark glassy depths. Your brothers and sisters, all powerful laughers, had the bodies of giants and shortbread complexions: they looked like sacks of coarse-ground grain. Bursting with health, this one-eyed artist fixed a circle of glass like a third eye in front of his unseeing one. Sometimes the outlaw-songs of the southland rang in the studio, and a jackdaw at the window flew in to see what was happening. And windows rattled far and wide to hear the roaring Burliuks. Mountains of powerful canvases were piled against the walls. They sparkled with circles and angles and rings: a black raven, its beak glittering; crimson canvases hung beside green ones, painfully dark; others heaved like hillocks, their rough shaggy surfaces like black sheep shuddering; bits of mirror and metal gleamed in their coats. Your brush laid on the paint in heaps, like deposits of clotted blood, a rash of colors. It was all a display of devices, it was writing on method and lessons in diligence, and all of it only a spell cast by Burliuk's dead eye. What power was it that crippled your still-unacknowledged strength, with insolent authority stating: "Burliuk was a low-down knife in the back of poor Art"? Didn't Balashov put a nice slash (it was done over heavily afterward) in Ivan the Terrible's face? Russia, that ever-widening continent, has widened the voice of the West, as if repeating the cry of a monster 96 Lyrics a thousand times vaster. You giant of fat, your laughter rolls from one end of Russia to the other; you sheaf of the Dnieper grabbed in the estuary's fist, a fighter for the people's right to a titanic art: you have given the soul of Russia an outlet to the sea. The strange breakup of painterly worlds was Freedom's forerunner, deliverance from chains. So Art marched on to the great song of silence, and you advanced like a weight lifter through the rich fat lands of the steppe, gave the peasant hut a hope of making the land its own at last, and its barn-mountains gilded by sunlight gave hope to the migrant workers of woe. Harvest-sheaf of the Dnieper-mouth, even those lumps of man-mud obeyed you. The beat of your giant heart and your fat laugh alone set chunks of cast-iron waves in motion. Your voice sang songs of revenge and sorrow. You have burrowed excavations into the burial mound of cast-iron riches, and emerged like a hero from the burial mound of your ancient native land. [1921: Τ 163] I have come like a butterfly into the hall of human life, and must spatter my dusty coat as signature upon its bleak windows, across fate's windowpane. Human life is papered thick with a boring pattern of dull gray leaves; with my dust 97 Lyrics I must inscribe my life upon the windowpane of fate, upon fate's staring eyes. If only I could find an open door to that other world, where birds sing and the wind is blue and everything, even death in the jaws of a damsel-fly, is sweet. My dust forever fled, my wings forever faded! The transparent no of these windows! Beyond them shimmers and flutters the love of butterflies! See how the love of butterflies dances above the breezes! Already I have worn away my bright blue glow, my pointillated patterns; The blue windstorm falls from my wings, their bright motes vanish forever. Stiff and colorless, I droop despairing at the windows of the human world. A branch of flowering numbers scrapes at the windows of this alien abode. [1921: DP 216] Weary wings of the dreamstead, river of blue skystead, names of not-here, calls of no-there, fly-bys, these fledglings of flight who drift away into their dreaming, airways of cloud-cover shifting, hurrying hover, like dark-blue Temnigov. Their nevering songs of youngshine, their creak-note of darkening sunshine— they are a bright blue Stilland, these never never fleeing things who fly away into their Everland. [1921: LO no] 98 Lyrics Fate hides her yawn, rolls over, and again we lie face down in sleep and tear the pillow cover with our teeth: our only native portion is the earth. Damn! All thumbs here at the shelves' edges, deep-sea divers, staring at stars— what are we looking for? We float from the pillow into heaven, a crooked-finger tail the only line holding us to Planet Earth; we bend our steel-suited body back and forth and in our nightlong madness sink into the sky. Fate has lured us into night's bottomless emptiness. Is this our crowning achievement? Through the face-grating we see the sky, and in our fury pound against our helmet. So what? Fate shuts the book of dreams, yawns us to scorn. Like a drunk for his vodka we long for the bar above, the Zodiac Club, begrudging night its hallowed exaltation. Damn! This grating between us! Think of the caged ape, who bares his teeth at man. [1921: III 215] Babylove, don't your eyes ever get tired of being so wide and beautiful? I want to call you little brother—will you let me? If you do I swear by my own blue eyes I'll hold up the flower of your life and protect it. 99 Lyrics You and I are alike, I fell from the sky just like you, and the world keeps causing me grief. I wasn't what they wanted, never have been, I'm a loner and no one can love me. Let's be brother and sister. You want to? We're both of us free and the earth is free, we won't be afraid of their laws, they can't hurt us, we'll make our own laws and model the clay of our own behavior. You're my flower of blue, you are beautiful, I know that, and everything's tender and sudden when you talk about Sochi and sunshine and your eyes grow wide when you do it. I've been doubtful of everything all my life but now I believe, instantly and forever: a trail has been blazed ahead of us, and no one can ever obscure it. Let's avoid a lot of useless words. I'll be your long-haired priest and just say Mass. We'll drink the blue waters of purity, and names will never hurt us. The year the girls first called me "Gramps"— giving me the go-by in their voices and acting as if I was old—they put me down because of my body, a plate not bashfully dished, maybe, but still not eaten up yet— in that healing-house by the Narzan stream I sluiced down my body, got stronger and stronger and pulled myself into a man once more. Veins reappeared in my arms, my chest grew stronger, and soft silky hairs started to cover my chin. [1921: Τ 151 ] [l92i: Τ 157] ΙΟΟ Lyrics The lice had blind faith, and they prayed to me. Every morning they would congregate on my clothes, every morning I visited punishment upon them and listened to them crackle and die. But they kept on returning again and again in a quiet worshipful wave. [1921: Τ i6i] Russia, I give you my divine white brain. Be me. Be Khlebnikov. I have sunk a foundation deep in the minds of your people, I have laid down an axis. I have built a house on a firm foundation. "We are Futurians." And I did all that as a beggarman, a thief, a man with a curse on his head. [1921: Τ i6i] With the grabhooks of wholesale slaughter I will pull down the old order of nations, with the ink of disease I will proof the rough draft, the pages of the human manuscript; with the crowbars of epidemics that follow great fires I will roll out the ridgepoles, the foundation-pilings of nations, and frame up a new dwelling. I will fashion a new edifice with the hacksaws of tuberculosis, I will cut out a new nation. I will wrench nails from the walls with the ripsaws of typhoid fever, and thus I shall extend myself, my great self, and wear this sun of yours as a ring on my finger, and examine it all through the lens of a puppy dog's tears. [1921: V 100] Three years of civil war— a slaughterhouse of gun and gain, the howl of unbearable pain, the wounds of cast-iron shells. On a high hill, tail between his legs, a wild-eyed stray dog begs. 101 Lyrics A soldier takes aim at its pelt and pulls the trigger. Farmhouses are extinguished, blown out like matches. Bang! Bam! Boom! The village is all smoke and smoulder from one end to the other. The tiny belly of a yellow tomtit swells, he sings: Ping! Pang! Pan! What swagger, my God! The ruin of law lies scattered all over the place. Two canisters of poison gas have been fired at the village. Tomorrow not a single living soul will open a single eye. The fields are oceans of ripening grain but there's nobody left to reap. No one will survive. Pity the man who tries to run: a bullet will cut him down. [1921: LO m] Bow! Wow! Wow! Black bunch Bow! Wow! Wow! Running dogs Bow! Wow! Wow! Rage in snow Bow! Wow! Wow! Outside town Bow! Wow! Wow! Rip the dead Bow! Wow! Wow! Drag someone's leg Bow! Wow! Wow! Drag someone's arm Bow! Wow! Wow! Belly Blood Snout Snow [1921?: V 73] 102 Lyrics War and wildness part his hair, blowing it across his shoulders, out of his eyes. Time, terror-stricken at his speeches, caught in rays of silence, dies. The front of his skull slightly curves, the line of his bull-brow is hard. His insolent mouth never moves, holds in check volcanic hordes. Did she like him because the sight of blood never bothered him? [1921?: Ill 229] The fault is yours, you gods— you made us mortal, and for that we let fly at you the poisoned arrows of our sadness. The bow is ours. [192.1?: V 66] When I was young I went alone into the dead of night; my hair was thick and touched the ground. Night was everywhere and oh it was lonely, wanting friends and wanting a self. I set my hair on fire, threw the bits in a ring around me; I burned my fields and trees and things felt better. Arson in Khlebnikov Acres! Burning ego flickered in the dark. Now I depart with flaming hair, not as I, but WE— Our Rhineland enemies fear the stink of famine and disease across our border. 103 Lyrics Come, Nansen, upright Norseman, bring back our law and order! [1921-. Daugava 7, (1986), m; VRi 120-121] People stared in horror; souls in anguish wept. They threw a sheaf of grain upon the ground, then with their wives went rushing east, heard the hum of airplanes overhead. The steppe in flames, the holy hills on fire. Again in children's eyes the Mongol hordes arise. The grain is gone ... an angry God has smashed it flat. Refugees go rushing east. [1921-1922: Τ 177] Hunger I. In the Woods Why do the elk and the rabbits run, abandon the woods in autumn? People have eaten the bark of the aspens, the green shoots of the fir trees. Women and children wander the woods, gathering leaves from the birch trees for soup: birch-borscht, birch-bouillon. The tender tips of fir branches, the silvery moss— Food from the forest. They'll start getting teeth like the elk from eating the trees. Children out scouting for food swarm in the forest. They build campfires, they barbecue worms, they fry caterpillars, they eat skunk cabbage, 104 Lyrics they dig the fat grubs of the staghorn beetles and stuff their hungry faces. They bake their bread out of goose weed, and chase butterflies out of hunger. The smallest children babble like babies, their eyes enormously empty. Their faces are transparent windows and hunger, self-satisfied landlord, leans from their faces, at home there. The children are wasting away: their mouths stretch hugely from ear to ear, their eyes like sunglasses—blue glasses, brown glasses— glint in their faces like shiny reflectors; their noses sharpen to knife-points, like candles set out on a grave. Kids in the forest, chasing a rabbit who scampers away. They stare in delight, watching him go as if he were an angel, a vision of heaven— but he vanishes, fleet apparition, flicking the somber ends of his ears. The children stand blissfully still— what a wonderful dinner he'd make, if only we knew how to catch him and eat him! Grasses are their bread and butter, with yummy weeds and hay for dessert. "Look, there's a butterfly! Somebody catch it! Somebody run, there's another, a blue one!" "My acorns are gone! The people have eaten my acorns!" the scampering squirrel chatters angrily. The moles and the field mice have vanished, and hen coops are only a memory for foxes. All the rabbits are anxious— Whatever became of the cabbage patch? 105 Lyrics II. In the Village 1 In the hut next door with the board roof a grim-faced father broke up the bread into breadcrumbs with hardened fingers. Only to look at. It wouldn't fill a sparrow, the one that chirped just now. You eat with your eyes nowadays. "Times aren't right," the father muttered. The black bread looked like topsoil with bits of ground-up pine cone. At least their eyes can eat. Mother stood by the stove, white with pain. Black coals of hunger burn in the pits of her eyes. The thin slice of a white mouth. 2 Roast mouse. Their son fixed it, went and caught them in the field. They lie stretched out on the table, their long dark tails. Today it's a decent dinner, a real good meal! Just a while back the housewife would shudder and holler, smash the pitcher to smithereens if she found a mouse drowned in the cream. But now, how silent and peaceful. Dead mice for dinner stretched out on the table, dangling dark tails. 3 They used to have a cow but they killed her. Traded her for sacks of flour 106 Lyrics and now that's all gone. One of the neighbors killed her, none of the family could. Blackie. She had heavy sides and her udder held a full pail of milk. She had big horns, and she really made a bellow when she mooed for her baby in the evening, and waited for an answer. The little girls cried. But they all ate the little calf anyway once they were down to horse meat in that village. 4 A boy down by the creek caught three frogs yesterday. They were big and fat and green and "better than chicken" he said to his sisters, who smiled with glee. Last night by the fire they chattered cooked their frogs and ate them. I wonder if maybe today they get butterfly borscht. 5 Dinner's ready, and here's the first course in the old iron kettle: boiled-up chaff. It's good for scouring stomachs. Children, come eat your boiling water and your little bits of straw. Your soup. The children sit down, now you stop that, you're big kids, you stop that crying, hear? And they all got serious faces and nobody laughed. Nobody fooled around. Mother stood by the stove like she used to but she held her face in her hand and cried. The kids got quiet and scared like something mysterious happened or somebody died. Their eyes were dark and their mouths still open 107 Lyrics and dinner was over. Then the kids went away and disappeared. 6 In the corner, mother's eyes grew dark and stared. And what's for seconds? A hole in the ground where all embrace. They will lie down huddled together, fathers and families: fathers and mothers and sisters and brothers. 7 It has the unassuming face of a burnt-out candle. Fire-eye, lacking its lashes of downpour and rain. It burned our fields, our land, whole populations of stalks of grain shaken like straw. The fields grew smoky and the grain turned yellow as death and fell. The grain shriveled and the mice ate it. Is the sky sick? Does the sky hurt? Where are its watery lashes? What became of wet weather, and pounding rain? Furious fire-eye, burning our hayfields, our grasses and gardens, constantly burning, its cloud-brows gone. People sat down in a daze to wait for a miracle, and there wasn't one. They were waiting to die. This was sky-blue disaster. This was drought. After a run of caring years, this changeling. Now everything—grain and rain— plays false with the farmer's labor. Didn't the plowman's sweating hand 108 Lyrics scatter good seed that spring? Didn't the farmer stand all spring looking up, hoping for rain? Fire-eye. Naked golden glare, burning the fields of the Volga plain. The fires of heaven were merciless. They burned four regions whose names begin with S. 8 "Eat it up, puppy, and hope you won't die!" a mother shouted to her youngest then ran from the farmhouse. The sound of laughing and crying came from the hayloft. Her eyes flutter like black moths caught in her eyebrows. What's that noise from the ravine in the woods, those feet moving forward? Downpours of eyelashes vanished that summer . . . 9 Dust in the air near the ravine in the woods. A crowd rushed out to the green hills, to the three tall pines, all of them hurrying, anxious— sticks in their hands, long pointy beards, anxious and hurrying, running and rushing, all of them, grown-ups and children, it was hunger that did it. They were trying to find the holy land, the dirt you can eat just like bread and never get sick from. 109 Lyrics People were running. Rushing. You're all we have left, now that everything's different! Earth! Dirt! 10 Hunger herded humanity. Men, women, children, they fill the ravine rushing to find the holy land, the earth that makes do for bread. Dirt, our silent savior beneath the roots of century pines. And at that very moment scientists' minds were striving toward other worlds, seeking to fashion a dream of life out of earths made fertile by thought. [1921: V 75] The Tree 1 Above the scarlet glances of the raspberry bushes, among rejoicing doves bluer than sky, you trace the thorny highway from Berlin to Bombay! When spiteful autumn comes, and the sons of summer wildly careen, your sharp thorns lash about, poke eyes, scratch the servile human face. Along the steel fabric that rolls from Moscow to Vladivostok, Siberia, you move like gray night's whistle through the blue. And the route of Siberian trains, shamefaced and green as they hurry to abstinence, ends in the blue, in the sadness of flower petals. Where midnight is mirrored in the curls of earth's oakgrove, nothingness flows like a river, the path of the branches is broken like a horseman's gallop, like the wailing of prisoners condemned "to the wall." Fighting over open spaces, bright with shamans' eyes, spearing night on the black points of your branches, no Lyrics Tree, you have terrified the oakgrove: space hangs from the hooks of your branches. The Cossack rider, his long hair streaming, flies across the field. The lance in his hand trembles with war-fervor. You tap at the window of the starry sky. But the darkness has no eye. 2 I swear "I will with wrath repay my neighbor." Rattling the Russian war-club, oh, the rustling of nighttime branches! And crushed the nightingale to death. You spin night's oxygen into a sinewy drag-net and challenge the firmament! The resonant thwack! of a club with a thousand leaves! And even the moon's at fault: In the meshes of the drag-net, night's colors glitter with the heavy silver of fish scales. And every morning Nietzsche echoes in the forest. And every morning, sunny indigent, you take your glasses off and beg for pennies! The stars—even the ones up there— talked all night of the fair-haired herd. There are fights and fights, and the forceful rights of an outlaw's fist. Bird-catcher stuck with stars, your caveman hand trains a black bow on the long extent of years and you stiffen suddenly, like a hero of underground slaughter. Under and above ground, the two-faced city, its thousand windows plunging into earth and into sky like fishes. You rise straight as a Cossack spear, you battle for capacity, seem to seek Lobachevskian space, and the young men seek a sword to swear an oath on. Dressed in golden helmets III Lyrics your troops march into the almost-dark. God on our side! The warriors ride! Here Yermaks lead their leafy troops to overwhelm Siberias of blue. Child of war, dressed in dove-song you drape the blackthorn bush in autumn, you know the sound of pine boughs scraping. Warring with roots, slowly engaging the enemy, the forest path trails silver smoke. There: troops of leaves move slowly to besiege the sky, so slowly decades pass before they take their predecessors' places. A branch tucked under an arm, like a warrior's spear, like a bird, its beak wide open against blue sky. [1921: NP 277] The air splits on the black branches like old glass. Pray to Our Lady of Autumn, the stained-glass windows of autumn, smashed by a sprinting bullet, they wrinkle. A tree burned like a torch in the golden air, turning, bending. Autumn's steel is angry, striking sparks of golden days. The forest a prayer meeting. All at once the shaggy golden caps come off. The trees stretch out like hayrakes gathering armfuls of sunshine. Their autumn branches diagram the map of Russia's railroads. The golden wind of autumn has scattered me everywhere. [1921: III 186] 112 Lyrics The Moscow of the Future In the claws of clanging plates, stiller than the mouse in the owl's claw, dwelling-spaces soar into empty frameworks, combs for humanity's honey, honeycombs abandoned in a hive deserted by its austere inhabitants. Above the Mississippi yesterday or over the dusty Yangtze-Kiang the house-unit hung suspended, then soared, and with sensuous ease descended into a palace of idle delight, a palace of blessed idleness. Eaten away by departing flights, a tall vast building stood bare as an autumn leaf, and heard the hum of the departing dwellings. A leaf in a city chewed bare by the worm of flight. A leaf of decaying autumn, a transparent skeleton, its flesh decayed and gone. Let the cells of living tissue fly away— the transparent patterns of tendons and veins preserve the dry trace of a leaf in autumn. With the skeletal frame of its tracery leaf, a palace of idleness raises its sail of canvas glass. It rises above the Oka, dark with hollow slots, with a grid of empty spaces, a grid of deep housings "3 Lyrics for a winged settlement, like a hall full of chairs when the crowd has departed— "This is a Congress of dwellings of light, an Assembly of glass houses." [1921: Τ 162] Today Mount Mashuk is a hound dog, all white, with clumps of birch-tree sparks. A bird above him, freezing cold, flies south toward Piatigorsk. . . . Flies on a spark-spewing train, forgets the stillness of mountains where autumn stoops to glean what grain still lies in the hollows. And then what? A mindless return, though the poor thing's wings are frozen. Their eyes are grating as lawn-rakes, their hearts are wintry and cold. Commerce has speeded their lives up, turned their eyes grim as gunshot. And now they sport a pair of ears to hear the hucksters hawk their wares. [1921: Τ 157] The Solo Actor While Akhmatova wept and her poems poured out over Tsarskoe Selo, I unwound the enchantress' thread and dragged myself like a drowsy corpse through a desert where all about me impossibility lay dying: a worn-out actor, a face-faker, looking for a break in the wall. But meanwhile in dark caves the curly head of that subterranean bull kept up its chomping, devouring men 114 Lyrics in the smoke of insolent threats. And wrapped in the moon's inclination like the lated traveler in his drowsy cloak, in dreams I leapt upon the precipice and moved from cliff to cliff. I moved like a blind man, until Freedom's wind directed me, beat me with slanting rain. And I cut the bull's head from the hulking meat and the bones, and set it upon the wall. Like a fighter for the truth I shook it in the world's face: Here it is! Look! Here is that curly head the crowd once blazed for! And with horror I understood—no one could see me. I would have to sow eyes. My task was to be a sower of eyes! [1921-1922: VRi 66] At the backwoods whistle-stop the sign says "Khopry." The wind has left "aurant," knocked the "rest" to the ground— the wild wind of the past three years. Wind, wind! It beats the tin sign and shouts: Here's your life! Grunt, groan, strain, the whole fraternal mass is packed on a train, sent rolling along on its way— and merrily all together we shout: Hooray! Fate, can you spare us a smile? [1921: τ i68] Dinner Laughter and raised glasses in those eyes! The game of the universe begins! Hide-and-seek with life and death, blindman's bluff—and death the blind man. 115 Lyrics Just like the moon that lights the sky, the ax-blade rises over that bull-neck. A man sits and fishes in the sea of death, and his long hair's reflection in the water shines like a sunflower. He catches life for maybe half an hour. A thick slice of homemade bread lies like the mighty Volga-bank, an escarpment of invective, a place for old Razin to stand. He rises like a wave, and the universal wave beats on humanity's shoreline. Icons of flesh above the frame of a gaping mouth: hunger's temple. Loaves of gray bread loom like dark clouds. Death after death in weary waves lashes at humanity's shoreline, splashes and breaks, rusalka-like, on humanity's rocks. Day ran on in the rough-out coat of a clanging alarm. In the great capital cities— fear to fall, call to kill, will to wail— striding, like the shadow of Razin! [1921: VRi 30] Don't Mess with Me! You hot-shot young hustlers, you air-heads, look out! There's a new man in Moscow in old Pugachev's coat! We didn't go through all the blood and the mess 116 Lyrics so you'd have fur coats and could laugh at us. We didn't sacrifice our lives for this— to see cheap crooks sporting diamond rings. Why should I lie here and rage all night long? I'll sail down the Volga and sing my song! The black boats of evening will carry our crew— and who will go with me? My comrades, that's who! [1922: Τ 174] Let the plowman leave his furrow to watch the crow that flies across his field, and let him say: That cry contains the fall of Troy, Achilles' howling anger, and the weeping queen. As it circles (its jaws are black) above his head, on a dusty table—let there be lots of dust, and let the dust form circles, curves like the gray insides of a wave, and let some schoolboy say: That dust is Moscow, there, and that's Beijing, or a cowfield near Chicago. Capital cities have circled the earth in the eye of a fisherman's net. The sound of various worlds produces a planet Chicagoed in knots of dust. And let a bride, who would not want to see mourning bands beneath her fingernails, scrape the dust from under them and murmur: 117 Lyrics Here in this dust burn living suns, and my nails' cold flesh has hidden worlds no mind dares comprehend. I believe that even the light of Sirius must fail to pierce the dark beneath a fingernail. [1921-1922: Τ 167] The Future If the wind comes to kiss me I'll describe how the blood has congealed, caked itself in my gray hair. And this pair of lead pearl eyes will ask . . . Tell us your name, they'll say . . . And there will be more weeping than in a week of meatless days. There will be beautiful colors, an eyebrow will scratch a grackle's wing, cradling the constellations in madness. There were beautiful colors— snow-white, black, and gold, there were women on horseback, Revenge's handmaidens, who went flying from weapons, dwindling in flight. Skyscrapers burned in their eyes. They were seeking a path to the skies. Their lips shone bright as scarlet snow, and kept devouring distant corpses. Across a thicket of imploring arms the white horse gallops, and gallops hard. Fate has spoken: "Like flowers in springtime, the galloping rider will gobble you up." [1922: VRi 77] Suppose I make a timepiece of humanity, demonstrate the movement of the century hand— will war not wither like an unused letter, drop from our alphabet, vanish from our little gap of time? Humanity has piles, got by rocking 118 Lyrics in armchairs forever and ever, compressing the mainspring of war. I tell you, the future is coming, and on it come my superhuman dreams. I know you are true-believing wolves— I squeeze my shots into the bull's-eye like yours— but can't you hear Fate's needle, rustling in her wonder-working seams? The force of my thoughts will inundate the structures of existing states— I'll reveal the drowned city of Kitezh, risen by magic, to serfs blinded by the old stupidities. When the band of Presidents of Planet Earth will be thrown like a green rind to feed appalling hunger, then the rough lug nuts of existing states will yield easily to the turn of our wrench. And when the bearded lady throws the long-awaited stone, that, you will say, is what we've been wanting for centuries. Ticking timepiece of humanity! move like the arrow of my thoughts! Grow as governments destroy themselves, grow through this book, let Planet Earth be sovereignless at last! PRESPLANEARTH alone will be our sovereign song. I tell you, the universe is the scratch of a match on the face of the calculus, and my thoughts are a picklock at work on a door, and behind it someone has shot himself. . . [1922: Τ 170] OK, Graylegs, you're pulling Planet Earth, so how about a little giddap and go? A plow of stars hitched to your traces, a whip of dreams— and we're off to the races! 119 Lyrics I write poems about it all to put oats in your pail. What would you say to ancestral hay? It's a special honor, so don't say neigh. I'm not making fun of your coat of gray; I love you, old girl, and I just wanna play! I'll fill your old pail with a cup full of oats before the universal brawl to conquer the skies. Like cool water flowing I say where I'm going and describe the great Numbers that pasture my thoughts. I fed you so we could catch hold of our sail, though of course you like oats and a full water pail. I fed you because: My soul is a seer who has seen in the skies the constellations beginning to rise and the thunderstorm fly like a bird. White-maned—our friend, you know?— whose mane shines bright in the mountain snow. "OURS," say letters of clouds in the sky, and that means . . . keep your powder dry. OK, Graylegs. You're pulling Planet Earth, so take care. 120 Lyrics Koltsov's Graylegs. Tolstoy's Old Gray Mare. The Milky Way! Who's calling me up there? [1922: Τ 173] Cresting spines of towering stronghold-books, pages of glass habitats on which to print inhabitants. Here are cities: living books ruffling their own pages, towering stronghold-surfaces, books set upright, bound in back, where thundercloud plough-horses shake sheets of blue lightning from their manes. Ο write of rights, uprighting rites! People gathered into human haystacks, stowed as cozily as drying hay. In the glass canyons of this city's streets the balladeer calls us to play. A city undefiled by scabby walls! Habitable, populated pages, glass woven into habitats, shiny flatirons, pleating their inhabitants into crisp, unwrinkled folds of symmetry. Shelves of books, whose author's name is Sound, whose common carcass—those who read the book. [1922: VRj 81] Three V's, three M,s, three words— your name towers over your father's! Tall as a teamster, you chew up the steel of silence! Cracking away with a whip of words, you stampede nations in nervous tandems! [1922: Τ 170] 121 Lyrics Who? The guy with the elephant neck and enormous awkward easy honest ears, with his lip curled down on the words "That's that!" sticks out the iron chin of a leader of men, pushes his way out, breaks out, flies out! A pilot who laughs as his plane cracks up in midair and the gloom of the universe glitters like an iron bird exploding with laughter. A soft tender lip, a pouting lip, a hulk, a hero with five-foot shoulders— Who is he? What he does is, over and over, with a voice that sounds like a smile, he strikes the blazing match of his wit on the sole of stupidity's shoe. [1922: Τ 175] Acknowledgment No this is no joke, no surly style, no flowering of perfect vision. This is fate. This is fate. V.V.! Mayakovsky, you and me! It's we, it's us, we're—what's the Soviet word, mumbo-jumbled all together, the USSR word, with the righteous ring of the local lingo? Just say it out loud: SLOBS! Let's both of us be proud of the rigorous destiny of sound. We'll stand together at the tree of silence, stained with the names they call us. 122 Lyrics We'll defeat the Turks of doubt like Jan Sobieski at Vienna. We are iron tsars, let's jam on our heads the iron crowns of SLOBS, and—draw sabers! From the scabbards of the past! See them shine! Sleep, uneventful days. Shhh! Sleep, old moans and groans, like Merezhkovsky, the weepy old papa of our pastorals. Sounds are the source of life! We shout out defiance and slam a wild song into the face of heaven. No longer SLOBS, behold the MAN! Let's raise our rough-hunk scaffolding over humanity's swarm. [1922: Τ 171] You feel my summons— my saber here against your shirt. You've got no shirt. Repeat after my saber: The emperor has no clothes. What we accomplished with a breath of air I summon you to carry out in steel. [1922: Τ 175] To You All Revenge. The word exists. My tears are ready. The snowstorm whirls, spirits without a sound. I am stabbed full of holes 123 Lyrics by lances of spiritual hunger, pierced by lances of hungry mouths. Your hunger is hungry, in the stewpot of tasteful pestilence it scrounges for food, in a profiteer's pocket! And then I'll collapse, like Kuchum on the lances of Yermak. To pierce the hunger of the lances I must murder my manuscripts. Oh god, to find the pearls of those I loved on a fishwife screaming in the street! Why did I abandon that bundle of pages? Why was I willfully stupid? Not just the mischief of shivering farmboys, burning my books at the stake— everywhere hatchets and axes and the bodies of my poor poems. Everything this three-year period has given us, poems, maybe a hundred in all, a circle of faces known to you all— everywhere you look, the bodies of murdered tsareviches, everywhere Uglich, that godforsaken ugliness! [1922: Τ 179] Hey, holy man! Old graybeard! Tell me, who are you? Monster or man? What's your name? And the hills answered: Monster or man? What's your name? No answer. He carried a white book before him, reflected in the blue water. On it were old Glagolitic letters, and the wind that worried his beard tried to keep him from walking or carrying his book. 124 Lyrics And in it was written: "Beware of a horse with three legs, beware also three-legged men." Hey, holy man! What are you after? And the hills answered: What are you after? Who were your ancestors? Where are you from? From a land where two hitch themselves to the plow, and a third plows the earth. Three peasants in a black field and a cloud of crows. Also a herdsman cracking his whip. A pack of demons hide in its tangles, dodging the raindrops; they will help him take care of his cows. [1922: Τ ιβο] I'm not just some carnival barker huffing and puffing my cheeks out and squealing like a wet baby. No, I come from a communal grave where the bell of freedom lies buried. I raise my hand to be recognized and stand to speak about danger. I've shown you the route you must follow, it is long and obscure and uncharted and there are no great bonfires burning on your deck for the broiling of beef, or on the decks of your friends and relations. Yes, I've revolted, I've fallen; the clouds kept me covered and cover me still. But you fell yourselves a bit later, didn't you, awakened by the memory of tumbling that distance, shaped me unwillingly into this earthly shadow in stone. Because I wouldn't let you forget the stars, 125 Lyrics because I could feel the quick of these beggars' lives, more than once you went off and left me, ran away with my clothes while I swam through the gulfs of poetry, and laughed at me for being naked. But you took off your own clothes a few years later, and never noticed that I had become the apex of events, the pen in the hand of time that traced the thinker's thoughts. I was the only physician left in this madhouse, and I brought you my medicinal poems. [1922: Τ i8o] Refusal I would rather watch stars than sign a death warrant. I would rather hear flowers murmur ("It's him!") when I'm out in the garden than see a gun shoot down a man who wants to shoot me down. Which is why I would never be a governor. Ever. [1922: Τ i72] The Road I Took Astrakhan Moscow Kharkov 126 Lyrics Rostov Baku Persia Piatigorsk The Train Moscow Freedom [1922: VRi 26] Once more, once more I am your star. Woe to the sailor with level and compass whose angle is false; he will wreck on rocks and hidden shoals. Woe to you without love or compassion who angled me false. You will wreck on rocks and the rocks will laugh at you the way you did at me. [1922: Τ 182] 127 Longer Poems Zoo (Dedicated to V.l.) Ο Garden of Animals! Where steel bars seem like a father who stops a bloody fight to re- mind his sons they are brothers. Where Germans come to drink beer. And easy women sell their bodies. Where eagles perch like an eternity figured by the present day, as yet unfinished by evening. Where the camel, its great hump riderless, knows the secret of Bud- dhism and suppresses a smile of China. Where a deer is fear itself beneath its branching stone. Where people's outfits astonish. Where people stroll with mindless frowns, while the Germans glow with health. Where the dark glance of a swan—wintry all over, its beak orange- black as a thicket in autumn—is somewhat too hesitant, even for him. Where a blue gorgeousness fans out its tail, and a blue net of clouds is cast across the golden fire of leaf-fall and the forest green, and it is all shadowed differently by the roughness of the ground. Where we want to seize the lyre bird's tail, strike its strings, and sing of Russian heroism. 131 Longer Poems Where we clench our fist as if it held a sword, and whisper an oath: to defend the race of Russians at the cost of life, of death, of everything. Where the monkeys are variously angry and display their variegated bottoms, and seem, except for the sad ones and shy ones, eter- nally irritated by the presence of man. Where elephants shivering like mountains during an earthquake ask a child for something to eat, making old meanings ring true: "I'm hungree! Gimme something to eat!" and who kneel as if asking for charity. Where the agile bears scramble up and look down, waiting for their keepers' orders. Where bats hang upside down, like the heart of a present-day Rus- sian. Where the falcon's breast recalls ragged clouds before a storm. Where a little ground bird drags behind it a golden sunset full of embers on fire. Where we see in the tiger's face the white beard and the eyes of an elderly Muslim, and we honor the first follower of the prophet and read the essence of Islam. Where we begin to think that religions are the subsiding surge of waves whose dispersion formed the species. And that therefore the earth contains as many animals as they find different ways of witnessing God. Where the animals, tired of roaring, stand and look up at the sky. Where a caged seal is a vivid reminder of the sufferings of sinners, hurtling back and forth and wailing. 132 Zoo Where funny fishwingers groom one another with the touching care of Gogol's Old-World Landowners. Ο Garden of animals, where the stare of a beast has more meaning than stacks of reread books. Ο Garden. Where an eagle broods over something, like a child grown tired of complaining. Where an Eskimo husky vents its Siberian aggression in a hostile rit- ual born in the blood, at the sight of a kitten washing its face. Where billy goats beg by waving their cloven hooves through the bars and then look pleased or satisfied when they get what they want. Where the overstated giraffe stands and stares. Where the signal cannon at noon makes the eagles look up at the sky expecting a storm. Where eagles drop from their high perches like graven images falling from temples and rooftops during an earthquake. Where an eagle, shaggy as a girl, looks at the sky, then at its talons. Where we see a "tree-beast" in the silhouette of a stock-still deer. Where an eagle sits, its neck toward the public and its face to the wall, its wings oddly ruffled. Does it imagine it's soaring high in the mountains? Or is it praying? Or is it only suffering from the heat? Where an elk, through the fence, kisses a flat-horned buffalo. Where deer lick cold steel bars. 133 Longer Poems Where a black seal hobbles along the ground on its long flippers, moving like a man tied up in a sack, like a cast-iron monument that suddenly finds something irrepressibly funny. Where a shaggy-haired "Ivanov" jumps and slaps its paw against the steel bars whenever his keeper calls him "buddy." Where lions lie dreaming, their heads on their paws. Where the deer never stop banging their horns against their cages, never stop tossing their heads. Where a single breed of ducks in a dry cage raises a unanimous cry after a shower of rain, as if performing a rite of thanksgiving to some deity—one with webbed feet and a bill? Where guinea hens are sometimes honking matrons, with insolent necks and ashy-silver bodies ordered specially from the same dress- maker who stitches dresses for the starry nights. Where I refuse to recognize a Malay bear as a fellow northerner and unmask him as a Mongolian and feel like taking revenge on him for Port Arthur. Where wolves display readiness and loyalty in the attentive squint of their eyes. Where I enter an animal house so stifling I cannot stay long and am met by an impersonal "Stoopid!" and a shower of seed pods from idle, smooth-talking parrots. Where the massive gleaming walrus, like some languid beauty, fans itself with its slippery black flipper and falls into the water, and when it heaves itself back onto its platform, its great blubbery body sports the bristly whiskered, smooth-browed head of Nietzsche. Where the jaws of a tall, white, dark-eyed llama and a stooped smooth-horned buffalo and other ruminants move regularly right or left, like the life of a nation. 134 Zoo Where a rhinoceros' red-and-white eyes hold all the unquenched fury of an overthrown emperor. Alone among animals he shows his disdain for humans as if they were slaves in revolt. In him lurks the spirit of Ivan the Terrible. Where seagulls with long beaks and cold, blue, bespectacled eyes look like international con-men, whom we recognize by the easy artistry with which they snatch up food thrown to the seals. Where we remember that Russians have always called their heroes falcons, and that the eyes of a Cossack, deeply hidden in a fur- rowed brow, and the eyes of the falcon, the king of royal birds, are identical, and we begin to understand who taught the Rus- sians how to fight! Ο you falcons, breasting herons out of the air! Your sharp beaks turned inward! But never as pins, for bearers of honor, loyalty, and duty would hardly impale an insect! Where a red duck on webbed feet makes us recall the skulls of Rus- sians fallen in battle, in whose skeletons its ancestors built their nests. Where the golden tuft of a certain bird displays a fire whose power belongs only to those who have sworn eternal virginity. Where Russia pronounces the word "Cossack" like an eagle's scream. Where elephants forget how to trumpet and make noises that sound like complaints of indigestion. Perhaps, when they see us so insig- nificant, they think insignificant sounds are called for? I don't know. Ο you wrinkled gray mountains! With lichens and grasses sprouting in your crevasses! Where wonderful possibilities perish in the animals, like the codex of the Igor Tale, lost in the burning of Moscow [1908, 1911: Τ 185] 135 Venus and the Shaman Venus and the shaman met one evening in his cave. It was short and sweet, their episode. She appeared at his door like spring fever, all in flower. (Had she taken the wrong road?) There she stood before him in the buff— oh, naked and pink—a diamond in the rough of cold Siberia, with desperation in her eyes. Also the sultriness of passion. It almost seemed as if a flaming fire had fallen from Olympus, burnt the snow! Blue constellations in her eyes glowed bright as she asked the Asiatic for lodging for the night. She pouted prettily. "Hey, Mongo," she began— (That's the way Lady Love always spoke to man. Whenever she thought, she got lines in her face so she generally spoke without thinking.) "Mongo," she said, "you're old and wrinkled, while I am frankly a river of delights, but could I beg a corner of your savage cave? A goddess begs—the situation's grave. I'll only be a day or two. And say— you think you could push your junk away so we can sit together by the fire? Have you looked outside? Can you believe that storm? I almost died of cold! Kings kept their furriers working for me once, but here I am freezing in a savage land, and my face is an absolute mess. Still, things could be worse. 136 Venus and the Shaman Oh, Mongo, if you knew what I've been through! You're a sweetheart to let me stay with you." Then the lady let her hair down, all of it, shook the snowflakes out of it, and moved right in—with a shaman who'd retired to the forest because he loved his peace and quiet. "There was a time," she began, "when every town in Greece had a statue of me, usually a masterpiece— you're sure this isn't beginning to bore you? Anyway, about those statues. Not any more. They won't sing my praises, they've forgotten my name, even what I look like. They ignore me! That's fame for you." The shaman lit his pipe and scratched his brow. "Things could be worse," he observed. "Right now you're freezing cold. You likely had a fight with somebody you lavished time on, right?" "No," she said, "it's worse than you can guess. No one admires my breasts these days. What shallowness! Why, I could make a milk-cow quit the field!" (There were tears on her cheek, barely concealed.) "And look at this profile! Glom these arms! But modern men ignore my charms: young ones, old ones, ones who love their wives, drunks who drink away their lives, even the military, officers and men, they all ignore me. Why, I remember when my bosom conquered multitudes! Kings or commons, any man in the place! But now, poor things, they're in disgrace. People nowadays are sneering snots, they made me cover my forget-me-nots! Would you believe it? Let me tell you, I'd rather die than have to sunbathe on the sly. It's just too cruel!" She turned aside wringing her hands, and almost cried. "Oh, this life is such an awful mess, Mongo! Everything is vanity! 137 Longer Poems We're born the children of distress! I get upset at everything I see! All the beauty in a young girl's cheek will feed the worms within a week." The shaman shrugged, and watched the milk-and-honey goddess, near collapse, sit on a nearby rock and burst into tears. Finally he found his tongue: "Better mind that rock, you'll scratch your pretty behind." He reached for a jug on the table near and downed a draft of birch-bark beer, then sat in silence, puffed his smoke, and stared into the evening air. (He always thought before he spoke: he liked a judicious atmosphere.) The goddess thanked him for his advice, and the look in her round blue eyes went from being playful to a heavy smoulder— because he was rather good-looking, though older. The passing hours slipped away; they sat together in that cave until a few pale streaks of light pushed at the edges of the night. The shaman kept on staring into space. Venus yawned, beginning to tire. He poked at the fire. She fell asleep. He stared at her face. Now for shamans, rules of hospitality are sacred. He sat all night and watched her, watched her silken curves. That's right, sat all night and never touched her, watched her as she tossed and turned, and just made sure his fire burned. She moved in her sleep, gave a couple of sighs, occasionally opened her sweet little eyes as if begging for something, he wasn't sure what; then lifted her arms as if for protection 138 Venus and the Shaman and stretched—oh, was she open to suggestion?— and gave a sleepy smile in his direction. But morning came at last. The pale birds on the fir trees all sang out. Full of sadness and self-doubt, she stared at the slowly fading stars and whispered something to herself. Beneath the trees, a trace of night still lingers. The sky grows pale, then pink, then red: the sun appears. Dawn with her rosy fingers calls all Nature from its bed. Venus finally achieved a blush at her behavior of the previous night, and, testing the path of virtue with a novice toe, began to think things over: was it polite to show up naked in the house of a man you didn't know? Alas, the lady's answer went unheard for just then the shaman, without a word, tossed her a fox-fur jacket. The goddess for once was speechless, and gave him a grateful glance. The lady began to do up her hair, all by herself, into a braid; the process left her shoulders bare but the shaman never said a word. Those snowy shoulders! Many a civilization had set aside days for celebration . . . But the wily shaman simply sat, grave as an idol, deep in meditation. Venus stalked about the cave and wrung her hands for inspiration. "They're animals, you hear me, animals! Where are the hymns they used to sing and the hungry kisses they used to bring me? Animals, all of them! Mongo, help me! I shall expire! My heart's a tambourine on fire! 139 Longer Poems I can see the truth without being told— Look at me, Mongol I've gotten old! Nobody writes me love songs anymore or waits to see if I'll appear— no wonder they all read books! I've lost my looks! They see me and they run away! Everyone's become a stay- at-home, afraid to practice love's little lessons—it's awful!" cried the lady, and burst into tears. "What's become of old-fashioned devotion? You tell me—is this some notion thought up by an Indian guru to rid the world of love's emotion?" The shaman never said a word, just sat there. Was he angry? Bored? Early that morning she had gone out before the birds had sung a note to gather blue forget-me-nots, woven them into a fetching chain and draped it around herself ... In vain. Now, as before, the shaman sat gloomy, grave, and sunk in thought. The lady gave him a mournful smile. "Well, Mongo," she began, "I guess you don't get what I'm saying, or maybe I'm a bit wild for you. Or maybe you just don't like my style. I'm going for a walk, need a change of scene, want to be alone—you know what I mean? I want to pick flowers, talk to the trees, get back in touch with the birds and the bees, far from the hum of the pressing crowd, find a place with a rustic temple, hunt for mushrooms, and sing out loud. I want to try to follow your example. What could be better than a life that's simple?" "Help yourself," the shaman said, and gave her a smile of pure relief— 140 Venus and the Shaman "I know a spot with a hollow tree— a nice little nook. It works for me." She smiled her thanks, and in her delight hugged the seer with all her might; her hair fell down and brushed his arms— the shaman's senses surged against her charms— but then she began a lecture on hygiene, how he really ought to keep his dugout clean, "... and stop smoking, for godssakes! Look at the mess it makes!" With a roll of his eyes he called the name Anduri, rose impressively, and began a ritual dance around the fire, his sacred rattle in his hand. He marked the tempo loudly with his feet, so a sullen Venus couldn't say a word, but sat and plucked his bowstring, keeping time. Then the shaman took his bow and arrows, ignored her squeals and cries of fear, and strode from the cave, a mighty hunter out to bag a deer. He moved away like the morning breeze and disappeared beyond the trees. Alone beside the dying embers the chastened goddess starts to pine. (She was down in the dumps.) Then she remembers after all she's really quite divine, and picks some more forget-me-nots to make a kind of housedress with; she's rather pleased at first with what she's got— a kind of flowery image out of some myth or other, reflected in the woodland pool. She laughs, giggles like a silly fool, but recalls from somewhere—she isn't quite sure— the set of tyrannical rules laid down for the latest fashionable couture, and mutters to herself: "You call that a dress?" or: "How unflattering!" or: "God, I look a mess . . ." 141 Longer Poems Still, all alone she snips and tucks and hums and frowns, tries again for a different fit, holds it up beneath her chin— and never seems to be bored a bit. Later she wanders past the pond and strolls about the field beyond picking loads of wildflowers; she braids them into wreaths and tries them on. A dove sings in its leafy bowers— the goddess coos and whistles in reply. Venus sat down at last on a hard pine stump and sighed to the wind: "Blow, big boy, blow! Possess me, caress me, distress my hair! I'm all yours, if you've got the time. No one else seems to know I'm there. For you, big boy, believe me, I'm already a meadow. Just feel my flowers! Honey, I could spend hours making you happy, giving you joy— we're all looking for love, even Love! Even me! Even this stump that in life was a tree! Get it now, I don't care if it's more or less— there ain't no second chance at happiness." Meanwhile she hears the footsteps of the seer, back from the hunt. She greets him with kisses and hugs, takes the carcass of the deer, cuts it up, and fixes one of her favorite dishes: Venison a la Venus. He takes a bite— and has to admit, by god, it tastes all right! Later he lights his pipe and looks around— then shuts his eyes with something like a frown. The cave is hung with wreaths of leaves and flowers: he now resides in one of Venus' bowers. Next day a white swan flew in from the coast, flapped a feeble wing, cried hoarsely, "You! 1+2 Venus and the Shaman Goddess, return! You are the toast at dinner parties once again. They want you back! Look, I know I'm a mess— I'm bloody and bowed, but I've got to impress you, got to convince you before I die. Come back to your people! Oh, try to forgive them; they love you, you know. And one of them, a true admirer, has gone so far as to buy a tiara. A new one—for you. It goes to show. So. I'm a dying swan and I'm singing a song to say you've been away too long. Come on home! Leave Siberia and strike out, my dear, for the interior." He gave a white wiggle at her feet and died. It convinced her. She turned to the shaman and cried: "Mongo, you're the smartest man I've ever met. I really loved you. Loved your jet- black hair, and your biting smile. I melted. But for me the simple life was wrong, so I'm leaving. But I'll have them write a song about you, I promise. Now, forget my breasts. Put them out of your mind. Forget my face, my sweet behind, and the fire in my eyes (which was, let's face it, lust) and the glory in my thighs. It's just that I wanted to be a simple girl at heart . . . But come, we must forget all that. We have to part, and you mustn't ever regret you turned me down." The shaman looked up; his usual frown had turned to a smile. "Drop by whenever things get slow," he said. "You're always welcome, even though a bed on the rocks is all I've got. But we can share. And there's always sunshine, and lots of fresh air. As long as those birds sing in the trees, you're welcome to stay as long as you please." Venus smiled as he spoke, and stroked his beard. Then, like a sweet mistake, she disappeared. [1912: Τ 230] 143 The Stone Woman A bent old man, his twisted stick, the stillness of a magic spell. And you like a laughing rusalka, perched upon a mammoth skull. The bark of ancient willows rustles, telling tales like people do; the stone women of the fields are tales told in books of stone. Ancient cults erected you. You stretch to heaven and back again. Their faces are vengeful and austere. Their necklaces are crudely carved. Hawks, uncomprehending, drift above these stony Eastern legends. Her smile is motionless, she stands abandoned by some unknown father; her breasts are cobblestones, the dew shines there upon a silver aureole. Here a dark-haired woman's step wakens a nocturnal eagle; her braids hang long and limp; the silence of his horse's bridle! The mountains whirl in webs of snow, unwindings of millennial sounds, and the babble of water falling from the rock face into the wheatfields. That tree raises its arms and prays, on the twilight meadow it weeps and wails 144 The Stone Woman in words with no names. Ο gentle poplar, somber poplar, suppliant to the cool of evening! The conversational rustle of your trembling leaves! And here comes little "scribble-scrabble," blond-haired and speechless. What does the child want in the stillness that overlies this silver murmur? Cry because the Milky Way isn't mine? "How many dead thousands weep beneath a cool veil of clay! And I am the last depictor of earth's inaudible anxieties. I expect to be shot. Every day. But why? For what? After all, I have loved all creation, and spent my childhood here in the steppe, amid plume-grass and stones." He approached and sat down. His hand paged the glowing book of his face. And the moon gave her crying child a loaf of evening stars. "Do I need a lot? A crust of bread, a cup of milk, the sky above, these clouds." I love all milky women, even these, who are slow to flower. I hid myself in that butterfly net, the meshes of the Milky Way. When the Vistula flowed with blood and blood streamed in the Tisza, then shrieking numbers in formation closed ranks above the suffering world. And a butterfly's wings were blue as the idol-figure's eyes. 145 Longer Poems She is condemned to stand here, graying shade where insects swarm, without a comb and pins, her crude hand tracing erotic stony ciphers. Her gray eyes are plank- like, flat unmoving things. But a moth hovers upon them, descends, covers them with the bright blue heaven of its wings. A lacework of spots protected by a spot of fire, a cherry stain. Those spots of fire made the statue's eyes flicker with intelligence. The eyes became blue, intelligence grew with the airy teachings of those agile wings. Has a straw caught fire in the dark night? Idol of stone, rise and thunder like a tournament of storms! Flock-watcher, bat-blind once, open now your moth-wing eyes, be a seer through the Milky Way! Gun-song bites bits from these blocks, maddening the moth-grave to shatter its fetters, grappling the graven grave. Hip! Hop! Stomp the grave in heaven's hoedown Stamp, stone, the star-spinner reel of the moth-eye turned toward the sky. Remember then these shining stars, their fire all glitter; they are studs stamped in the blue boot-heels that reel in heaven's hoedown! More rainbows of light! Summers of stormy flight! The maid of the steppe restored to sight! 146 The Poet When autumn comes to turn the trees, to stain them crimson, rust, and copper, and chill refractions in the waterfall predict the triumph of the coming snow, the trunks of birch trees shimmer white in some last fevered vision, and winter's heralds, birds in flight, take a long leave of summer's green. The slanting hillsides wear a shawl of fragile gold, falling among the ghostly naked slopes that mark the white ravines; the soft blue stillness seems to call words from the poet's mouth— then we think of spring and March Gras! Carnival, unbridled energy to bury too-short days; the sun skulks low along the horizon, tramples winter's weavings underfoot, and, teasing time, outruns the deer. Then out of nowhere overhead a golden ghost appears, and noontime shadows fawn upon our feet like dazed enchanted animals. Then the barefoot thicket of humanity with heartfelt thanks begins the dance, and the lonely linden loosely weaves its hair of languid leaves. Bouncing along like a gaggle of fools, the human horde makes up new faces, 147 Longer Poems effacing frozen winter's pale, its bleary creams and pallid powders. Down with Winter! Welcome, Spring! Blow a blast on springtime's trumpet! See the race of men done up like cupids dressed in clouds, or naked, drifting in the hush of heaven, scattering flowers underfoot. Constant lover of inconstant spring, man hails the coming summer sun. Spring, in costume as a fisher-maid, trails full nets of flowers, and the season's cold wet scales flicker from her silver leaves, the wind, inspired by things half spoke, half sung, plays with the fabric at her knees, ringed in pure imaginings. Good friends, arise! and stand prepared to follow her with heaps of light and woven strands of mist and flowers! Wilder than the sea at dawn, spread yourselves in streams across the east and watch, enchanted by the air's blue escapades, as dreams uncoil like waking snakes. Iridescent as the flowers, blown by the breath of human mouths, Spring arises from her sleep. All men who scrabble after profit, who reckon days in gain and strain, who reckon days in trade and coin, all have joined the single flood of love for the Virgin Spring, loyal subjects sure her carnival will last forever. The joker's shout, the women's wail, the shaking rattle's ringing roll, 148 The Poet old whiteface with his baggy pants, the righteous wrath of once-reasoning hordes, All praise the Virgin Baby Doll! They shout their singsong loud and clear drunk on waves of wild wailing song. Two figures there, beside a bench, shelved in the shadow of a poplar tree. A naughty laugh, the pressure of a thumb, and mischief from a seltzer bottle! A gypsy in holiday motley barely strikes his instrument, leads a lot of ragamuffins. A hooligan, a bad bad boy, a dark-haired, suntanned boy, flails the parade with an empty pumpkin head; its eyes and mouth carved out with a knife. It bangs about, it cracks about, advancing airy spear and shield. The dance rolls onward in a stream— women in transparent clothes— "Sweet friends, can it really be, our sleepy wood-wart will not dance? Sweet friends, how can he sleep in such a time of revelry? Little brother, sleepyhead, what a spoilsport you turned out to be." Tweaked awake by pinching fingers he hops and lumbers awkwardly— a bear! then suddenly a bird, and free, he flutters from his teasing sisters. Another carnival grotesque, black mask with a red and shiny mouth, shakes a spear bound up in willow withes and terrifies the crowd. Behind him there, by magic unattached, an enormous hand—the rest invisible— bears a basket of vegetables 149 Longer Poems that overclouds the sunny day. Carnival maskers everywhere, and sunburnt fiddlers' country songs. The briefest stillness, then the henbane game begins: faces whitened with the drug, the children of hallucination prance and drug-enchanted demons dance a chain of visions, one by one, as if someone were dreaming them, as if he saw their silent stream, visitations in an alien dream, creeping in at Flora's windowsills. Laughter forever! Care is dead! Flags and banners overhead Laughter tosses Care aside and boldly struts ahead of the parade, an octopus emblazoned on his chest. Burning bold and bright he goes: high priest of jokes, in a rubber nose. A whale's great jaws are trundled by, Hell-gate gaping wide and high; two hermit-saints concealed within it debate a dead religion's tenet. But the crowd is driven like the snow and puts its faith in love and joy. A melancholy bagpipe wails, an old man cackles, cries, and crows, snowflakes swirl and catch the light, dry confetti-glitter now, and glitter-blizzard the parade. In this wholehearted merriment a figure wrapped in wolfskins howls— a warrior with a shield of bronze; an ancient pilgrim sprouts a cookpot on her head, and makes the pious laugh. 150 The Poet Look, those eyes! How blue! Surely an icon walks the earth! Her aura of eternity disturbs the dance; she moves as through an Easter vigil, a holy picture strayed from church; she makes the unbeliever and the infidel of Islam turn their eyes, she makes the painter seize his brush! Sweet Jesus! Lovey, look! It's the holy Mother of God! Every human passion stills before those sorrow-darkened eyes; to her the race of Adam turns for intercession in the skies. Whiter than the whitest marble, wrapped about in prayerful calm, she stretches out her blessed hand and humbly takes the offered alms. But look! Just look! See how she goes hand in hand with some buffoon! She is shamed by the vulgar gaze! God's mother, begging in the street! But her unworldly countenance shines as on a summer's day. the white of her mantle seems like purest stone and streams from her shoulders like milk, a beggar from the distant faraway come down from her altar—the Mother of God. Stock-still. Like little boys and girls, dumbstruck. From the vision streaming, pure white radiance bathes the crowd. But now the merrymaking swells: wind-moan, laughter of ashes, redskins with savage shouts rush by without turning to look. Behind false faces, passers-by leap and dance and hop about and the crowd of let's-pretenders 151 Longer Poems with tearful wails and jokesters' whoops and feline screeching, battling cats streak with snarls along the street. Howling witches, bellowing cows, a camel-figure slowly bows, eyes of owls, speech of fish, weeping whiskers drawn with soot, a wagon with a scarlet crab with painted hair; an idiot in a carnival face bangs his tin can on a barrel, drags along his little girls. A rain of soaking soot, bonfires full of resinous flames, nearsighted eyes drip soot on faces across these cityscapes of curly hair, these fiery nights of magic spells, this general hunger for hallucination; weird faces madly shining, faces burning flannel red, were reflected like candles in a thousand-mirrored hall where fire splashed like death. Up with laughter! Down with fatal stars! They shouted, whirling by like wind. And still persistent snowflakes fall, spearing the pavement underfoot. Again the bench. A monk, whose shaven head partners a woman with dark eyes. Like bowers to eternal blue her hair in ringlets rose and fell and a petal like a burning coal flamed in the midnight of her hair. Then what? Her eyes insistent blue burned with the joys of anxiety, and full of languorous luxury promised nights of doubtful dreams. 152 The Poet But whirling like snowstorm, set free from their bodies, their eyes all some other's, not this one's or that one's, the crowd in a frenzy went helling along now sheet-white as phantoms, now savage and dark. And plodding ever where east is west and west is east, beside dead gods whose prophets perished long ago, a stumble-footed weary wind forgets the lessons of the here and now. Twisting this chain in thought about his much-tormented mind, he stood by a wall, harmony's eternal prisoner, at odds with merriment, an altar of ideas. See his cloak, a mountain of darkness, ridges and rivers and chutes of white water falling in waves to his feet, obscuring the blue-petaled flowers he wears in his buttonhole, Lada's devotion. His brow is the curve of a dream, a mountain swallow's arching flight; his mouth curls down in disbelieving scorn. From his high forehead the hair descends like a herd of deer driven to frenzy by the sight of predators circling above them who throw back their antlers and flee, breaking in madness like waves of the sea, their antlers entangling each other and branching like stonework above their heads. Their trustful black muzzles shuddering, shaking and shuddering, treasuring time, hearts straining to follow the stag, panting they race to the glacier. His hair tumbles down to his shoulders like a herd of deer driven to frenzy fleeing past waterfall, rockslide, fear-maddened deer, stampeding in darkness, ecstatic in panic and swifter than birds! 153 Longer Poems There he stands—mad, proud, poet. (A tatter of blue, like a wave of the sea, a scarf round his neck, crumpled and twisted), and a diamond known as Kizel-E set in a stickpin, a magical star given in care of a virginal soul whose crimson reflections set fire to the blue endeavors of the cloak. Are you happy, sweet lady, to see his hair streaming, a river of fear-maddened deer stampeding over a steep snowy rockface— a starched snowy whiteness, his collar? In this august hour, this evening hour, your daughter-vows forgotten, girl, with your sky-blue soul you stand and comb his eagle hair, leaning like a stalk of wheat whose grains are pearls. And like the wind, whose stormy song divides waves drunk with the seagull's cry, so the comb slips through his hair, this child of other worlds, his long hair fallow as a field before a lazy, knowing plow. He neither sleeps, nor dreams, nor lives, a crimson light upon him falls. With his black curls he caresses the pattern of the blue stone walls; his arms are crossed upon his heart a specter pressed against the piled-up stones, he leaves this life attracted by some light, astonished by some vision, and his body there against the wall strains to hear the footsteps of his soul, its promised return from on high: clay vessel full of water, 154 The Poet an empty vase, its flowers gone, all sensation absent. A rusalka at his feet sits sobbing. Unclear desire has driven her here, far from her mill wheel, to him, whose evensong she listened to over and over, the song of evening that subdued her, tamed her and her sisters, wiped away all memory of forests at night and the miller and his pact with the devil, the miller and his compact with the stars, his muttered dark enchantments, the daring of their underwater games. When the black silk pond at evening is threaded with stories of stars, someone carried from this world of words to heaven hears the secret of the world, and from nocturnal heaven sees the earth and waits for one to join him there, tender, perishing in stillness. When on their rocks, translucent, the rusalka-race sit combing their hair, half-hidden in the willow branches, a belated rider calms his skittish horse, and only the bittern's booming cry lows like cattle beyond the mill. The weary descant of the weary mill charms the heart with secret pleasure and all seems proof against transgression. Then darkness shines within the deep, and like a vision of deception a maiden rises from the river waves and proudly, simply, all divinely, begins to sing. She sings of blue eyes' ecstasy behind a spiderweb of rays, delusions of the waterways 155 Longer Poems shadowed in a kind of shivering. Then the stars burn with longing to join in single consonance the water's rustic faith, the dancing splash rusalkas make, the lumbering of the ancient mill, the treetop full of croaking crows and the girl's nocturnal apparition. And now proud and lonely you move through the town. Her body, blue-green in the moonlight, frightens the people. She knocks at a door and goes in. He is there. Something in her soul the mind can't comprehend. Her prescient heart remains untouched by night's scheming adventurers, hustling herds who always crowd the streets. In moon rays rusalka comes veiled like a bride to her wedding, her eyes full of silences; blushing, she stares at the poet. Nighttime eyes. They call and fly away into the swans' homeland, gleaming like flax-flowers under the curve of anxious brows, shining, suppliant, and sweet. "Remember how often you came to the mill, turning my fine intelligence with your stories of feasts and triumphs of scientific fires. For the moons have fallen from heaven, in the tangled wood they shine like eyes; and lightning, trained to human gait, transports whole crowds in carriages, replacing gentle horses. 156 The Poet The old world is ground to fine white flour by the work of common sense, the old world dies in the saddle! And over the corpse forget-me-nots burn blue, clear-eyed daughters of the riverbed. Our onetime world is lost in night. Tormentor, you even told me that I, Rusalka, died with it, and the river will never again see with its virginal eye the eagle of time. Father of painful persuasions, you were cruel in nighttime silence. I have come to crown your poetry. Count me among your admirers. Now write!" She stops speaking. She clutches a corner of his cloak, steps back, and stands dumbly silent watching him and trembling. "Father of murderers, cruel hangman! Do you really take me for dead? Do lurking crabs devour me? Their dark claws tear my flesh? Why have you destroyed the delight we traced in night and darkness and discarded me forever? Call me whatever you want: a clutch of light flickering at your window, sorrow-river, heavenly coursing, or no from yes in the vale of poetry, or the mind of water through the mind of numbers where the blue damsel-fly hovers. You have rescued reason from our underwater nonexistence, not left to death our dreaming 'but' . . . Am I a game of nighttime eyes, always cruel and cheatful, radiant in the bosom of night, 157 Longer Poems the backwater where a horseman drinks, or a ray of the moon that breaks through a chink— am I left to be nothing but legend? Pity me! Be brave, turn away your sharp spear!" Some inspiration moved his hand; he gestured toward the Holy Virgin. "You and she are sisters. I've never doubted it. Go walk with her," he said. "I know no place for you or you, among the people of this world. Bride of water, bride of stars. Take each other's hand and go, flow like a river wave through a net or carry the web of constellations into the great cathedral's gloom like a vast mural. You may be fated to wander as dwellers in the waves, to be divinities in daily fact in the white church or the dark stable, to live as beggars in a fence's shadow, to be strangers in filth and tatters, to cross the waves to earthly delights, and be a nest of infestation gleaming in the godhead of your eyes, to sleep on earth, on piles of straw, beneath the shining hand of night in groves of birches, vale of tears, or in a house of bitter sighs. Know this: you will be exiles everywhere. A bitter fate awaits you: always to hear 'Please step aside.'" He followed the white stone staircase to the garden, moving beneath Aquarius. "We swear we will never change our vow," he said. He raised his hand, picked a flower, and gave it to them both. 158 The Poet "As many days as crowd a year, so many times I mean to swear my intentions: I will guide these outcasts along the stony paths of fate." And like the ghost of some nocturnal band, beside a bench three figures stand. [1919,1921: Τ 263] 159 Night in the Trenches Statues of women, stony sisterhood, stood like sentries in the open field, watched over stretches of flatland. A man who was once a tsarist draftee crouched in the trenches cursing: "Christ! Those weird old women! Where did they come from? Too many dead men tomorrow to count— they'll roll us under, one by one." "Well, one last chance to roll your own." Soon the constellations' infantry will quit the field; now the hours dribble lazily; even thinking seems a waste of time. "What's on your mind, buddy— you tired of being a hero yet? Let's sing the regimental chorus, then let's turn in, OK?" Above the rhythmic snoring of the camp, over the noise, the creak, the rustling sounds, the Internationale's great chorus engulfs the nighttime steppe, vowing itself eternally to heaven. The dew descends across the steppe and in the night a bright red star gleams on a soldier's cap. "... Who once was nothing will now be all ..." Which of these warrior hordes will win? The first one cocks a dubious eye 160 Night in the Trenches at fat, complacent Muscovites; the other, shaken, tries to hide behind the Kremlin walls. Two spears advancing from two seas, one from the north, the other from the south? No—the clash of tsarist lackey and one whom Labor claimed as friend. One who scrawled on a convent wall, the Convent of the Holy Savior: "He cannot eat who will not work." Even the trapper's bloody work is blest! Driving out the chanting monks from their ancient holy choir, the powers-that-be converted it to classrooms for the art of war. But HE with his uncompromising hand holds a course along the iron way. No—I'm not him, I'm not like that! Mankind, fly! His face has a Mongol cast— a massive forehead, creased with care, the questioning eye that sees right through you—the farmstead his only care. "The iron way's the only way! Too much idle talk already! My time will come, and even I will trail the tsars into oblivion; then you'll have time for talk. Once we die we see it all; then we can judge. I sent a team of scientists, specialists in superstition, to excavate the hermits' caves; their scalpels laid the relics bare and raised above the crowd a woman's glove, inhabitant of artfully produced relics. He died, the gaunt miracle-worker, but that woman's glove meant superstition's death by firing squad. And let it come to horseflesh 161 Longer Poems in the market, curving horses' heads snickering from Moscow's butcher stores, I swear by horseflesh I'll succeed— I am the mousetrap, not the mouse. I swear by horseflesh, you're my witness, that from its hinges I will tear— though even God should bar the way— the gate to that Red edifice where I will have my say. I promise that. If that seems stupid to the stupid and the fools, still let the earth lie tranquil as a corpse, and commend itself into my hands. And redder than the flesh of horses when the skins are stripped away, our banners claw the air like eagles and rip to bits the bygone day! I will unite the human race, parts of a whole imagined long ago. Red regiments, the game is up to you! The dying Whites have fouled themselves! We will want flowers to cover graves, and graves remind us we ourselves are flowers—fleeting things, that nothing saves. When you ask me to raise the stargazer closer to the heavens, or when, like the Holy Virgin, you flee to save your son from slaughter, when nomads were the only ones who came to save your banners, or when you shine like some foreboding star upon this people of a single tribe, Moscow, still you raise a golden torch above the world, our own Statue of Liberty, your own rusalka blood watering with crimson these destroyed foundations— But are you in the right? What keeps you alive? Your dresses hide lace underwear: when like a blackening scaffold 162 Night in the Trenches you rose beside your walls, when on our crowded Maidenfield you tied a bandage on the wounds of war." The face of the Mongolian East, where streams of blood contort the Slavic features, stands powerful and cruel: a brand-new icon—yours, Ο Time! Damn, what a dream! All quiet in the trenches . . . the stars above us burn. Will tomorrow bring a battle? Not likely. The burial mound of pagan Rogneda still guards her virgin bones. The feather-grasses move their fronds and you appear, a brazen monster armored up in plates of steel. Red Cossacks from Kuban upon the hills. Like clockwork, see, it creeps along upon its armored belly, trampling human beings! creeps like a lizard from before the Flood along the linked lines of the Red trenches. Trees fall with a smash in its path, entrenched outposts are nothing to it, and the noisy machine gun chattered, spitting up its stomach at the sight. It looked as if a bear was squatting above the anthill of the trenches, invincible, scooping out bright honey with his powerful enormous paws. And the trophy of the strong—death's bed— and the groans of the weak: Oh God! My God! Again the creature's scaly back caught light and then the desert seemed again the way it had been—but the faithful machine gun like a bell-man, echoed the prayers of a requiem Mass. Borne on by faithful friends, the cavalry flew across the flatlands. 163 Longer Poems Like guests, old friends returning home, spear points entered shrieking bodies. And the horse leaps forward . . . See the yellow teeth grin! And over and over a copper crucifix beats blow on blow upon the corpse. Like basher-boys: "Smash their faces!" sounded from the White encampment. His wound convulses, all on fire, the bullet's path lies through the Virgin's medal. Upon his shimmering stallion the cavalry commander rides. His steed's a strider. Behind the front-line palisades the enemy's cavalry waits— his chant comes ringing through the morning light: "Zhuravel zhumvka, zhur zhur zhur . . ." And the stone slabs of the stupid women, a longing for the twang of a hometown guitar, for the structure of wheels and spokes, for the kinship of fairy-tale rusalkas, then out of nowhere, a voice singing: "Got a pound of paper money, gonna get myself a bride, gonna stick my saber to her, then across the fields I'll ride. Now it's rape and loot and killing as we march through fields of rye, stick a lilac in your rifle, kiss the girls and say goodbye. Gonna get ourselves a grave where the feather-grasses wave." That's the song that someone sang. An old soldier growled: Wasn't their grandfathers' fate enough for them? "Well, all you're gonna get yourselves— 164 Night in the Trenches the old folks know, it happened once before— is a pile of pine-plank coffins. But we'd be better off at home planting beans, or framing up new houses, planting cabbages or rye, instead of here with guns and knives." Then out of the Scythian burial mound came the sons of ghosts gone by, they herd their horses before them, tangling their hair in the horses' manes, threatening, shaking their long-handled lances. They hack the foe-folk with their swords, then suddenly all race to one side, their ancestral war-whoop echoing across an amplitude of boundless grass. The horse-charge shakes with bellowing. Some leapt upon the horse's croup and wrestling, swaying, grappled with the foe; others with a gripping fist made fast a horsetail, coursing behind; their feet still stuck in stirrups, while their faces bit the grass. Then quick, inspired by former bravery, again they leap upon the horse or snatch the wounded in their arms. The scratch and rustle of a pack of wolves . . . A bent and withered pine-tree branch still bears a rugged nest . . . So Moscow-snow dissolves like foam before the fires of spring. When you are full of tears, Old Moscow, when you weep, remember: those tears will wake some day as waves upon a distant sea. But the Black Sea laboring to reach the pearl-gray Valdai hills stretches its arms toward Moscow. 165 Longer Poems The long spears clash together and the voices of the sea resound. They sound among the stalks of rye, in the disappearing bullet's whine, at the moment when the sharp knives shine. The waves of the sea are deceivers: their roar repeats the deep sea-swell, gray as seagulls diving for their prey unrecognized by anyone. They are dressed in the helmets of men. The sea's hostility, ocean's white avalanche, floods forever from these fair-haired savages, this always innocent horde. Three maidens of the steppe stood guard, to warn the traveler this is ancient land. Priestesses of the ecstatic wasteland, but the arms of the stone goddess clasp the severe stone of her legs like granular hands pressed against the severe legs, and dully with dead eyes, secret witnesses of ancient acts, the stone women watch. Stone beholds the work of man. "Where is the bowstring made from maidens' hair, the bending bow as tall as any man, the cloth-yard arrows, birdtail fletched, the warrior women I knew when young?" The question came from the barely moving mouth of the goddess-stone. And the black snake coiled in a ring hissed at some mysterious presence. Vacant, dull—the animal face of the steppe-goddess stared. Why do the harsh hands of the warriors 166 Night in the Trenches snatch the dead by the temples and Red-besotted regiments fly with delight in the chase? Bitter stone witness, tell us— what follows war? Typhus. [1919: τ 275] ιό7 Lightland And the fortified centers of world trade where poverty's fetters shine in the many-paned windows, the day will come when you turn them to ashes, and the look on your face is a rapturous vengeance. You who were weakened in ancient struggle and argument, whose torments are figured in the constellations above you, shoulder these barrels of gunpowder, persuade the palaces to shatter to rubble and blow in the wind. And when the pillar of smoke dies down in the fiery glow of the flames, let blood stream from your hands in place of your banners and throw down the gauntlet, a challenge to destiny. And if the conflagration proves accurate and a sail of smoke billows up in the blue, enter the burning tent, draw from its holster the fire you conceal at your heart. While ill-gotten profits slumber their nighttimes in crystal cases, in the Tsar's particular palace explosive devices are all the rage, to say nothing of clever feminine intrigues. When even God denies your life, slave of the rich, remember your knife! Someone has murdered your childhood, girl: strangle him with your hair when next you see him because you were barefoot and helpless and went to him asking for help and he kicked you aside. Creep like a cat, keep yourself clean, untouched by soft pawings at midnight. When you are sick, go kiss him on the mouth and breathe your disease through the laugh on his lips. Your hands are unused to steel? 168 Lißhtland Run to the rabid watchdog and kiss his slavering mouth, then go kiss your enemy, kiss him until he dissolves. Slave of the rich, go laugh in his face. You are poor and have nothing, and poverty tears you, you crawled like a have-not at a king's feet, and then you kissed him. You are ailing and sick with a great hurt and must open the fiery gates of dawn: Tear out the dripping beard of Aquarius, and the Dog Stars, whip them yelping from heaven. And from this moment on, let Lobachevskian space stream from the flagpoles of night-loving Petrograd. The Time of the Takers is over; the Might of the Makers parades; Γ has fallen; Μ occupies the stage. These are the high priests of LIGHTLAND, and "Workers of the World" is their banner's device. This is the havoc that Razin unleashed, come home at last to roost in the clouds over Petrograd! And its mad rush is the theoretical system of Lobachevsky, and Lobachevskian space itself. Let Lobachevsky's curves descend as ornaments over all the city, let them rest like strongbows on the sweating shoulders of Universal Labor, and the lightning will wail, complaining and crackling, when it finds itself harnessed, condemned to a life at hard labor. And gold, done up tightly in bars and portfolios, will lie untouched, with no one to buy it. Death will sit counting the hour of death, the hour when he will come again, And the prophets of earth in their constant appearance will reform all alphabets, wiping out unwanted letters. The day when winter died in early spring, workers in Hungary stretched out their hands to us! Workman, raise up the fortress of what you are worth, let its building blocks be only the beats of your heart. Then raise your glass, clink it in the face of starry Virgo, and remember the melodious songs of the mind 169 Longer Poems and the voices of strong men long since vanished. Then leave, go out to the clang of one sword on another. Let the linden tree send her ambassadors to the high seats of governments everywhere, and there will be no one left to desire those long-gone occasions of sinful passionate ecstasy. Let kings make much of the carved fa9ades of their palaces, though the carving is cheap and vulgar and tasteless— in the same way, see how often the venerated crutch, holy relic of a famous saint, becomes a fafade for highway robbery! When even God denies your life, slave of the rich, remember your knife! Move ever onward, you convicts of earth, move ever onward, you squeezed-out survivors of hunger strikes, see how one man sweats and labors in the dusty field, while his sharp hustling neighbor snaps up the harvest! Move ever onward, you convicts of earth, move ever onward, you who are free to starve, and you others, you kings of commerce, your eyes are left you for one thing only—for weeping. Move ahead—there, that way—toward a time of universal health. Let us fill up our words with sunlight, making them glow, and pull down thrones, and hurl them like fallen idols, like Perun, to be pieces of wood adrift in the Dnieper. Soar, you great constellations, star-clustered humanity, fly farther and deeper into space, and melt all forms of human speech into one unified conversation of mortal men! In the heavens shot through with stars like the chest of the Tsar, the last Romanov, some homeless lounger, tattered by thinking, friend to all that's un- holy, will hammer away at a forge, refashion that star-cluster. And you dawdlers, deceivers, you pitiful madmen, you drunkards, scatter across the winds, part of the past like chopping blocks and the wedding rings of the last kings. Your textbook twitter bores us, stories of black swans, how once a black swan dwelt far to the south— 170 Lijjbtland but now a swan with scarlet wings flies on the waves in a blizzard of bullets. It is time for you tsars to keep your appointment: your time is up, your scaffold is appointed. And the secret every army keeps is this: when the bride arrives, her dress is crimson red. Let the last kings on earth, overcoming their anger, smile and stand like statues, stones against the glow that shines from the graves of dawn. You gave wings to constellations, a rush of infantry against the sky. You set depth charges in the riverbed of time and locked up kings in cages in the zoo. There he sits now, the last surviving king on earth, behind the iron monotony of bars on a cage, next-door neighbor to a horde of monkeys, downing the fatal vodka of his poisonous thoughts. In a swirl of bluish smoke you have drowned all thrones, their glitter, their glory, their pomp and their majesty, and one last tear rolls down his cheek, child of an unseen visitation of thoughts. Capital cities rear up on their hind legs, trampling great hooves upon the low-lying places, their living inhabitants swarm in the streets and advance to assault the thrones. With the sound of thunder, graves split open and thrones come tumbling down. The sea will remember, will always recount in its awful threatening language, how a castle of lace was the prize of a girl who won it by dancing in front of a throne. The sea will remember, will always recount in its thundering racket and roar that the palace was once a prize for a dance danced for the assassin of a hundred nations. Limestone carved into fretwork lace on a palace for their majesty's girlfriend. Now the dancer's private residence 171 Longer Poems beats out a call to arms that arouses the mind. You remember a time of thunder and threat by night; you were walking, stalking the enemy's odor, and heaven looked down at you, whistling, blaring its madness in howling horns. The sign of the hangman writ large in the heavens. Once again the crack and beating of thunder while someone who smiled a divinely idiotic smile looked down upon earth's conflagrations. Germany's G fell away from its name, likewise the R dropped from the name Russia. And I myself beheld the rise and extension of L in the smoke of the fires on Midsummer's Eve. Raise your bow above the expanse of storm clouds, above the violin of Planet Earth and assign a black name to the firemen who come to extinguish the fire of intellect. Remember, a tsar is only a panhandler now, and a king is a poor relation. Move ever onward, rabble of freedom, let Freedom's hammer fall! You are fodder for cannons—meat, nothing more, warfare's scabby corpse—at least until across the waves of universal dancing the hopak-hurricane descends. You hear? "Banzai!" is dead, and "Hoch!" and "Hurrah!" both are silent. Raise your shout to the red god, direct at him your groan of anger. Decorate the summit of Mont Blanc with the all-knowing skull of Hiawatha. His land is innocent, and part of the encampment of Humanity. The Valparaisans scramble for doubloons; rubles have overwhelmed the Hondurans. Your task, you madman, is simply to assure the drench of your knife blade in blood. Hatred is the good word nowadays; bloody yourself in its actions. 172 Ltghtland You records of bygone centuries, hurl yourself into the sea of thoughts and swim. Strike up the band again, light of dawn, and call down battalions, defenders of freedom, if ever again the people whose kaiser is iron move out like iron, like an iron river. Where the Volga says "I" the Yangtze-Kiang says "love" the Mississippi answers "the" Old Man Danube adds "whole" and the Ganges-waters finish "world." The river idol in his courses marks the edges of the green world. Everywhere always, ever and everywhere, all for one, forever and everywhere! Our shouts will rise up to the stars! The language of love drifts over the world and the Song of Songs longs to be sung in heaven. The blue expanses of ocean peer through their depths, their own blue eyes, and in diagrams of destiny I will decipher the reason that scarlet lightning shines. Wars have pecked your eyes from your eyesockets— go, you trouble-filled blind men, seek for yourselves such power and authority that your fathers have reason for savage rejoicing. I have seen such trains of blind men, their arms outstretched to those who call them family, the doing of dealers·—wheelers, stealers!— all testimonials to the filthy workings of evil. Wars have torn the legs from your bodies— but Siberian forests are sprouting with crutches— and after all, perhaps God will lend a hand to help you cross the vast expanse of Russia's fields. Shuffle along through the night, you skeletons, on pathways cut between these palaces of glass, and let the wits among you coin their cleverness into the booming bell-song of the dead. For the last time now, over the city Krupp has built, 173 Longer Poems which rustles with the bones of slaughtered armies, the corrupted soul of the golden corpse spreads itself out in every direction. You have crammed yourself into these prisons, where even the stairways and handrails run in harmonious accord, and the skyscrapers neighbor the clouds, but all of it heavy with smoke and anxiety. A thick layer of dust covers the iron kaiser's cohorts. The fingers of the past bit into Adam's apple, digging, convulsed by what has come to pass. But you have known the strings of ruptured muscles, tied up your bleeding sores with a shirt; you know the terrifying song they sing: your groans—or are they howls of torment? And now for the first time appears on earth: the face of Razin, sculpted by Konenkov, like a holy book on the Kremlin, and Shevchenko, who no longer fears the day— warrior of freedom, barefoot wanderer. See there, those horses galloping by? A herd of turbulent freedoms, smashing cast iron. Drive your knee upon his chest try to be strong, however you can! And you, wind, with your pockmarks of iron, go whispering, "Lord, Lord." You showed the god of nighttime the ancient sores your fetters caused—• find a better class of idiots!-— and you showed the sky the road. The hand of earth seals off the mouths of those whom cannon shot has buried. Carry into the temple of slander the wind of those who burn in chorus. The man whose neck is strangled by gold's implacable fist, cursing with the strength of a hammer, is familiar with the speech of lightning. 174 Lißhtland A team of six horses, their front-bending heads, no longer transports noblemen; the continent flares like a star from one end to the other with a fire more ardent than flame. And there! Those icons of freedom, the bright shining eyes of Qurrat al-'Ayn, wreathed in secretive eyelashes. A Slavic girl, her light-brown hair in braids, tearing petals from the water-flowers, dissolves the sayings of Tsong-kha-pa in the innocent morning dew. Where the scarlet beef of battles lies still smoking from the fusillade, everlasting Freedom marches, in her hand a banner boldly flying, and the skyscrapers drown in the smoke of an explosion set off by the hand of God, and the palace of profit and salesmanship is hidden in smoke rings and grayness. The city that snapped the carriage-poles of God as they wheeled in a sudden turn has quieted now; unease seems barely perceptible in the quiver of its horse's mouth. The city that boasted once of its ancient Tightness and rose strong in the beauty of its laughter— in its eyes the most heavenly horsehead chews on the steel bit and the bridle. Cruel always, and eternally sad, caress your throat with a heavy razor. From heaven's case of drawing instruments you chose the hurly-burly of revolt, and it will fall across the anvil beneath the hammer's blow—God's own design! You have pounded horseshoes onto the feet of God to make him serve you as a faithful slave and fastened tightly fitting fetters on the raven summits of the sky. It makes its horse's head look human, 75 Longer Poems entangled in the mane of man's intelligence. Its eyes blinded with the splash of whitewash, the chalky city strikes tinder, sets fire. Who is the horseman, who the horse? Is this a city, or is the city God? But the clattering racket of beating hooves calls out for galloping, for a great wild rush! To the land where Izanagi reads Monagatori to Perun, and Eros sits on Shang-ti's knees, and the topknot on the god's head looks like snow, a lump of snow; the land where Amor embraces Maa Emu and Tien and Indra sit in conversation; where Juno and Quetzalcoatl adore Correggio and admire Murillo; where Unkulunkulu and Thor with folded arms play peaceful games of chess beside Astarte, who worships Hokusai— go there, go there! Like owls ranged along a blood-stained perch the towering palaces go up in flames. Wherever labor finds it easy walking and rebel drills and wedges beat the ore, there deep as all rebellions shine the Virgin Mother's cast-iron eyes. Again the cattle low within the cave, and the innocent child takes suck from the she-goat's udder and beasts and people crowd about the Divine Birth of women for today. I see horse-freedom and equal rights for cows. Again years flow together as they did in ancient tales, the scales have fallen from mankind's eyes. And one who knows no dawnlight is wiser than a horse conflagration in indigo darkness, he shelters the horses' ambassadors 176 Lißhtland at Volkonsky's great house on Ostozhenko. And once again, sectarians austere as Arctic oceans cover the nighttime triangles of the face of Freedom, closed over with stars. From flowers of May to April showers the year is one long labor for us all, and yet they say the gods are kind, that every workday has a right to rest. Side by side from dawn's first light you gather sheaves beside your wife. And what repayment from the man who owns the grain? "Peasant, much obliged." From sowing-seed to stubble-field, until the first snow covers all traces of the path, an army dressed in white, armed with sickles, binds up the laborious sheaves. You are bound around with the landlord's ropes, you are gentled by whips in the hands of priests, you pant like an ox—until the perspiration on your shoulders burns. Chew your chunk of moldy bread, your cruel bread- how long already?—until you are freed by the force of earthly rack and ruin. Fill the drinking bowls of Freedom up with a song of exultant poison. Freedom goes on, it moves, it grows like the conflagration of the universal soul. There will be armor, a breastplate of time on the chest of international labor, and the reins of power will be transferred to number, understood as farmsteads. There will come a final struggle between the angry ruble and the hungry rabble. Rejoice, you edible grains, in brotherhood with the hammer in the worker's hand! And let the plague-breath ink cover the blank pages of existence, the breathing of destiny has transformed 177 Longer Poems the lands that wear Freedom's garment. Then will the beautiful angle of labor's earthly sail catch the wind and you will fly, immortally sunburnt, blessed young man, to that land! A final assault on the pestilence of gold! Come join us, you thieves of heavenly eyesockets, you best and you brightest, come learn the trick of muzzling the mouth of the plague-beast! And let the chatter of birds now echo in the bright blue heavens of springtime, tomorrow the scaffold will tumble you down into dreams beyond all human dreaming. This is the surf of humanity pounding away at the cliff-face of death. The Russians no longer have a land to call their own. Where London carries its trading to China, we, the creators of what's to come, adjusting the clouds like a Panama hat, we ignore their insolent palaces. For us, their ashes do not count. We have followed the path of rebellion, and our losses at last are but little. The Presidents of Planet Earth advance in a group, ready for anything. For thirteen years we Futurians have kept alive, at heart, in sight, before our eyes, in our retreat at Krasnaia Poliana, the burning spark of Nosar's revolution. Upholders of the banners of all freedoms, guiding the galloping ride with your bridle, fly fast along the highway of blue, go be a part of this superhuman campaign. Bury the remains of time and drink from the starry glass of freedom and upon the heavy ingot of the sun let the clanging giant's hammer of assembly ring! You hoist a sail above the constellations, 178 Lißhtland so earth can sail its strength and wildness into the highest tier encircling the world, and the bird of stars remains as it was before. Sweep from the face of earth the filth of commerce and level the castles and fortresses of trade, then use the stars as building blocks and let grass bells ring in the streets of Capital cities. And in the great grillework of mirror-windows, you night-bird wrapped in a glow of blue, spin yourself a cocoon of filaments; let the silkworm mark the path of your flight. And the giant sounds of nighttime beat upon the earth as on some vast alarm, when those mirrors reflect their echoes outward and the mesh of capitals spreads its encampments. When the fleece of fields is combed by a rake of clouds of deep nocturnal color, the birds of the air will pause in midflight to steal the grain as it falls from the fertile skies. Early in springtime the wizard of wings will cut the clouds in his flying machine, and the plowman will hang there, high over the earth, sowing his spring grain with an aerial hand. His harnesses span heaven and all its clouds, his harrows help the sprouting fleece of earth, and everywhere the stalks of rye spring up, tended by herds of horses in the sky. He does not simply pray: Gimme a good and heavy harvest, God, amen! but trusts his crops to the power of equations, and carries a series of numbers in his heart. And their millstones grind out flour made of edible earth, nocturnal windmills there by the steep ravines, wearily turning their tired wings. Words of knowledge form themselves into lightning flashes, speak out loud to an audience of rejoicing young people. Thus are textbooks transported through clear air to learning centers, one in every village. 179 Longer Poems Search beyond the downpour of grains of rye, for one who cut the East in two, where tanker-trains go north, transporting the nourishing broth of lakes. Where once the landlord's fishing rod jiggled and his children lazily sailed their boats, waves are now roasted to feed the capital cities, and fumes of intoxication rise from vodka lakes. Nightriding steam-engines carry lake-soup, vast kettles of it; the stuff is frozen into ice-blue blocks and brought to human eyes. Behold the sea, slipcovered in cragged peaks of glass; a plume of heavy smoke arises from it, and hangs in the air like a twist of some god's hair. A structure casts its shadow on the water and the palace of the seas arises, ready— a troika of whales sets the sea afoam as it carries the castle of waters onward. The lakemaker, mirror of a wilderness of clouds, finds that it has the power to fly. The bard who sings the uprising of writing seeds workbenches as he sows plowed fields, and a band of youths, all of them sworn to the destruction of all languages— I know you have no trouble guessing their names!— march in parade, and flowers crown their heads. And you march too, a sheepskin carelessly thrown across your daring shoulders, full of wildness, marching to light the bonfire that signals the inception of changes in earthly existence. In love with wandering, he reached for a row of numbers, as if they were a walking stick, and squaring the root of minus ι cleverly noticed the rusalka it contained. He discovered the double-visaged root of one who has nothing, never had, in order to perceive in the land of the mind the rusalka hidden at the roots of the tree. 180 Lightland The pearls of the Pechora burn above us through a headdress of distant stars— there's your direction, go, you heaven-helper, exalted by the force of your lever-device. We will form bucket brigades to transport Neva-water to extinguish the Dog Stars where they blaze. Let a train lay a scar of soot across the blue as it flies along the branching forest network. Let the heavens shake and stagger at your heavy footfall. Brace up the constellations with log-beams, and fasten the valleys together with an axial grid. Crawl like an ant across the face of heaven, explore the cracks and fissures of the firmament. Blue wanderer, snatch fast at those prizes, those blessings that were already promised you. The savage force of that lever-device has allowed this descendant of midnight storms to set piledrivers, power drills, sledgehammers in place among the nighttime constellations. Brace your ladder against the face of heaven, set a fireman's helmet upon your head, and climb, scramble, over the walls of the moon through the carbon smoke of corrosive fire. Set the hammer for a sign in the heavens, spin the sun in a circle a turn or two and see—where the east burns with a red glow, set in motion its cog-wheels and gears. You replace one clock with another, you pay for your supper with a smile; whenever the value of labor must be measured, you place the number of heartbeats on the scale. The sharp-eyed attractions of profit and gain, inequality and heaps of money— the great prime movers of the distant past— the poet of today will exchange them for poems. A masterful siren will brighten the silences of the great desert, and the train, swift envoy, will pass out of sight 181 Longer Poems more glittering than the crowned constellations. You wind electric coils from the very earth, whose wires are conductors for storms alone, and you praise the gentle shepherdess who sits by the brook among the damsel-flies. And there will be equal signs between the hours of labor and the hours of rest, and the sacred iron rod of perished power will be entrusted entirely to the voice of song. And even idleness, the mother of invention, will rank as labor's equal, will grasp the crowbar of authority with the otherworldly force of ecstasy, and your flight, forever forward, will be followed later by those who move limply as even the traffickers in truth begin to recognize the booming voice of justice. Trace out a path on the shores of the sea of slander, tensing the soles of your feet as you go! Encased in a shell of steel, an eaglet will fly, trailing its crimson wings; only a moment before the flame of a match, like the tongue of a calf, licks it alive. Survey the world with love, not chalk, draw us diagrams of what is sure to come, and Fate, descending through air to your bedside, will stoop to listen, a sentient ear of rye. [1920,1921: Τ 281] 182 Night Raid Get 'em out. It's this one here, it's thirty-eight. Ready, men. We're goin' in. Kick it in! Yessir! Harder! Officers, please! Come right on in . . . We're Marines, lady, not the cops. Take a better look. Anyway, you lie. You don't ever want to try to fuck over a sea-soldier. This apartment thirty-eight? This is number thirty-eight. Were you boys looking for a party? (Her head shakes, she's really old.) OK, lady, what's your name? What do you say, lady, show us the way, lady, we gotta check this out. You just keep calm, lady, no harm, lady, we're just checkin' for Whitey. One of you guys watch the door— nobody there. Somebody check out the floor above. Buddy, over here! 183 Longer Poems Yes sir! Come on, Marines, let's move it out! Grab 'em by the short hair. Sneaky bastards could be hidin' anywhere. The rowdy crowd of bootboys holstered their iron, grabbed what wasn't nailed down— they never played Whitey's fool. Listen, lady, move it, will ya? See this rifle? It can kill ya even though ya got gray hair. Where's your menfolks hidin'? Where you got your stash? Listen, lady, I'm an old sea-wolf and I'm after cash. I smell Whitey, lady, got a nose can smell 'em and I got a whiff of Whitey right now. You smell that, brother? Gonna get us something White tonight. Sure as shootin'. Here's everything I've got. You can take my pearls . . . How much is there? . . . worth forty, fifty, maybe. Maybe buy us all a beer. Don't just stand there yakkin', grab the stuff, let's go! Time to blow. No one here. Grab your share, no time to spare, to sit around. Come on, boys, take the lady's toys, boys, 184 Night Raid and let's get back to base. Let's go, you sea-soldiers, move out as much as you can carry. Hey wait! Play a polka, lady, on your fancy piano; show this bunch of swabbies how a lady goes to town! (A Voice) Mama! Mama! Keep it shut, lady! Don't say a word! Whitey's not here, huh? You'll get yours for this tomorrow— Friend, I'm old. (Red, White, Blue-blood, who can tell them apart?) All I know is what I'm told. My hair is white. And I'm his mother. Bam! Bam! Gunfire, smoke! Stop! Where you headed, buddy boy? Drop your weapon! Both hands up! Shall I shoot the fucker, boys? OK, smart boy, up against the wall! That's right! That's the way! Well, look at baby's golden curls, hasn't even learned to shave! Over there beside the stove, Whitey. Strip. Let's see the kind of man you are. Sorry to interrupt your shore leave, fellows— sorry my shot went wild. The fucker's laughin' at us! Is that an insult, or just brave? 185 Longer Poems Shall I shoot the fucker, fellas? Going to blow my brains out, swabbies, celebrate your nißht ashore'? And everybody says that you're theßoodßuys— Everybody's right, goddammit! We're Marines, sea-soldiers, we can be nice if we feel like it. Don't want you watchin' this, lady. OK, boys, what'Il it be? Shoot the White bastard? But he's my son! Take off your shirt! Don't want holes in something someone else can use. You don't need clothes where you're goin'. Got no girls to impress when you're six feet under. Drop your trousers, buddy boy. Take it all off. That's the way. Hurry it up, you think we got all day? Later on, you can take your time. Where you're goin' you can rest forever. Mama, ßoodbye! I won't be back, don't leave the nißht lißht burninß. Here, kid, take these clothes away. Ready! Aim! So lonß, sucker! Thanks for the shot! Fire! In the People's name! Bam Bam Bam! Bam! Thanks for the shot? Pigeon's-egg size? Sparrow's-egg size? Who the hell cares? He's bought it now. Good-lookin' young fucker. Too smart for his own good. 186 Night Raid Two more shots— one into the floor, and now one more at the sky! That's the way! Send the fucker packin'. We're Marines, we're the flying sea's soldiers, and we shoot back over our shoulders, our white-shirt shoulders, our navy-blue shoulders. We sight 'em we fight 'em we meet 'em we beat 'em. I got blue bell-bottoms and my gun goes dancin' in my hand and I don't wear fancy, all I got is the navy-blue sea around my shoulders and my tight white shirt. Mother of Christ. Hey, man, whatta we do now? Carry him out? Take him along? It don't look right to leave him lying here. Fuck him! It's not our job. Mama! Now what the—wow, will you look at that! Seventeen, and look, her hair's turned white! And dark eyes, full of fire. You Marines bring the snow ashore— half an hour and my hair's gone white! If you don't like staring at an old lady, don't look! Just turn around! Vladimir! Volodya! Vladimir! Mama! They took off his clothes! Calm down, girlie, dead men don't need clothes. Can't embarrass a dead man! You men, stand easy! Watch your mouth! Bastards! Making jokes about a man you've killed! Listen, lady, see this shirt? 187 Longer Poems I'll never be able to afford one like it, why shoot it full of holes? Custom-made. And see? No bloodstains. A step on the stairs, the squad returns, a hand on a shoulder. Got another one. Hiding in the attic. Squeezed off a couple of rounds. No problem! Way to go! Where's my mother? Listen, Snowbird, don't blame us your hair turned white. You had a snowfall here, upstairs, before us Marines came along, before our sea-wind sang its song. You were stuffin' your mattress with machine guns. But what the hell, we'll forget it. It's just an early spring, that's an apple-blossom snowstorm on your head. Get a grip on, girlie. It's autumn. Time for leaves to fall. Not the greatest funeral wreath, but still— Knock it off! Buddy, why you want to bother her? Fuck her! OK, Snowbird, up against the wall! Where? Here? Like this? Go ahead, I'm ready! OK, blow her fuckin' brains out! Stop! No more blood, you hear me? It's OK, baby, you can turn around. Blood? You call this blood? Red blood from these Whiteys? They dribble piss, man, piss and shit, pollute our water everywhere! 188 Night Raid He must be her brother. Maybe he's her husband. Vladimir! Mama! Don't forget to yell for Papa, sweetheart. Say, where the hell is Papa anyway? Gone with the rest of the thoroughbreds, racing to get out of the country? Is Papa the odds-on favorite to get his ass across the finish line? OK, sweetheart, go to your room. And stay there. You're no sight for sore eyes, baby, so relax. We're gonna do a little drinkin' here tonight. Don't cry, sister, just beat it. This is no place for civilians. We got sisters, too, back home, just hometown girls, not hot-shot city sluts like you. Get out of here, old woman. Deal with this your own way, we'll leave you alone. We got the time, they got a mirror, I'm gonna give myself a shave. The mirror's crooked, and my face ain't none too straight. Come on, you guys, let's heave this junk out the window. Nobody needs it any more. What we want here is the sea, great waves like the sea, and a few seagulls. Fuck this mirror! There! A hard left, right in its kisser! Watch it, you cut yourself! Looks like you broke a bottle of red ink. A fightin' man, cut with a piece of mirror! Sometimes a mirror can be cruel, can look 189 Longer Poems too close. Nobody wants to be shown up. Somebody turn down the lights. Gimme your handkerchief, buddy. Vladimir! Volodya! Look, lady, he's dead! He died tonight! Just up and died! He can't hear you, He's a lump on the floor! Too bad for poor Vlad. What the hell is this thing? Some tinkle-toy to keep rich White girls entertained? She sits there nights and dreams about her boyfriend, plays herself a happy little tune. The keys are black and white. White follows black and black follows white as day follows night. Any of you guys play this thing? Yeah, I can bang out a beat with the butt of my gun. Hey you guys help us shove it over here! Now we'll have some fun. Slam-bam, sing it, shout it, and then a faint complaint, like a puppy left whining out in the yard. Then a roar and a rumble of cannon-thunder and the echo of somebody laughing, a watery snicker, a rusalka laughing. They crowd the keyboard. Sound of strings. Strings go ha-ha, snickering strings. Then a gun-butt beat! 190 Night Raid Beat-beat-butt-butt! Sea-storm laughter! Sea-soldier laughter! Fat-fist hurricane harries the keyboard! Pow! Hand grenade in the enemy trenches! Down in their dugouts, the homeboys hassle the Holy Mother's holiday. Their White bodies go to fill a certain need, then the worms. Two changes of shirt, one smaller than the other. Two big eaters, just one dish. God, what a noise it makes, taking a nosedive to doom! The strung-out metal jangles, jangles on and on. Hammer it harder, buddy, make it hum like a hive when the honeyman comes, collecting his combs. Wham! Pow! Atsa way, boys, that's music for Marines! Bash out the beat, boys, bang, bang! Break it in, break it up! Beat it in, beat it up! Bang bang, beat it down blow it up! That's the way us sea-scum operate! The big bad bang boys! The fat cats will pay when the party's over. And this pile of shit, this big box with the wails and whines out the window! Crashing down to the street below! Wake up the neighborhood, way to go! That's the kind of job for a sea-soldier. The sea gets rough, right? That's the job for us, 191 Longer Poems we're not just sailors, not fiickin' failures, we're Marines! So fling it to fuck-all, Ba-baam! Slam! Bam! ICraakl Kraak! Bababoom! Vavavoom! Now the sea is getting higher now the waves are getting wilder, now the storm is at its height. Sea power! Pow! Did it hit anybody? Nope. Just three little insects out to take a look. That piano went bust, sure raised some dust. Where's your rifle, kiddo? See the sparrow on the rooftop opposite? Think you can pick him off? Just watch. Ready? P-toing! Get him? Got him. Shot him dead. Where's that old lady gone to? Lady, you still here? Round us up some eats, lady, roast beef and booze, lady, and a clean tablecloth underneath it. Flowers! Glasses! We wanna have a party, just like you White folks. Hustle up now, you rustle up the good stuff. Got any steak? Get a move on, before we improve on your fuckin' face. We're gonna eat, boys, 192 Night Raid we're gonna gorge, boys. Chomp down, chow down, feed our fuckin' faces, fellas. She's gonna lay it on us good and we'll chew till our jaws hurt. Only something stinks. Something dead is starting to stink. Vladimir! Listen, boys, she wants Vladimir! She doesn't want us! Gotta give the young lady some time— Wait a minute, baby, what about us? Hey baby, how about me! Hey lady, how about me! Hey there, honey, how about me? Meeeeow! What a fuckin' laugh. Listen to him whine, like a fuckin' piece of pussy. Knock it off, you guys. Have a little respect for the dead. What about the tinkle-box? You clubbed it good before it hit the ground. That bang-box sure made music on the way down. Sang out, rang out, rang like a bell, flapped like a dead bird and flew all to hell. That's the kind of stuff happens when the sea gets rough. Hey listen, they had a sign out front says: "Please knock," one of our guys wrote on it and now it says: "Please fuck," right by the dead man's door, where his sister can see it. Or maybe 193 Longer Poems she's his widow. Ha-ha-ha. What an asshole. Still, she's got a lot to weep for, that young widow-lady with her hair gone white. We're the wind, we blew that snowstorm over her head. The wind from the sea. Marines are sea-soldiers. That's us, boys. Wherever we go we bring sorrow and snow. We are the sea! We are the sea! Count up the bodies we leave behind. The drunken-sailor sea, the tattooed-dagger sea, the pirate sea, the unquiet sea, a storm of red flannel, the unquiet sea, the Pugachev Sea! I got a nose for Whitey, smelled the bastard a mile away. Got us something White tonight. And the bastard tried to fight! Mama's boy hiding in the closet. He fires, he misses, he laughs. So I say: "OK, smart boy, stop!" And he says: "Gonna blow my brains out?" So I say: "Goddam right!" Bam! Bam! Bam! And the way he tosses his head and laughs, like he was askin' what's the price of somethin' we were selling. 194 Nijjht Raid Like we were in business. Right, we're in business, no need to be nice, we all wind up alike— and nobody kicks the bucket twice. What the fuck. It's just his luck. "Goddam right," I say. "We're Marines, sea-soldiers, we can be nice if we feel like it." Bam! Bam! Bam! That's the way it happened, boys— There's the young guy there, "Gonna blow my brains out?" "Goddam right," that's what I tell him. Bam! Bam! Bam! Smoke! Scorched the air. And look at him lying there with his golden curls, till his sister came and kissed him goodbye. "Bye-bye, baby, Time for beddy-bye." Hey kid! Little girl! Where you goin'? Just to put the cat out. Hold it right there! Gimme that cat I'll put her out. Out the fuckin' window! What's your name, honey? Missy. Pussy'd be better! Your table is ready, officers. The old lady stands there, straight as a pine tree. You can tell she's the mother 195 Longer Poems of Vladimir. Her eyes are hard. Roll out the barrel, boys, it's six o'clock and time to party! Pour out the good stuff, buddy boy! Let's get this off our minds. Drink it down, you Marines. Live it up, you Marines. Harder, faster! Raise a few waves! Let's hear the sound of the sea, the drunken sea! "And the pirate chieftain feasted as he drank his liquor down . . . drank it down!" This is the life, boys! Sit down, you guys, we got ourselves a party, and the wine is gonna flow till dawn. "Roll out the barrel, and we'll all fall down!" You wanna smoke? I wanna light! Gimme a light, goddammit, mine's gone out. Little by little it just went out. 'Samatta, Pops, you give it up? He don't say shit. Just sits there dreamin'. The old man keeps to himself, dug down deep in the dumps. With his head in the clouds. So what? We got the booze we wanted— oceans of vodka, a whole sea-full, so God can have the clouds. We won't fight him for that. There's a picture of God on the wall there and another one here on my chest, nailed up, crown of thorns and all, picked out in blue ink on my skin— that's what sea-soldiers do. 196 Nijfbt Raid The one on the wall's got a candle burning— a better smoke than we got! Yeah, he sits there in the corner smoking and gives us the eye. I'd like to split him into splinters for the stove! Smash him to bits. Fuel for fancy fires. Fuck his baby-blues, he's got a come-on like a girl's! God's face is a girl's face, only he's got whiskers. Got a little beard hangs down ends in two points like the twilight muddle of sheep herded along a lake, like a rain at night. His eyes are blue as the sky before dawn, serene and all-knowing, austere and beautiful, tender with speech unspoken, they look down in silent reproach, the whole drunken bunch of us, killers of saints, the whole damn mess of us, killers of saints. Look out, he'll come down and start screwing around. Face to face, blink to blink, like the flick-flick of a lighter. His eyes are dark as heaven, there's an all-knowing secret that breathes in his image, lakes of blue thought! "You wanna blow my brains out?" Blow my brains out, girl-god, you got them seven bullets left. With those beautiful baby-blues? Thanks, really appreciate 197 Longer Poems your letters and cards. Marines! Marines! He says he will! He bats and bats his baby-blues like a bird flaps its wings. His eyes race right into my soul, they fly full speed, flapping and sounding and as chill as the gallows he looks at me with unrelenting cold. Wide open, staring like horror stories, his blue eyes fly like furious birds straight into my soul. Like two seabirds, enormous, dark blue as the storm, stormy petrels, prophesying the worst. The whoosh and wave of their wings full speed right through me! Bottoming right through my soul. Yeah . . . I'm drunk . . . And this is really happening . . . And I want him to kill me right now, right here on the tablecloth in the wine-slop and glitter of broken glass! You guys, you band of buddies, saint-killers all of you, in your white shirts with sea-blue bands, your sailor pants, bell-bottom black, blue wings flying on your unbending necks like sea waves curling, like the white surf surging, like the blue breezes of the sea, the black swallowtail flutter on your necks, with the home-sign in front, your ship's name, Ο speech of Marines, our sea-soldier homeland, seagoing fortress, Ο name of the power of the state! You guys, you band of brothers, you convoy of sea-tramps, you stomp in blunt boots on deck and on shore, when the going gets rough you never waver— you're not even afraid of the sea. Listen to me now, hear what I say— 198 Nißht Raid I wanna fall dead, be killed on the spot, and the bullet that kills me, I want it to come from there, from that face on the wall, the sheen of a rifle from there, so I can shout at him: Asshole! Right in the face of my death. Like that kid shouted at me and laughed a cool laugh point-blank at the cartridge-clip of death. I burst into his life and killed him like some dark deity of night but he won, he beat me with his laughter that echoed with the glass-clink of youth. Now I want to conquer God with a laugh as strong as his, though my mind right now is black. And heavy. And hurts. God, I'm drunk! The old man's really shit-faced. Time to get back to the ship. Let's go! No, wait—I know I'm drunk, but listen . . . listen, let's have a smoke. I wanna have a heart-to-heart with you. You worked a lot of miracles— but you never got to be a father, did you? Forget how I know, I just know. You're a girl. With a beard. You go out in the fields and pick flowers to stick in your hair then you look at yourself in the water. Wanna know what you are— you're a blue-eyed country girl, a hick-town farmer's daughter with a curly beard. That's what you are. A fuckin' girl! You wanna little present, I'll bring you some perfume. Wanna go on a date? 199 Longer Poems Just tell me when, I'll show up with a shave and be polite and bring you flowers. And make eyes and sighs and maybe we'll go for a stroll on the boardwalk arm in arm, out on a date like the rest of them. Gimme a little kiss, baby. Have a little drink, baby. Call me baby, baby. . . . which art in heaven, baby. You guys, wait up, don't go, don't get so crazy! A mermaid with ferocious fog-bank eyes— Rusalka baby, drink it down! Buddies, buddy-boys, think we'll ever get together again? Will we be best buddies in the sweet by-and-by? Oh, I got a little bottle of homemade booze, gonna get God drunk, get rid of his blues, so bring on the bimbos and let's have a party! Gonna get to heaven and be right at home from three to six every afternoon. Onward, onward, only kids get scared, we're big boys now . . . and ain't that too damn bad! We'll drink the saints in heaven blind, we'll drink to our Odessa mama— we'll see if God's got a light and that's that. Nothin' more to say. Hey, buddy, you on the wall— Bottoms up!—Christ! His lips are moving, he's saying something, fuckin' fish-mouth talking, saying something, something terrible, a word, something terrible, guys, it's a terrible word— FIRE! —You're drunk!—No, we're all drunk! 200 Night Raid, See you in the sweet by-and-by! You wanna blow my brains out? The old lady! Fuckin' old bitch! You did it! You set the place on fire! Christ, the smoke! Help! We'll burn to death! I don't care. I'm cool. I'm even happy. I'll stand here, comb my hair, ready for inspection. Savior! You're an asshole! Come on! Chief, come on! We gotta break out! Use your rifle butts! It's an iron door! What'll we do? Choke on the smoke? Shoot me first! What'll we do? (The Old Woman appears) You can do whatever you please. [1921: τ 317] 20I The Chairman of the Cheka He comes in, laughs, takes a drag on his cigarette. He comes back again, another laugh. Again he takes a drag, smoke drifts from his little white rifle. He offers us a blueprint, shows how the suite of generations bears laws devised by rational intelligence, polygons of fate: "I think sometimes that I'm a paste-up job, one-half Nero, one-half Jesus Christ, I understand them both at heart; I realize I've got two souls. I was sentenced to be shot because they found I'd never sentenced anyone to die. As Death's provider, I'm a loss. I've never scratched my signature, remember, on anybody's death warrant, never put a nail in anybody's coffin. Of course I like to watch my clients sweat while I interrogate them, like to watch their shaky eyes. I've terrified the locals more than once with my exacting unemotional inquiries. A man would say farewell to all his family in his mind, see himself already in his grave, and then I'd say, without emotion, 'Citizen, you're free. You're free to go.' He'd back away like a rabbit, shivering, stammering, chewing his lip, not believing his luck, through the door and down the stairs, into a cab and home to his family. My own leave of absence came a month late, we had to travel by night." 202 The Chairman of the Cheka He stopped, his blue eyes smiled; again he gulped a heavy hit of Soviet smoke. "I never let things go as far as execution; I ransom them spiritually from death with the spiritual torture of interrogation. The shower room of death, you know, cleans the body and the soul. Yes, I could have been crucified in the name of the Cheka and hung on a cross before society's tribunal. Of course I could. Look, I used to study numbers myself, learned their secrets. I'm young, I'm only twenty-two, I learned to build steel bridges, learned that the law of generations is accurate, straighter than a steel bridge, learned how flamboyant Moscow burned— the angles come together here, and here they separate, see?" he said, raising his cold eyes to the sky. He didn't live alone. His wife was someone else's. She seemed to have stepped down from a wall painting in Pompeii, some curly-haired divinity of spring, ashes sprung to life again. Her clipped black curls (she'd recently been sick with typhus), her Hellenic springtime eyes, her body, exquisitely thin, transparent as wax, and her ardent face had conquered everyone. A very few were critical, called her "pushy," and "a whore." Her husband was a big-shot Soviet official. We lived in a communal room, it had five windows. I often watched them mornings, making love before he left. They lay on the floor beneath a black sheepskin coat, getting ready to go. Suddenly the blanket would heave, and from beneath it peered two pairs of eyes, one dark, one blue and slightly sleepy. Sometimes he'd lay his mad head in the girl's sweet lap and his pale head would suddenly seem an invalid's. Then she would gently stroke his golden hair, 203 Longer Poems it moved in the air, she played with it, ran her fingers constantly through it. Her dark eyes brimmed with love and with tears, proud of their passion. Sometimes they kissed fiercely, tenderly, wildly, in front of us all; their heads seemed to be one, his blue eyes and her dark ones seemed like day and night, two halves of twenty-four hours, a single ring. "You bastard, you're mine, you're my bastard, my fabulous bastard ..." She kissed his pale forehead, slapped him lightly in the face, caressed him with love-talk as she was leaving, tenderly fondled the golden hair that fell across his forehead. He smiled forlornly, tenderly, hung his head, and sat down. I saw the burning slap marks on his cheeks, heard the echo of that noisy kiss at the doorway, like a punctuation mark, and his sad, derisive, long-lingering glance— Two months ago he shot himself because of her, to prove to her "he wasn't fooling," and the bullet almost grazed his heart. He was only a hair's breadth from dying—a golden hair. He bore it all without complaining. Then he would look at us all with a look of intelligent scorn, unemotional, skeptical, and dead, but eternally and beautifully blue, like a goblet someone had emptied. It was the look a superior gives to subordinates. "Go ahead," she said, "you bastard, hit me!" and turned her cheek. Now and then his gray-haired mother came, her gray hair neatly parted, the same blue eyes, enormous, with the same mad blue fire in them, she smoked eagerly, caressed her son hurriedly, stroked his hand, laughing, whispering. She too played with his hair. From time to time she wept with reproaches of happiness: "You're such a silly boy, such a silly boy. Oh, my silly little boy, my silly little boy, you're so silly." 204 The Chairman of the Cheka Sometimes she shed quick tears and wiped her happy blue eyes beneath her white-gray hair, whispering for a long time with her sad, dry son. And he charmed his mother's mind with endless meanderings. He lied mercilessly about his wife's estate, her money; they were planning a long trip in a heated freight car to the front lines in Poland, a seven-day trip. He'd sneak out every night like a thief to arrange his leave papers; he evidently made two sets of them (he had an official stamp), and proudly said: "The Cheka almost arrested me." She was surrounded by dressmakers and endless wristwatches. I never knew exactly what went on, but every day there were ex- changes of gold watches through third parties. What for, or where they came from, I never knew. But there was a real flood of watches: she had organized a happy lavish trade. But he, Nero with blue eyes, interrogator, tormentor of solid citizens, exacting punishment from the Old World with the exquisite tortures of his blue eyes, the gleam in his blue eyes, it was he who hung on the Cheka's cross! And his golden curls fell from his broad forehead to the ground. He too came down to dwell amongst us and groveled in filth. He didn't shine against a bright sky Like a good boy, papa's favorite. And in the very bowels of his soul with a lyre in his hand he used to go each morning to watch Russia go up in flames, to watch a world on fire, collapsing into nothingness. "We'll turn the Old World upside down, and then . . ." to watch old Moscow, her temples of trade, her fortresses, burn by the law of what is happening today. Once more, a flesh-winged Savior known to all, 205 Longer Poems yielding up his beautiful flesh to spiritual nails, sarcastic, in the rough clothing of the official icon, a green uniform jacket and puttees. And afterward he overturns the throne of his nailed-up hands in order to go watch Rome burn, in a white sheet with a purple stripe, like a Roman emperor crowned with flowers, the purple streams of burning Russia, the Russia of lords and land- lords, of moneyed men, two cruel blue eyes, they rested on you like a flower, and relished the perfume of smoke and fire. He loved to go out in the streets of the burning world and say, "Good!" The worn-out charges of the Cheka lived In a basement protected by barred windows; from his seat behind an armored barrier, a sentry chased the passers-by away. And to one window, at the same time everyday, a white dog with black spots came to whine and howl to her master, to bark and howl mournfully at the windows of that sinister cellar. We used to go out walking together. She stood there, her white ear cocked, offering her paw, stood on three legs, anxiously, lovingly watching the window and barking softly— her master was somewhere in the dark basement. The name Saenko was notorious in the city. They told stories about him, how he said his favorite fruit was eyeballs— ". . . especially those I pluck myself," he added, smiling through his moustache. The Cheka building stood beside a great muddy slope at the edge of a deep ravine, 206 The Chairman of the Cheka its rear windows faced the slope. You couldn't hear the moans from there. They threw dead bodies out the window into the ravine. Chinamen buried them in waiting graves. Garbage pits were graves sometimes, and splinters driven under fingernails were decorations, signs of manhood. The Cheka's fortress stood at the dead end of a large street on the edge of town. Sinister stories hung all over it, that castle of death, there at the end of a street named after a great writer. One phrase describes it: silence speaks louder than words. "And what do you think of Saenko?" the chairman of the Cheka asked me carelessly, looking at me with his innocent blue eyes. [1921: Novyi mir 10 (1988), 149] 207 Cmcking the Universe Wonderworld 1 Student (he slams a book shut and closes his eyes): I am dreaming a strange dream: a little girl cups my nation in the palm of her hand, then tosses it into the void. It resembles a little red insect, a beetle wrinkling its weak and tattered wings. It is tiny and tired and close to death. Her mother from an open window calls: "You put that down and wash your hands, you hear?" "Oh mother I will," she says, "and see? It fell in the water, there by the window." Then she herself sits by the window, braids her hair and drinks her lemonade. The fall of my nation is near! Oh teacher! What a painful dream! The Older Man: All things are waves. We have left the crest, and wallow in a trough. When Lobachevskian space shone on our banner, when we began to perceive his transparent polygons in every living face and our poems decomposed like the flesh of the dead into the simplest of particles, and the poem-skull smiled the death of prophetic language leaving only the skull of rational language— 208 Cracking the Universe then things came close to the edge, and the keenest of men burned with foreknowledge. In the morning many voices sing on the rooftops. See how it rises, the sun of the downfall of the nation! Its first dark rays shine upon mountains and me, we are the burning mirror of death's enormous sun. And the sleeping valleys still gather their grain. Son: Hear me. When many men died in a great deep of water, died in the rye-fields of home, there was no one to write down what happened. I made a promise then, and into the sky-blue bark of a swamp-side birch tree I scratched the names of the ships that I took from the chronicles. On that sky-blue bark I sketched the outlines of bodies and smokestacks and waves— I, the clever conjuror— I dragged into conflict the faraway ocean and my down-home swamp and the birch tree. Now who will win? My down-home birch or the fury of iron-clad seas? I promised to understand everything, to pardon everything and everyone and teach them the how of it all. I gathered old books, harvested numbers with the rotary sickle of memory, watered it all with my thoughts; bent and exhausted, on the seashore I raised up pillars for poetry that found a support in the sky. I established white temples of Time, 209 Longer Poems filled them with poetry and the life of young men, temples chiseled from the dead sea. I discovered truths, majestic and straightforward, and like divinities they entered my temples, greeted me with outstretched open arms, and filled the empty white temples with their breath. My mind, precise to the wth degree, like a heart of burning coal, I placed on the tongue of the dead prophet of the universe, placed in the breathing breast of the universe, and I understood suddenly: Time does not exist. Aloft on the wings of an eagle, I saw simultaneously all that was and is to be. I saw the powers of twos and threes, mainsprings in the steel workings of worlds, the resilient speech of numbers. What would happen in the future was clear to me. I smiled the smile of Buddha, then suddenly I began to groan, I raised my hand, I foamed at the mouth, and the lightning tore my flesh. You see the lighted match flare up by the dark ammunition dump, once fenced-off, unassailable? You see that explosive mixture of workers and owners, of kings and their frenzied pursuers? Look: some enormous being will throw us away, we will fall from our seat on Planet Earth into the vast deep of the stars. Are you ready to drop headlong into death? Come, like swimmers in the waters of death we will press through the waters, stroking our way through the river of death with unrelenting arms. Swimming is always refreshing, though it's never easy at first. Ο Teacher, come with me! 210 Cracking the Universe Teacher: Think first. Student: I have thought, and have made up my mind. I'm going. The Older Man: Green leaves like butterflies cover the tree once again; every tree is a fisherman dressed in green, a green-shirted fisherman casting his green meshes wide in the endless blue of the sky-sea to net the industrious sun. 2 The Young Leader: Ο Comrades! You see before you the rational skull of the universe and the dark entwinings of the Milky Way— the Horde-road, they call it sometimes— Let's raise a scaling ladder to besiege the fortress stars! Let us batter our shields like warriors, let us breach the walls of the rational skull of the universe, let's storm our way in—like ants swarming over a rotten stump hissing with death— to the mechanism of its brain, and shake up the strings of this heavenly puppet, this doll whose eyes shine in the night, cause her to move her arms, to open her eyes. Where flywheels exuding oil moved the mechanism of the brain where wheels and winches are, you'll see me on the belt sawing through the first will— a high priest of breaking and entering, smashing his way through the sacred shackles. A picklock undoing high heaven! What an encounter, 211 Longer Poems what a face-off at the dance party of words! We will turn it into a doll! Make it bat its eyelashes, learn to say papa and mama! Let's attack that mechanism! We will make the sky a talking doll! All you children of the grand design, follow me! 3 Make it fast! Push it higher! There, right in the witch's ear! More! More! Against the right side of her head! She'll never get rid of us now! The ladder is fast now, against the right side of her head. Chisels ready! Go! Beyond the shoulders of all of us tremble oceans of daring and pride. Now use your drills and your augers! Dynamite, now is your chance! Shatter the skull of the universe! Heroic as ants, unnoticed as night, we will leap to the side of the skull and begin operations. The sun glints on our hair, fitting us all with the crimson helmets of warriors. The final step! Bright as universal dawn! Now! I stand upon the fractured skull, my fingers probe the heavens. One after another let's jump back down, rappelling like mountain climbers. We are already distant from earth by the measure of the many years we've climbed. We will soar up into the skies and after many thousands of years we'll return to earth 212 Cmcking the Universe as obscure ashes. And again in the mechanism a screen for shadow-pictures begins to glow, and there's the same face still, reflected in the blue opalescence. Look! It's her, she's still here, the girl who held the beetle in her hand, still sitting at the darkened window, dubious still; yes and no still brandish their wings and here's a notice in human characters, and beside it a valve. Something written here is of crucial importance to me, and I must read it: "Stranger! You have come unannounced into this world. If you turn this valve, you will rescue the insect, the ladybird you love. That red-coated insect may well be your nation, your native land. Only thinking and reason can help you to save it. It flounders now in the water, drowning. This is the valve of my will. Turn it! Do it now! See, how simple it is!" Tounß Warrior: I've turned it. It's done. The shadowy world is still the same as before, but the beetle now rests on a flower. And if it is indeed my native land, it is saved from disaster once more, by the turn of an uncomplicated valve handle. Hurrah for us all! Hurrah for unlooked-for assistance! "Mama! I just had the most hurtful dream! And someone much stronger than me took charge of my will and I rescued the ladybird, look! Now it can dry its wings and fly wherever it likes." [1921: D 202] 213 The Gul-Mullahys Trumpet 1 Hak'. Hak! It's a prophet come down from the mountains! From the throats of the crowd, like the breathing of whales, moaning, and cries of frenzy— the Flower Priest passed like a frenzied buffalo: a rough sheepskin, bare legs, bare arms. A mountain shepherd would take him for one of his own, and a wild water buffalo whisper: "My brother!" Like some divine wind he descends from his mountains of snow, to pass through the streets of the city. The Flower Priest, wild man, his white fleece threatening, somehow. a(rlok pul!" a£ok $ai!" Like surf sound, the cry is incessant! Across the world, the flood of buying and selling rises too high. His black hair streams madly, a waterfall, over the sunburnt face and dark arms of the prophet. His chest burnt the color of gold, the color of acorn, his feet are bare, his sheepskin dangles like a golden leaf, a fur coat inside out. Divine darkness shines in his wild eyes, a dungeon of delights. Unshorn for over a decade, ignorant of scissors his hair like a river streams over his shoulders. A horse would be proud of a tail like that, a black meadow of midnight musings, haystack of starry midnights, 214 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet shocks of black wheat. Birds in flight swoop down from the snowy mountains across the naked shoulders, the dark arms of the prophet. A nest of dark voices, conductors to heaven for his conversations, his dark talk with God. His sheepskin is stronger than mountains of money, and he holds a white feather dropped from a swan, dropped in the night from a swan as it flew high above the world and its mountains and valleys. An iron bull crowned the prophet's staff, perched there like a bird, nodding its metallic head. His yellowed fingers held the white feather dropped from the nighttime sky, lost in the wild swamps, there by the cliffs. There on his staff stands the bull of nighttime, and there in his eyes the fire of sunshine. Hak! Hak! Again! Again! These are prophets come down from the mountains to meet the child Khlebnikov! Come down from their mountains, precursors, voices crying in the wilderness. Ofana! Mofana! Let us be friends! A cloud weighs more than a stone! From the throats of the crowd, like the breathing of whales, come their wild cries. "Gul-Mullah," sounds in the wind, "Gul-Mullah," sounds in their cry. And the wind descends, sounds in the darkened villages, sounds in the sands of the sea. "Ours," sing the holy men of the mountains, "Ours," say the flowers— spots of gold ink 215 Longer Poems spilled on a green tabletop by the hand of careless Spring. "Ours," sing the oak trees and thickets, a golden clangor, the summons of Spring! Hundreds of eyes, inquisitive suns, gospeling on the branches of trees. "Ours," say the clouds in the nighttime sky, "Ours," croak the ravens above the sea, green-eyed, iron-beaked, like a sweep-net meshed with severe regularity, hurrying eastward into the fishing grounds of dawn. Catching the moon in the net of their flight, weightily, heavily, onward they fly. But the maid of Iran never said "Mine," she never said "Mine." She glanced through her veil, darkly, through her black silk, and stood some distance away. 2 My white wings broken and my brain all blood, I fell into white snow and blackthorn branches. "Help me, comrades!" I cried to the mountain gods of the sea cave, to my equals in children's games. And I lay there, sheeted in my white wings, rudely fallen to earth. A fox nipped and snarled, tearing feathers from my white wings. And I lay there unmoving. You mountains, white mountains, the Kursk went chugging toward you, the sea was stitched with lacy foam like soft silk lace. The sky was blue. A grizzled old sailor was reading Kropotkin's Bread and Will. 216 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet In the past a man lit up from a stick on fire. I wonder, someday will he discover a hotter fire to light up a smokestack at sea? They kissed me with their eyes— me, heaven's conquest— the oceans, the oceans, boundless blue. My blood, these scarlet gardens, my wings, these snowy mountains. "Get in, Gul-Mullah, let me take you across." 3 I'm a star-studded rider out hunting the stars, I am Razin read backward, I am Razin reversed. I sailed on the Kursk cross-current to fate. He looted and burned, while I am a word-god. The breeze-cutter boat sailed into the mouth of the gulf. Razin threw his bride overboard. I'll do the reverse! I'll save her! We'll see. Time is no lover of bridles, has never yet opened its mouth for the bit. Are these caves in the mountains all empty? Are there gods who live there? I read in a children's book one time that the gods in their caves are alive, and that hordes of blue butterflies cover their feet, like swarms of eyes. Kropotkin's my path to the past, out to hunt down the crude and the common. The fates bless me and after my recent disgrace, again I feel wings on my shoulders. 217 Longer Poems 4 We are redskinned giants weather-beaten by Caspian winds. We stand today and sing for freedom, praising liberty and godlessness. Silent let the hireling stand whose oath to the sea was sworn in vain. Hear the hymn of the sea resound. All exploitation falls silent. Well, wind? 5 Shepherd of eyes, he stands apart. The white eyes of the gods sail across the skies! Snowy sawtooth mountains. Sea-siren songs. Recording the song of the earth. The wind drives these punishing eyes like mountain sheep across the pasture of the world. Across the flinty plains like mountain sheep from dark mountains, to feed in the cities. The Shepherd of Human Torments stands apart. Snowy imaginings, white mountain streams, snowy thoughts of a stone brain, of a blue brow, the clouded eyes of flint-haired cliffs. Torments beyond the snowy branches of the hedge-rose. The wind is the shepherd of God's eyes. Qurrat al-'Ayn, Tahira, tied the rope to the stake herself, turned to the executioners, and asked: "Is that all?" "Ropes and bullets in your bridegroom's breast!" This is her dead body, these snow-covered mountains. 218 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet 6 The black nostrils of the hills eagerly breathe in the scent of Razin, the wind from the sea. I ride the wind of pain. 7 Golden birds twitter on a golden stalk. Louder, you birds, don't be shy! Green streets and stone buildings, regiments of narrow streets. I am flogged with stones! Cobblestone whips have flogged the eyes of wildmen from the steppe. (I cover my head with both hands.) Stop it! There's no mercy in heaven! I am riddled with a thousand holes by the bullets of curious looks in these alleyways. These cobblestone whips have sliced open my shoulders! Only a tower of dark-blue stone, like a birch tree there by the bridge, smiles like the Virgin Mary and binds up my wounds. I have been whipped by these gray walls. 8 The marketplace. Evening. "Hard-boiled eggs, only one ξαί! One ξαϋ Only one ξαι'! Come buy! Come buy!" Curly hair, luxuriant hair, blue black, savage princelings from the marshlands, languorously blue, buttery gold—they make a roof-cover to get sparrows' eyes to live there, 219 Longer Poems eyes for twittering larks. (Butter from the cow's udder of the white skies, the snow and hoar- frost.) Bonfires. Fires in earthenware basins. A bull's head, dead, on a wall. They carry the bull away on poles; and half an hour ago he was alive. Savage shadows of night. Icy drinks in mixing jugs— in a warrior's shawls. Vendors sell ice, and beans, and oil-cakes. Leftover blue basins— left here like broken stones of blue from heaven's rubbish heap. Is that the Volga Boatmen's song I hear, or is some boatman hauling heaven to earth? Green hens, the shells of red eggs. In black hemispheres, like a skull, the crowd's eyes glitter, banging their prayer beads, crowds from the dark street. "No speak Russian. Alio, alio, kamrad." Hand-to-hand combat of the forests, sheepskin coats thrown open, green sheepskins, the gods of stone fall in a game of dimensions. 9 Children bake the smiles of their wide eyes on the grilles of their long lashes and hand them out laughing to passers-by. By the mosque a crippled boy, spiderlike, stretches his threadlike hands. Like wine bottles, women in black walk by, dark shapes sealed with pale foil. Who uncorks them? Lazy! Easy! I'm tinder to the spark of their animal-terror eyes, dumb charm, a dark charm beneath the veils 220 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet that protects them from fear. A fatal fever, a white fever their white veils shine above black shadows. White twigs cast black shadows—wicket of death. The little window of a black prison, white wickets on the women passing by. Silence! The Orient's Holy of Holies! I am a prophet! Hak! Hak! 10 Midnight: Rasht. Cat-leaping jackals slap down the two-spots of green graveyard eyes, tear through the backyards, teasing the dogs. Bow-wow! Wow-wow! Wow-wow! The dogs respond lazily. Wild jackals bark back at the dogs in the yards of the sleeping town. Souls of the dead in gardens of prayer. Those are sons of the devil, that leap through the yards. We stared all evening at the naked globes of skulls, shaven heads, with one dark lock left dangling on the side (dark cloud of smoke). Unclean women, raising their veils, called to the men: "Come here! Come rest! Come sleep on my breast!" 11 Tyrant—but if the i's were gone? "Rais tumam doniya." Ali became a President of Planet Earth— sworn in over a glass of the local gin. A land where all men are Adams, the exposed roots of the heavenly Paradise! Where they call money pul and in mountain ravines khans in white linen 221 Longer Poems by thundering waterfalls come to snare the salmon with netted poles. And everything starts with a shhh: shah, shut, shim. Where they give the silent moon a resounding name— Ay! And that's the land where I am now! 12 Springtime brings the sea a necklace of dead fishes— the entire shore is paved with their bodies. Dogs, visionaries, and prophets— and me too— are served up a dinner by the sea: fishes, gone to sleep on the tablecloth of the beach. What luxury! Be human! Don't hold back! Rest! Enjoy! There is no one here besides the sea. No need for me to thank you, Sea, you are too vast to let me kiss your hand. I go for a swim, I kiss the waves, the sea doesn't smell like a lady's hand. I found three sacs of caviar, cooked them up and ate them, now I'm full! Ravens cry there in the sky! The sea sings "Requiem" and "In Paradiso" to the rotting carcasses of dogs. In this land time borrows scarlet ink from blood— a friendly loan—around Pentecost, when a scarlet down turns the impatiens in the woodland red, in the tender green of eyelashes opened wide. The tree is impatient, it wants to be for me 222 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet the green banner of the Prophet. But the bloody marks of Pentecost haven't coagulated yet. The green feathers of a flock of swans—tree branches— float through the air, and springtime's golden ink spilled into sundown, rudely, and the scarlet forest changed to green. In this land, dogs don't bark if you step on them accidentally at night; these big dogs are gentle and quiet. And a baby chick, before falling asleep in its master's hand, runs at his heels, full of predatory urges, snapping at gnats and mosquitoes. People won't give you silks, Ο Prophet! And for the tree to be a banner, the bloodstained fingers of summer smear the green leaves when I pick the sweet impatiens as a banner. 13 Today I am the sea's guest. A broad tablecloth of sand, a dog in the distance. We both sniff around, chew what we find. We watch one another. I dined on a few little fishes, and caviar. It was good! You don't eat this well when people invite you! From beyond the fence a boy shouts: "Uruss dervish! Uruss dervish!" —shouts at me, ten times at least. 14 A shaggy lion—his eyes are like your friend's eyes— holding a scimitar, threatening someone, challenging, sentry of peace, guarding the sun- set, and the sun like an overripe floozy (I'm sure she has a secret sweet tooth) 223 Longer Poems sweetly, leisurely, rolls from the lion's shoulder among the green tiles. Among the green tiles! 15 Khalkhal. The Khan all dressed in white sniffs a red flower, fills his nostrils with its perfume. His eager eyes are caught by the distance. "Not know Russian—bad! No good! No need gibble-gabble, what for? No good! Teacher—give (fifty years) how many fingers, how many— Asia Russian, Russia first teacher, very good. Big man, Russian dervish, yes? Ha? Zorastr, ha! Very good!" And the sahib, getting tipsy, sniffed the red flower, barefoot, in white, and stared at the distant dark-blue mountains. His veranda faced the mountains, it was covered with carpets and heaps of rifles. Higher up, his ancestors' graves. Nearby a servant sat tickling his son's feet; he laughed, kept trying to kick the serving-girl's face. He was all dressed in white. The khans, in white, walk unconcerned in their gardens, or peacefully spade up the cabbage patch. "Behbot eh-oo-vehvyatsV the warbler sings. A stone mirror of mountains. I'm up in the mountains. The sea-mirror's there in that direction— The Mother (like a big head). From here, at right angles to the Volga, rivers flow into the same sea's expanse, 224 The Gul-Mullab's Trumpet where buckets scoop up reserves of will. A human being here among the mountains understands how pretentious he is. The river leaps noisily its dripping hair is glassy. Loaves of rock. Burdock grows high as a man. Streams of water. Who strung these rocks? Who plays this instrument? 16 Round boulders gathered in a circle, a valley unwrinkled as a tablecloth, the floor of the ravine swept clean— no need to wipe dust from your eyes. Trees in the center of these boulder crowns. Houses white as human skulls. Twigs on sticks. This is the chai-khane of the wilderness. The eyes of hungry children bulge like cherries. Armenian children are timid. Like hundreds of fairy-tale faces the roots of a fig tree (the one I was sleeping under) swirl and swell, fighting for leg room, then make their way into the earth, reaching out as a mother will reach for her children, an umbilical cord, stretching from branches to roots. I press ahead, my doctrines press hard on my back. My sermon is mute, I have no disciples. Like a great hollow in a tree trunk, the account book of the centuries lies open wide. The trunk with its massive belly (broader across than a horse), billowing, big-bellied, raises high a green mushroom cloud of branches and leaves, a green hat, a shower of branches flowing down to the roots, winding among them in knots, like the meshes of some enormous net. 225 Longer Poems A downpour of tree from above, a tree-rain falling into the roots and into the earth, rooting itself in the under- ground flesh, knitting itself like the mesh of a net into a dense loop. And the leaves, poets of that which is not, the younger branches and the older ones and a crowd of new ones—are held in their mother's ancient em- brace. A diagram? Or a tree? The tree poured down and flowed to its roots, dripping with tree sap like mountain streams in the slow downpour of centuries. The trunk is a swollen belly where the number 3 resides, and spreads a second sky, all green, over the valley— rings of meshes in four knots. Here's where I slept, worn out. White horses (swans of arrogance) already saddled, grazed in the pasture. "You are one of our children! Sit down, eat!" a warrior cried to me, fugitive from the Russian draft. "Tea, cherries, rice." In those days I had no βpul," I was traveling on foot, for two whole days I'd been eating wild blackberries, on loan to the stomach of a President of Planet Earth (Marienhof and Yesenin). "Behbot eh-oo-vehvyztsV the warbler kept singing! 17 The black shadows of monsters, nocturnal visitations. Black lions. A dancer, a tease, hopped in the treetop, stood on one foot, raised the other, bent at the knee, above her head, arm bent at the elbow. In a dress of black lace. What visions! A porcupine's quill gleamed in the light of Ay. I wound the tip with thread and begin to write poems—new ones. I got very tired. All I have is my rifle and manuscripts. A fox barks in the bushes. 226 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet Where the crossroads fork I lie down like a living legend, right in the middle of the road, my arms stretched out like a fairy-tale hero. I wasn't making camp for the night, I was being a living legend from Lake Onega. The stars in the black sky looked down into my soul. A rifle and a pile of grass—a tired man's pillow. I went right to sleep. When I woke up, I saw a dozen warriors squatting in a circle around me. They smoked, meditated, said nothing. "No speak Russian." They sat and thought. Rifles slung across their shoulders. Their chests were heavily armored with shells, hung with the luxury of future shots. "Let's go." They led me off, fed me, gave my hungry mouth a ciga- rette. And, miracle—-in the morning they gave me back my gun. And then let me go. A karde$ gave me a hunk of cheese, and a pitying look. 18 "Get in, Gul-Mullah." A black kettle, spitting in my face? Black water? No, just Ali Mohammed, who looked at me and laughed: "I know who you are." "Who?" "Gul-Mullah." "Flower Priest?" "Yes! Yes! Yes!" He laughs and keeps rowing. We move across the reflecting gulf among clouds of rigging and zigzagging monsters with iron bodies, their names on their hulls: Trotsky, Rosa Luxemburg. 19 "I've got a boat, Comrade Gul-Mullah! Get in, I'll take you! 227 Longer Poems No money? That's OK, I'll take you anyway! Get in!" The kerji vied with each other talking. I got into the old man's boat. Kindly, sunburnt, he sang songs about Turkey. The oars creaked. A cormorant flew by. We row from Enzeli to Kazyan. Do I bring them luck? Why do they all want me as a passenger? In Persia, nothing is more worthy of respect than being a Gul-Mullah, treasurer of springtime's golden ink. On the first day of the month of May I dance around, shouting, "Hey!" to the pale moon whose name is Ay, who rises on my right. In summer you shed your blood, in springtime you spread your golden hair. And every day I stretch out on the beach and fall asleep. [1921-1922: Τ 228 Autumns Passing in Piatijjorsk 1 The autumn sun has lowered its comforting golden staff, the golden skulls of plants are mired on the hilltops; sleepy clouds of blue autumn, and hoarfrost shivers in the clear sky. Only the thin gold bones of branches shiver wildly, reaching down toward us here: "You don't need division, you don't need distinction; once you were like us, now we'll be like you." Tossed, they twist, shaking and shattering, savagely torn by the autumn wind. Clouds keep piling their terraces higher. The naked carcasses of black trees shake their black hair at us, like that early morning, before I'd put my shoes on, asking a question meant to catch me: "Do you believe in dreams?" . . . someday we'll lie down together, while orchards dress themselves in golden dreams . . . Everything stripped bare. The gold is going. See the spiky specter there, that tree: hundreds of gold coins glittering— What's the matter, miser? Why not grab them all? Stuff your moneybags with leaves! Afraid you'll wind up the mark of a cartel of thieves? 229 Longer Poems 2 Like the shadow above us of a murderer's knife, a triple-bladed razor, blurred, gray mountains raise their peaks: dead battles slumber here in the dried blood of foam and fame. There's Mount Beshtau, crude curve, a splash of stones more unbridled than brigandage, the distant image of recorded sound, an A or V grooved into a disc by a gramophone needle, sharp as the points of flint arrows made for the bows of ancestral hunters. Strong with the soul of earth, white with clouds, it drives its hostile blade against the sky as if it were some fragile flaxen throat. The mountain is a flint knife in a murderous underhand aimed at the neck of heaven, but the vastness of heaven seems unmoved: the brow of God shows no emotion. Strong chains bind Beshtau like a leper; the conquering flatlands beat him into a valley. Murderous madman, caught in the distance! White eyes drift across the ordered grooves, tracking this recorded voice: hermits inhabit the traces of this sound. In the bright grove, a thicket of raspberry canes— listen to the robins and the little yellow buntings. This towering trace of a recorded voice was habitable once, full of shining waters and priest-stones: surely our ancestors worshiped here. 3 Long-vanished sea basins stand gray guard over autumn. In the basin I can make out fossil fish. It's the wave of a dead sea 230 Autumns Passing in Piatißorsk awakened. A sea compressed to a petrified log sawn-up into slabs, into eagles, by the cross-cut saw of humanity's intellect. A staircase of streams, musical stave for songs of the sea, its risers rugged as cow tongues, rough and gravelly. White walls lead over the hills, along the path of that sea's remains high up into the notch, to eagles and sea fossils flashing their towering wings as if they were sharp steel swords. Across this world of autumn, more yielding than wax, peasant feet shuffle through the sea's remains. A barefoot giant talks with me softly about the little feathered friends of God. A white helmet caps the shale-shattered hill, the flatlands' commander, rough and gravelly, the ascending scale of the songs of a dried-up sea! Slate roofs arise from the waves of a dead sea, a fossil lightning-field! The whale-road, the water-monster way, has turned to a slat, a bat for a ballgame. Here in the hot springs, human griefs and human tears subside in laughter and singing. How many watchdogs, sculptors of their own gray heads, guard Piatigorsk! In cloud-pelts they crouch: the two Beetles, Gold Kurgan, Mashuk, and Dubravy. Who licks their dark noses? They leap up— to rest their paws on whose shoulders? And down in the town, pressed to their windows, writers and children, doctors and salesmen, and every hair on a girl's head 231 Longer Poems a skyscraper teeming with thousands! The sheepish green roofs nuzzle each other, then sleep. Poplar trees stand like golden knives, a girl full of passion shouts "La!" to her friend, and the windwhip drives the clouds. 4 Autumnal violins turn spiteful when green things turn gold. Autumn winds throw leaves into the sky like handfuls of love letters; by mistake they land in your eye (holes of sky poked through the dark branches). I'm to blame for wanting to come back here. I point my prosecuting finger at the sky, I plead my complaint, from the ground I grab a handful of damaging letters and hurl them at heaven's face. Too late. 5 Golden gobs of consumptive spit as the branches cough up their gold; the hoarse croaking of golden cadavers, branches that die and collapse at my feet. Rustling where Shura sat, hunched on her bench, a heavy boot scrabbling the roots, the rustle of gold, scrabbling the air, seated on stallions of instantaneous wind, in the teeth of the wind with tails aloft, golden gypsies in a tented field, encampment of autumn's wanders, galloping hunters, hallooing and howling. 6 Break, break, my brain, on the great rock of the world's "NO." 232 Autumns Passing in Piatißorsk I'm tired of heaving through wave after wave like a transparent star. That snowy finger raised above the redheaded flatlands of autumn is aimed derisively at me! Autumn is the sickbed of summer, curtained off in green silk smoke. Time for me to leave, to go kiss winter's frozen hands. 7 The sunflower's eyelets have darkened and dried, earth is paved over with sunflower seeds. How many declarations of love have been trampled into this earth! I strap my sighs to my boots like skis, they glide on the wind like my spit-gobs! This is no orchard, it's heartburn, the sour pain of a love spit out with the sunflower seed-husks. [1921: Τ 331] 233 Notes List of Poems Russian Index of Titles English Index of Titles Credits Notes "Harsh hush bends bow" The battle between silence and sound is, among other things, a highly charged political allegory. One of the neologisms that Khlebnikov uses to designate silence is nem\ derived from nemoi ("dumb, mute"), which in turn is linked etymologically to nemets (German). The triumph of the "clamor-call of dawn" is a victory of the Slavic principle over the German principle—a major preoccupation for Khlebnikov in his militant Slavophile years. "Where the winking waxwings whistle" The principal actors in this poem are birds called vremiri, a neologism based on the concatenation of the word for "time" (vrem-ia) and the word for "bullfinch" (sneg-ir'). Khlebnikov thus builds into the name itself the notion of birds as augurs of seasonal change. "The Dostoyology of racing clouds.The neologisms in this poem are based on associations typically evoked by the names of the writers cited. Dostoevsky's name suggests unbridled passion, Pushkin's is evocative of classical beauty, and that of Fedor Tiutchev—one of Russia's preeminent Romantic poets (1803- 1873)—is associated with the cosmic struggle between order and chaos. "Incantation by Laughter" Khlebnikov's best-known and most frequently anthologized poem was born of his experiments in "coradication" (skornenie), the creation of large nests of words based on the same root. His two most extensive examples are based on the roots of liubov' ("love") and smekh ("laughter"). "Bo-beh-oh-bee is the lipsong" Some twelve years after writing this poem, Khlebnikov composed the following gloss: "B signifies bright red, hence the lips are Bo-beh-oh-bee. Veh-eh-oh-mee is blue, and therefore the eyes are blue; Pee-eh-eh-oh is black." From other texts, we can decipher the remaining two colors in the portrait: I signified white and ßz a silvery gold. This is Khlebnikov's earliest attempt at sound-painting, a form of neology that became increasingly important for Russian poets in the postrevolutionary years. "Grasshopper" The word for grasshopper in Russian, kuznechik, is also a dialectism that means "titmouse." Another dialectism for the same bird is 237 Notes to Pages 31-3S zinziver, which also appears in the poem. Khlebnikov plays on this ambiguity and adds a third and more ominous hidden meaning by encoding the name of the seventeenth-century peasant rebel Stanka Razin in the bird's name and cry ("Pin' pin' pin' tararakhnul zi'wziver," conveyed here in the lines "Zin! Zin! Zin! / sings the raucous racket-bird"). The description of the grasshop- per, a traditional symbol for the poet, is thus transformed into a hidden incantation to insurrection, both poetic and political. "Neward, we praise thee!" The poem "paganizes" a well-known prayer sung during the anaphora in the Russian Orthodox divine liturgy. "I swam across the Sudak Gulf' The Sudak Gulf is an extension of the Black Sea on the southern side of the Crimean Peninsula. The poem contains a number of biographical references and self-citations. The couplet beginning "Russia has perished." is from an early satire, "Before me the water boiled." "Hlaha! Uthlofan, lauflings!" is from "Incantation by Laughter" (also in this volume). The slogans referring to the Hapsburgs and Hohenzollerns are taken from "Slavs!" an article Khlebnikov published in 1908 condemning the hegemonistic pretensions of the Hapsburg monarchy and calling on the Slavs to unite in a holy war of liberation against their German overlords (see Collected Works I: 226). The line "I walked by the shore of a beautiful lake" echoes the poet's self-portrait in "The I-Singer of Universong" (Collected Works II: 12). The reference to a photographic portrait-with-skull is borrowed from a letter Khlebnikov wrote to his sister in 1909 (see Collected Works I: 45). The closing lines refer to geological expeditions Khlebnikov made in 1903 to Dagestan, on the Caspian Sea (Petrovsk is now named Makhachkala), and in 1905 to the Ural Mountains. "The Tangled Wood" The poem first appeared in the miscellany The Impres- sionists' Studio in 1910. When he republished it in his Selected Poems (Izbornik, 1914), Khlebnikov added the note, "The hart metamorphosed into a lion is an image of Russia." "We want to be familiars of the stars" A more literal translation of the opening line would read, "We wish to say 'thee' to the stars," i.e., to be on sufficiently familiar terms with the stars to address them using the familiar personal pronoun (cf. du in German or tu in French). The models Khlebnikov selects for himself and his audience are all men of valor drawn from the annals of Russian history or Russian folklore. Iakov Petrovich Baklanov (1809-1873) was a Cossack hetman renowned for his military prowess in the Caucasian wars. Stepan Ostranitsa, or Ostranin (d. 1640s) was a Cossack hetman who distin- guished himself in the battles of the Muscovite state against Poland in the seventeenth century. Count Matvei Ivanovich Platov (1751-1818), a veteran of the Turkish and Persian campaigns under Catherine the Great, achieved his 238 Notes to Pages 37-41 greatest renown during the Napoleonic Wars. As hetman of the Don Cossacks and commander-in-chief of all the Cossack border troops, he played a vital role in Russia's victory over the French. Morozhenko is a semi-legendary Cossack hero whose exploits against the Tatars are described in Ukrainian historical songs. Yermak Timofeevich (d. 158+) was a Cossack adventurer who initiated the conquest and pacification of Siberia during the reign of Ivan the Terrible. Rodion Osliablia was a monk of the Holy Trinity Monastery who distinguished himself in the Battle of Kulikovo (1380), Russia's first major victory against the Tatars after two hundred years of subjugation. Sviatoslav Igorevich (942?-972), was Grand Prince of Kiev and son of Russia's first Christian ruler, Olga; he refused to convert to Christianity and devoted most his energies to military campaigns. His son, Prince Vladimir (978-1015), was responsible for consoli- dating the Kievan state, subduing its principal enemies and adopting Christi- anity as the state religion in 988. The Dobrynia of the poem's closing line is a legendary hero encountered in Russian folktales; his historical prototype is a military commander who served under Prince Vladimir. People in love, casting" The closing lines allude to Aleksandr Pushkin's poem "To Natasha" (181+). Natasha was the maidservant of Princess Varvara Mikh- ailovna Volkonskaia, Empress Elizabeth's maid of honor in the Russian court. "The eyes of the Black" In the original Russian, the body of water referred to is the Oka River. Khlebnikov plays on the folk-etymological link between the name of the river and the Russian word for "eye" (oko). "Qua-People" Russian critic Valentina Morderer has argued that the poem is a thinly veiled anti-Semitic diatribe, a by-product of Khlebnikov's militant Pan-Slavism in the prewar years. "I don't need much!" The poem was subsequently incorporated into "The Stone Woman" (also in this volume). "In periwinkle potion" Khlebnikov remarks in a footnote to the poem, "An infusion of periwinkle is used for casting spells." In both Russian and western European folklore, the plant is associated with spells designed to awaken or reawaken love. The actual recipe for the potion concocted in the poem, discovered by Henrik Baran, appears to have been drawn from a Russian translation of Paul Sedir, Les Plantes maßiques (Paris, 1907; Russian trans. St. Petersburg, 1912). "I am borne on the back of an elephant" According to V. V. Ivanov, the poem was inspired by an Indian miniature depicting Vishnu borne on the back of an elephant. The elephant is drawn as a composite of several female figures intertwined to form the body, limbs, and trunk. 239 Notes to Pages 42-48 "The Song of One Come to Confusion" The poem was dedicated to Anna Akhmatova (1890-1965). According to A. Parnis, it may have been inspired by Natan Altman's famous portrait of the poetess. "Rue: A Fable" Like so many of Khlebnikov's poems, "Rue" is based on a homonym. The poem's title in Russian is "Bekh," a noun which designates a plant (Circuta virosa) used for medicinal purposes; it is also the aorist tense of the verb "to be" in Old Russian ("I was"). The plant thus expresses the plaint of the bones buried on the ancient battlefield. There is a fortuitously comparable homonymy in the English "rue"—"to regret," but also a medicinal plant of the genus Ruta. The major subtexts of the poem, as Henrik Baran has determined, are Sedir, Les Plantes magiques (Paris, 1907; Russian trans. St. Petersburg, 1912) and an entry in N. Annenkov, Botanical Dictionary (Bo- tanicheskii slovar' [St. Petersburg, 1878]), which reads, in part: "There is a particular Ukrainian legend about the origins of the name of the bekh plant: a battle took place between Tatars and Cossacks, and from their bones grew an herb which cried out, 'Bekh.'" "A quiet perfume from the orchard" Bismullah is the opening word of the Moslem invocation, "In the name of Allah, the compassionate, the merciful." Yaroslavna was the second wife of Igor Sviatoslavich, the hero of the twelfth- century Russian epic The Song of Igor's Campaign. Her lament constitutes one of the most moving sections of the poem. The Pechenegs were one of several tribes against whom the early Russians fought in establishing their hegemony in the southern steppes. Khlebnikov is probably confusing them with other tribes, especially the Kumans, who were more directly involved in the battle against Igor. "Beast + Number" In the second stanza, Khlebnikov alludes to a conversa- tion about numbers in Plato's Timaeus—a discussion between a priest and Solon. The poem was written on the first anniversary of Russia's entry into World War I, and reflects Khlebnikov's belief in the possibility of predicting major historical events on a mathematical basis and thereby averting catastro- phes of the sort Russia was confronting. "A Vague Memory" The image in the opening lines is based on a wholly mundane allusion to a then-popular brand of shoe polish with the picture of a bear on the can. Khlebnikov transforms the image into the Ursa minor constellation. "Herd ofhoofsteps, ingots of elephants" The Chartomlyk (or Chertomlyk) vase is one of the most striking artifacts unearthed during mid-nineteenth-century excavations of the Chartomlyk mound, a Scythian royal tomb of the 6th-4th centuries B.C. Among the images on the silver vase are those of Scythian warriors pasturing their horses. 240 Notes to Pages 48- S4 "My elbow brushed" "Younggirls, young men, remember!" and "'Hey!' the wolf cries out in blood" These poems are all responses to the outbreak of World War I and the carnage of the first year of battle. "'Hey!' the wolf cries out in blood" "A man who once wrote 'Last Deer Songs'": Probably an allusion to a book by the avant-garde artist Pavel Filonov entitled Prophesalvos of a Branching Universe (Propeven' 0 prorosli mirovoi [Petrograd, 1915]). It contained among its illustrations a picture of a deer, which caught Khlebnikov's eye. "Bad News, April 8, 1916" On this date Khlebnikov received notice of his conscription into the Imperial Russian Army. "Anti-Onegin": An allusion to Aleksandr Pushkin's famous novel in verse, Eugene Onegin. "365 X 317 regular heartbeats a day": Khlebnikov had determined that a typical infantryman, marching at the standard pace of 80-81 steps per minute, would take this number of steps in a twenty-four-hour period; the figure corresponds, in his early theory of historical cycles, to the number of days that separate events of political and military significance. "The government of twenty-two-year-olds": An allusion to Vladimir Mayakovsky's poem "A Cloud in Trousers," where he writes, "Here I come, / a handsome twenty-two-year-old." "The King of Time": On December 20, 1915—less than four months before his conscrip- tion—Khlebnikov's fellow Futurists proclaimed him the King of Time at a gathering in Moscow. In the Russian, Khlebnikov plays on the etymological link between korol' ("king") and krolik ("rabbit"). "The King is out of luck" and "I am in Tsaritsyn, where" Both poems were written at a military camp outside Tsaritsyn (now Volgograd) shortly after Khlebnikov's conscription into the Imperial Army. The first poem was jotted down on a postcard and mailed to Khlebnikov's friend and fellow Futurist, Dmitry Petrovsky, as a plea for assistance in obtaining a discharge. "The King": See note to "Bad News, April 8, 1916," above. "Battle in the Comics" The Igor Tale, or, more precisely, The Song of Igor's Campaign: Russia's only surviving epic, presumed to have been composed in the twelfth century. "These triangles": An allusion to the geometric figures in cubist paintings, which dominated avant-garde art exhibits at the time. "Bou- vet": A French war-ship that was sunk by the Germans in 1916, resulting in the death of 600 men. Khlebnikov also mentions the incident in his story "Dream" (Collected Works II: 83). "Someday I'll forget about Swanland" Swanland: In Russian, Lebediia, the ancient (9th-ioth centuries A.D.) name given to the southern region of Russia watered by the Dnieper and the Don. "Horse Kingdom": The Kalmyk steppes around the Caspian Sea, where Khlebnikov spent his childhood. The Kalmyks were expert horsemen, and it was probably due to their influence that 241 Notes to Pages S4 - S9 Khlebnikov speaks so reverently about horses in his poetry. "The cruel prophe- cies of language": Language's prophetic potential is a function of "internal declension," a theory elaborated by Khlebnikov according to which vowel shifts within words (e.g., prance/prince) create lexical-semantic paradigms that may provide a key to the structure of time and space. "Tatlin! Poet of propellers" Vladimir Tatlin (1885-1953), one of the Russian avant-garde's leading artists, made a powerful impression on Khlebnikov with his "counter-reliefs," three-dimensional abstract constructs made of various industrial materials, exhibited at shows in Moscow in 1915-1916. The poem was composed in May 1916, when Tatlin visited Khlebnikov in Tsaritsyn. Together with Dmitry Pokrovsky, they organized a Futurist seminar entitled "Cast-Iron Wings." "I" When, in imitation of Tolstoy: As the editor of the Russian Collected Works indicates, the manuscript is indecipherable in places. Hence the ellipsis between the first thirty-five lines of the poem and the closing section ("but you are tall and slender, elegant"). "On a Hill" The night-riding demons—mavy in Russian—are naked, witch- like figures from Galician folklore: from the front they appear as beautiful maidens, but from the rear they are a mass of exposed entrails. Khlebnikov frequently employs the image as a symbol for war. "Unbending as Boris Godunov's boyarina" This poem is addressed to Maria Siniakova, an accomplished artist and one of the three sisters whose estate outside Kharkov, Krasnaia Poliana, was a favorite retreat for Khlebnikov and his fellow Futurist poets. Her historical prototype is Ksenia, daughter of Boris Godunov and wife of the last surviving member of the Rurik dynasty. She was renowned for her beauty and intelligence. "RusalkaSee note to "The Poet," below. "Is it the voice of the goddess of foam" The poem is addressed to another of Khlebnikov's loves, Vera Budberg. When revising the poem in 1922, Khlebnikov added the line, "It's the figure three, staring from storm clouds!" The figure "3," rotated counterclockwise ninety degrees, resembles a bird in flight; it also symbolizes the relationship between event and counterevent in Khlebnikov's Laws of Time. "The trumpets never squealed a signal for defeat" "The banner of the beautiful Savior" probably refers to the standard carried into battle by Russian imperial troops. It bore the image of Christ's face as depicted on the icon known as the "Image not Made with Human Hands" (the Orthodox counterpart to the image of Veronica's veil in Western iconography). The references to the 242 Notes to Pages S9 ~ 64 Nieman River call attention to one of the earliest theaters of World War I. In August 1914, Russian troops crossed the river on their march toward Königsberg. They were driven back with severe losses two months later. It is possible that in this poem Khlebnikov is reacting to chauvinistic verses com- posed by Mayakovsky for propaganda posters in the early months of the war. One of these poems depicts the corpses of German soldiers floating down a river and reads: "In the glorious forest of Augustus / there are a hundred thousand beaten Germans. / The enemy is decimated and then / set to float- ing down the blue Nieman." "Their faces by Maliavin" F. Maliavin (1869-1940) and K. Korovin (1861-1931) are painters known for their depictions of Russian peasant life. Red tones dominate in many of Maliavin's renderings of peasant women, leading Khlebnikov to associate his works with the Revolution. "You whose mind flowed" "Skull": See note to "Cracking the Universe," below. "Yesterday I whistled: Coo'. Coo! Coo!" The "ghouly witches" are the same creatures (mavy) that appear in "On a Hill." The word "Vele" constitutes a typical refrain in West Slavic ritual songs and may be related to the name of Veles, the ancient Slavic god of the herd. "The shining shower dripping from the oar" Commentators generally indicate that the poem describes Stenka Razin, leader of a peasant rebellion that came close to toppling the monarchy in the seventeenth century. Recently discovered manuscripts suggest that Khlebnikov has in mind the Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen (1861-1930), whose Arctic expeditions captured the imagina- tion of Russia in the first decades of the century. "When Freedom comes, she comes naked" The poem was written in response to the first Russian revolution (February 1917), which brought Kerensky to power. "The people raise the rod of sovereign power" The speaker of this lyric mono- logue is Nicholas II. In the third stanza he mentions his own abdication, which took place in the salon car of the imperial train that brought him to Pskov from Petrograd. In the fifth stanza he alludes to the events of Bloody Sunday (January 1905) and, by way of contrast to the horrific picture of demonstrators lying bloodied in the snow, to his mistress, the ballerina Matilda Kshesinskaia (see also the longer poem "Lightland," below). "Freedom" The earliest version of this poem was written to commemorate the first anniversary of the October Revolution. The proclamation of universal resurrection in the third stanza reflects less the influence of the Gospels than 243 Notes to Pages 64 — 70 that of the Russian philosopher Nikolai Fedorov, whose Utopian thought is centered around the potential for universal resurrection across time and space, engineered by a technologically and spiritually advanced society of the future. "Wind whose song" The play of "sword" and "word" in the translation finds its Russian counterpart in the paronomastic attraction of two words with opposite connotations: mech ("sword") and miach ("ball"). This poem is one of the earliest expressions of Khlebnikov's personal propheticism. "Warrior! You choose a cue from heaven's rack" Jan Sobieski: King of Poland (1674-1696), who led his army to victory over the Turks near Vienna in 1683. Minkowski (1864-1909): Hermann Minkowski, German mathematician who first postulated the idea of a four-dimensional universe in which the fourth dimension is time. "The land where Izanagi" Monagatori: any one of several prose collections of romantic or fantastic tales (e.g., Ise-monagatori or Takstori-monagatori) in early medieval Japanese literature. Perun: The Slavic god of thunder. Shang-ti: Yu-hiiang-shang-ti, literally August Supreme Emperor of Jade, the Father- Heaven of Taoist mythology. Maa emu: The earth-goddess in Estonian my- thology. Tien: Tien-Kwan, the agent of heaven in Taoist mythology. Indra: god of battle in ancient Indian mythology; Khlebnikov transforms him into a goddess here. Quetzalcoatl: Aztec god of the sun and air. Unkulunkulu: a Zulu god, the progenitor of mankind, identified by Khlebnikov elsewhere as a thunder god. "Why are these eyes forget-me-nots?" Ay is a Russian folk designation for the month of May. "My Campaigns" The poem juxtaposes two "campaigns"—one historical and the other personal and private. The former centers around the figure of Yermak, a Cossack adventurer of the sixteenth century who opened the Sibe- rian frontier for colonization during the reign of Ivan the Terrible. His incur- sions into Siberia represent for the poet the threshold event in Russia's east- ward expansion. The personal campaign is one involving "Vera"—probably Vera Demianovskaia (nee Siniakova), a cousin of the three Siniakova sisters and one of Khlebnikov's most intense infatuations (see note to "Now that the lilt of nightingales," below). The poem explores the reality of countermovements to both campaigns in accord with the poet's theory of historical progression— that events reverse their political and geographic orientation at intervals of 3'1 days. "Now that the lilt of nightingales" The addressee of the poem is Vera Demianovskaia (see note to "My Campaigns," above). She was married to a Soviet bureaucrat and at the same time was the mistress of A. N. Andrievsky, 244 Notes to Pages 70 - 7S a young mathematician who befriended Khlebnikov while he was living in Kharkov during the Civil War. Andrievsky was also an interrogator for the Red Army Tribunal based in Kharkov, and in this capacity had the power of life and death over his prisoners. (He is also the "Chairman of the Cheka" in the longer poem of the same name; see note below.) The danger of Khlebnikov's infatuation with Andrievsky's mistress is conveyed by the allusion to Pushkin's unfinished story "Egyptian Nights," in which another poet recounts how Cleopatra offered a night of love to any man on condition that he forfeit his life for the pleasure of such a liaison. P. P. Sushkin (1868-1928) was a well-known ornithologist, but not the author of Birds of the Kharkov Region (a similarly titled book was written by another ornithologist of the time, N. Somov). His presence in the poem is dictated by considerations of rhyme (Sushkin/Pushkin) and etymology ("Sushkin" derives from sukhoi, "dry"). "It was in the merry month of Ay" Ay is a Russian folk designation for the month of May. "The City of the Future" This poem is one of several works that Khlebnikov devotes to his urban Utopian visions (see also notes to "The Moscow of the Future" and "Cresting spines," below, and "Ourselves and Our Buildings" (Collected Works I: 347). These visions are informed by a change in perspective: they take as their perceptual and architectural starting point the city as seen from above rather than from the side: the vertical axis, and a concomitant concentration on the relations between the cosmos and the individual, are accentuated. "Here public dwelling-places . . . / like pages of glass": Khlebnikov once described a hypothetical structure in the form of an open book: "this one consists of stone walls set at an angle, and glass sheets of living modules arranged fanwise between these walls" (Collected Works I: 354). "Clear glass honeycombs": Khlebnikov envisions domiciles consisting of a framework of steel bays to accommodate individual glass living units that can be docked and undocked, allowing residents to move from one building, and from one city, to another simply by undocking and moving their apartments—by rail or steamship or, for self-propelling units, by air. "Blue strands of smooth glass homesteads": "The filament-building consisted of single rooms connected in a single strand stretched between two towers . . . Transparent because of the glass sun-spaces, it had the appearance of a filament or film" (Collected Works I: 354). "Tall pillar blossoming with dwelling-spaces": Elsewhere Khlebnikov refers to such a structure as a "flower-building": it "rose gracefully to an unattainable height; it had a dome of reddish matte glass, lacy railings that formed the edge of the calyx, and staircases of beautifully wrought steel" (Collected Works I: 355). "Asia, I have made you my obsession" Maha-vira (ca. 540-468 B.c.): A contem- porary of the Buddha and founder of Jainism. Sivaji (1627-1680): A chieftain 245 Notes to Pages 7$- 81 of the Maratha people, who led a successful rebellion of the indigenous Hindu population against their Mogul overlords in the seventeenth century. "The One, the Only Book" "Where they sing the Razin songs": Stenka Razin was the leader of a peasant rebellion that came close to toppling the monarchy in the seventeenth century. "The Present Day" Written in Kharkov during a period when the city fell alternately into the hands of the Reds and the Whites, the poem conveys the conditions of marshal law, starvation, and summary execution that charac- terized the rule of both parties. This variant of the poem may be only a fragment of a more extended version (see "Asia Unbound," Collected Works II). "Kruchonykh's editions": Khlebnikov's fellow Futurist Aleksei Kruchonykh (1886-1968), published numerous books (his own and others) in handwritten, lithographed editions. "Two Moscow images" The poem was occasioned by a meeting between Khlebnikov and two Imagist poets, Sergei Yesenin (1895-1925) and Anatoly Marienhof (1897-1962), when they came to Kharkov from Moscow in 1920. In the Russian original the penultimate line of the poem reads, "God, calve a son!" a quotation from Yesenin's poem "Transfiguration." The line became particularly notorious when the Imagists scrawled it in large letters on the wall of Moscow's Monastery of the Savior in 1919. "To Alyosha Kruchonykh" "A Game in Hell": A poetic burlesque coauthored by Khlebnikov and Kruchonykh and published in 1912. See notes to "The Present Day" (above) and "Kruchonykh" (below). "Someone wacky, someone nutty" The poem was inscribed in a notebook (probably on graph paper) belonging to Aleksei Kruchonykh, beneath a sketch of Kruchonykh walking nervously down a city street. The author of the sketch was Sergei Gorodetsky (1884-1967), an Acmeist poet and rival of the futurists. All three poets had come to Baku in late 1920, shortly before the city came under Soviet control. "Like a flock of sheep peacefully grazing" The juxtaposition of the two excla- mations "God is with us!" and " We are with us!" carries a particular resonance because the former, a quotation from Isaiah 8:10, serves as the refrain to a well-known hymn sung during the compline service in the Orthodox Church. "The Neva knows the look" The poem's toponyms are all related to Petrograd: the Neva River, the Stroganov Palace on Nevsky Avenue between the Moika River and the Kazan Cathedral, the equestrian ensembles further along Nevsky Avenue on the Anichkov Bridge, and the Peter and Paul Fortress, which houses 246 Notes to Pages 81- 88 "the graves of the tsars"—the tombs of Peter the Great and his successors. The Stroganov Palace is of particular significance for the thematics of the poem: situated near the Kazan Cathedral, it is adjacent to the scene of the workers' demonstrations which led to the downfall of the monarchy in Feb- ruary 1917. "Easter in Enzeli" Enzeli is situated on the southern shore of the Caspian, in the Iranian province of Gilan. Khlebnikov arrived there from Baku in the spring of 1921 with a contingent of Red Army troops that Lenin had dispatched to aid a local revolutionary movement. This was Khlebnikov's first encounter with Asia, and he sprinkles the poem with Farsi words to add local color to his description: portoghal means "orange tree"; naranj means "laurel cherry tree"; ji-ji is vodka distilled from grape juice. "The song about Razin's Persian princess": The song, by D. N. Sadovnikov, is one of the most popular in the Russian folk repertoire (see note to "I saw the young man, the young prophet," below). "In Zorgam's canyon": Khlebnikov's responsibilities as a propaganda officer were minimal in Iran, and he was allowed to wander about on his own. For a time he hired himself out as a tutor to the daughter of a local sultan named Zorgam, who lived in the mountain village of Khalkhal northwest of Enzeli. The daughter figures in several poems as an idealized object of the poet's affections. "Iranian Song" The two men are the poet and his friend Μ. V. Dobrokovsky, an artist who painted propaganda posters for the Red Army troops in Iran. "Night in Persia" "Samorodov": Boris Samorodov (1897-1942) was a set designer and sailor whom Khlebnikov met in Baku in 1921. He led a mutiny against his White commanding officers on the Australia. His sisters, Olga and Julia, also figure in the poet's biography (see note to "Babylove, don't your eyes ever get tired," below). Mahdi is the name of the promised Messiah in Islamic eschatology. "An Oak Tree in Persia" "Mazdak": A Persian archimage of the sixth century A.D. whose revolutionary doctrines—among them the equitable distribution of property and the community of women—incited the population against the Sassanide monarch Kobad. "Batu": Batu Khan (d. 1255), grandson of Genghis Khan and leader of the Golden Horde when it overran the Kievan state in the thirteenth century. "I saw the young man, the young prophet" In the early days of the revolt against Tsar Aleksei Mikhailovich, Stenka Razin (see note to "The shining shower dripping from the oar," above) engaged in wholesale brigandage along the Caspian coast. On one occasion he was attacked by a Persian fleet, which he routed completely, taking as prisoners the son and daughter of the fleet's 247 Notes to Pages 88-93 captain. He kept the daughter as his concubine for several months, until his men began to grumble that his devotion to her was interfering with his responsibilities as leader of the brigands. According to popular legend—and at least one reliable historical witness—he threw her overboard into the Volga, saying, "Here you are, Mother Volga! You have given me much gold and silver and other goods, showering me with glory and honor, and I have not given you anything in return." In the poem, Khlebnikov draws a parallel between, on the one hand, himself and Razin, and, on the other, the Persian concubine and Zorgam's daughter (see note to "Easter in Enzeli," above). Whereas Razin sacrificed his princess to the waters, the poet has turned his beloved into a rusalka, a mermaid. "I am a wave, I roll down" "Was printed out on the doubled": the manuscript becomes illegible at this point. "A ray struck me and gave me P. / I rose like a wisp of steam": In Khlebnikov's "Alphabet of the Intellect," Ρ designates the growth in distance between two objects or the general movement of several objects away from one another, such as molecules of water when it turns to steam (par in Russian). "The smell of night, inhaling stars" Written upon his return from Persia, the poem is a reflection on Khlebnikov's spiritual encounter with the Orient. The teacher mentioned in the second stanza may be Sayyid Ali Muhammed of Shiraz (1819-1850), founder of Babism, whom Khlebnikov held in great esteem as a teacher and prophet. He was executed in Tabriz by the Islamic authorities. (See also notes to "Lightland" and "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet," below.) "A stream of icy water" This poem appears to be based on an incident that occurred after Khlebnikov returned to Baku from Persia in the summer of 1921. The area had only recently come under Soviet control, and the Cheka (the secret police) was alert to all suspicious activity. Given Khlebnikov's peripatetic lifestyle and his utter indifference to matters of bourgeois order and propriety, he probably attracted the attention of the authorities while wandering about the environs of Baku without proper documentation, and was escorted to a Cheka interrogation point. A part of the text that was subsequently deleted speaks of the poet's being "persecuted" by the Cheka, and a later, incomplete reworking of the poem begins with the line, "Freedom's gone! / Galloping off to an interrogation." "Ra, who sees his own eye* The poem is a profound exercise in folk etymology. Khlebnikov analyzes the name of Stenka Razin (see note to "The shining shower dripping from the oar," above) as a compound consisting of two elements: Ra and zin. Ra is associated with the name of the Egyptian sun god and also with the name given to the Volga River in ancient geographic treatises. Zin is linked paronomastically with the Russian dialectisms ziny and ziry, which mean "eyes." The recurring mirror images in the poem are associated in turn 248 Notes to Pages 93-100 with Khlebnikov's "Alphabet of the Intellect," according to which the sibilant ζ signifies reflection and angle of vision. "Attentively I read" The version of the poem in the Russian edition (V: 22) contains two additional lines. An examination of the original manuscript reveals them to be part of a different poem. "Old Walt": Walt Whitman, whom Khlebnikov read in Kornei Chukovskii's translation, and whom he regarded as one of his visionary forebears. "Russia and Me" Khlebnikov provides a gloss for the poem in "A Cliff out of the Future" (Collected Writings I: 397), where he explains that human happiness relates directly to the degree of accord between the microcosm of the human body and the macrocosm of nature. The glorification of the naked body also relates directly to Khlebnikov's interest in Jainism (see note to "Asia, I have made you my obsession," above), which preaches nudity as an ascetic discipline. "Kruchonykh" The poem reflects Khlebnikov's mixed feelings toward Kruchonykh. While recognizing his genius as a Futurist proselytizer, he was uncomfortable with the way Kruchonykh borrowed others' ideas. In the margins of the manuscript, Khlebnikov wrote "dangerous," and in 1922 he wrote a poem openly accusing Kruchonykh of plagiarism. "Burliuk" The poem describes David Burliuk (1882-1967), poet, painter, tire- less promoter of Futurism, and friend of the poet. He was born in Kharkov and studied in Moscow, Odessa, Paris, and Munich. "Didn't Balashov put a nice slash": In January 1913, a mentally disturbed A. Balashov slashed Ilya Repin's famous painting of Ivan the Terrible. "Weary wings of the dreamstead" A longer and considerably different version of this poem was incorporated into the supersaga Zangezi (Collected Works II: 351), where it is clear that the poet is speaking about the "twilight of the gods," their gradual recession and disappearance. "Babylove, don't your eyes ever get tired" The poem is addressed to Julia Samorodova, an artist whom Khlebnikov met in Baku in 1920. Upon his return from Persia he stayed for a time with Julia and her sister Olga in the Caucasian resort of Zheleznovodsk, where he composed the poem. In her memoirs Olga indicates that Julia was a shy, otherworldly creature, and that Khlebnikov once said to her, "We both descended from the clouds"—a clear paraphrase of the lines, "You and I are alike, I fell from the sky / just like you." "The year the girls first called me 'Gramps'" Narzan is a well-known type of Caucasian mineral water. The spring Khlebnikov is speaking of is located in Zheleznovodsk, where Khlebnikov resided for several weeks with the Samoro- 249 Notes to Pages ιοο- ιΐ4 dov sisters in the autumn of 1921 (see note to "Babylove, don't your eyes ever get tired," above). "The lice had blind faith, and they prayed to me" and "Russia, I give you my divine" These two poems have consistently been printed together as a single poem. Manuscript evidence suggests that they are two independent, though related, texts. "When I was young I went alone" In the manuscript, the poem is followed without a break by a somewhat more extended version of "People stared in horror" (see following note). The reading of the poem presented here is based on a reexamination of the manuscript and does not correspond precisely to any of the versions in print. The poet's "spontaneous combustion" reflects his preoccupation with the searing drought that led to the Volga famine. Fridtjof Nansen's name is mentioned in this connection because he was instrumental in bringing the famine to the attention of the world community and organizing international relief efforts. "People stared in horror" and "Hunger" Khlebnikov was an eyewitness to the horrors of the Volga Basin famine of 1921-1922, which are described so graphi- cally in these poems. "The Tree" "Here Yermaks lead their leafy troops": See note to "My Cam- paigns," above. "Today Mount Mashuk is a hound dog" Mount Mashuk is one of five peaks that surround the resort town of Piatigorsk (see note to "Autumns Passing in Piatigorsk," below). The closing stanza reflects Khlebnikov's concern about the reversion to free-market exploitation associated with Lenin's New Eco- nomic Policy. "The Solo Actor" In the opening lines the poet contrasts his poetic mission with that of Anna Akhmatova (1889-1966), a leading Acmeist poet from St. Petersburg. Among her early poems are several devoted to Tsarskoe Selo, the summer residence of the tsars and, more importantly, a place associated with the young Aleksandr Pushkin, who attended the imperial lyceum there. He is also evoked in the line, "I . . . dragged myself like a drowsy corpse through a desert," which paraphrases a passage from Pushkin's famous poem "The Prophet," and in the closing image of the "sower of eyes," which recalls another of Pushkin's poems, "A lonely sower of liberty." The image of the Minotaur is doubly symbolic. On the one hand, the "curly head" (kurchavoe chelo) is itself evocative of Pushkin, whose portraits invariably accentuate his curly hair. On the other hand, textual evidence points to the bull as a symbol of war: an early draft of lines io-n reads: "The curly head of that subterranean bull, / like war, kept chomping and devouring men." In his 250 Notes to Pages 114-119 role as a new Theseus (or rather as an actor playing Theseus), Khlebnikov makes himself out to be a victor over both the traditional literary order represented by Pushkin and Akhmatova, and the old social and political order that feeds on young lives. "At the backwoods whistle-stop" Written en route from the Caucasus to Mos- cow. "Past three years" refers specifically to the years of the Civil War. "Wind, wind!": These words open Alexander Blok's masterpiece, "The Twelve," an evocation of the early days of the Revolution. Word of Blok's death in August 1921 reached Khlebnikov not long before his departure for Moscow. "Dinner" "The shadow of Razin": See notes to "The shining shower drip- ping from the oar" and "I saw the young man, the young prophet," above. "Don't mess with me!" This poem, written shortly after Khlebnikov's return to Moscow, reflects his dismay that the cause for which so much blood had been shed in the Civil War was being subverted by Lenin's New Economic Policy, which was opening the door to a new generation of capitalist entrepre- neurs. In old Pugachev's coat: Pugachev was the leader of a major peasant rebellion against Catherine the Great in 1772-1773. His coat figures prominently in the plot of Alexander Pushkin's tale, "The Captain's Daughter," the fictional autobiography of a young officer during the Pugachev Rebellion. "Let the plowman leave his furrow" The image of city sites marked in waves of dust is taken from the experiments of August Kundt, a German physicist who devised a method for measuring the speed of sound by means gas-filled glass tubes ("Kundt tubes"). The vibration of a membrane at one end of the tube produces standing waves registered by a fine coating of dust inside the tube. Lumps of dust that form at the nodes of the waves—the point of least vibration—represent for Khlebnikov the points on the surface of the planet where people are lumped together like the particles of dust. "Suppose I make a timepiece of humanity" This poem served as a preface to the first fascicle of Khlebnikov's Tables of Destiny (see Collected Works I: 417), which provide the mathematical foundations for Khlebnikov's belief that his discovery of the Laws of Time would render war an anachronism. "I'll reveal the drowned city of Kitezh": According to Russian legend, the city of Kitezh was saved from the invading Tatar hordes of Batu Khan by sinking into the earth and being covered by a lake. Pilgrims visiting the site claim that one can still, on occasion, see the cupolas of the churches beneath the waters and hear the pealing of the church bells. Kitezh is a common symbol of Russia's idealized pre-Petrine past. "OK, Graylegs" The poem begins with a line from "The Plowman's Song," a lyric in the folk style by the Russian romantic poet Aleksei Koltsov. 251 Notes to Pages up-123 Khlebnikov deliberately contrasts his cosmic plow horse with that of his nineteenth-century forebear. The contrast is accentuated in the closing lines, where Khlebnikov evokes the image of Leo Tolstoy behind a plow as depicted in Ilya Repin's famous painting. "'OURS,' say letters of clouds in the sky": The Russian word nash ("ours") is also the code word for the letter n. In the Russian maritime signaling system, η means that explosives are being loaded and weapons prepared for firing. Khlebnikov deleted three lines at the end of the poem. Addressed to Vladimir Mayakovsky, they read: "Hey, Vova! / Some- one's knocking at the stars! / Friend! Let me shake your noble hoof." "Three V's, three Μ ^ three words" The first line describes the name of the poem's addressee: Vladimir Wadimir[ov]ich Mayakovsky. Khlebnikov plays on the fact that the poet's Christian name is the same as his father's (Vladimi- rovich, or "Vladimirich" in spoken Russian, means literally "Vladimir, son of Vladimir"). "Who?" This poem is a portrait of Vladimir Mayakovsky. Acknowledgment" The word for "slob" in Russian is kham, which Khlebnikov reads as an acronym consisting of the first letter of his surname and the first letter of Mayakovsky's (Kh + M). The word also figures in the title of a well-known essay by the symbolist poet Dmitry Merezhkovsky (1866- 1941), in which he expresses his disdain for the "slobs" who threaten high culture. Khlebnikov defiantly accepts the appellation on Mayakovsky's and his own behalf. The opening lines diverge from the Russian original in Τ 171, following a more compelling reading based on an examination of the manu- script. Jan Sobieski: See note to "Warrior! You choose a cue from the rack of heaven," above. "To You All* This poem is addressed to Khlebnikov's Futurist colleagues in Moscow. One of the poet's chief concerns upon returning to Moscow in late 1921 was to recover and publish a large number of manuscripts that he had left with Mayakovsky three years earlier. The poem expresses his distress over manuscripts lost or inadvertently destroyed during the three years he spent wandering across Ukraine, Persia, and the Caucasus. "And then I'll collapse, like Kuchum / on the lances of Yermak": Yermak (see note to "My Cam- paigns," above) defeated the Siberian khan Kuchum in 1581 and drove him from his capital, the city of Isker. Ultimately, however, Kuchum returned to defeat Yermak and was finally subdued only in 1591. "Everywhere you look, the bodies of murdered tsareviches": in 1591 Ivan the Terrible's ten-year-old son, Dmitry, died under mysterious circumstances in the town of Uglich, where he and his family had been exiled by Dmitry's half-brother, Tsar Fedor. The real power behind the throne at the time was Boris Godunov, and rumors were widespread that he had ordered the tsarevich's murder. 252 Notes to Pajjes 124-147 "Hey, holy man!" This poem borrows extensively from the Vita of Saint Mikhail Klopsky, a fifteenth-century Novgorodian monk who, upon joining a monastery, refused to reveal his identity, repeating rather than answering the questions posed by his interlocutors. "Glagolitic letters": The original alphabet of the Slavs, introduced by Saints Cyril and Methodius in the ninth century but subsequently replaced by Cyrillic. "Zoo" Dedicated to the symbolist poet Viacheslav Ivanov (1866-1949), whom Khlebnikov met in 1908, and who encouraged him in his early poetic efforts. The poem is based on the poet's observations in the St. Petersburg Zoological Gardens. "And feel like taking revenge on him for Port Arthur": At the onset of the Russo-Japanese War the Japanese attacked Port Arthur, which fell on December 19, 1904, after a siege of 148 days. Khlebnikov's decision to devote his life to the discovery of the laws of time was precipitated, in part, by his reaction to Russia's humiliation in the war. "Like the codex of the Igor Tale" ·. The sole existing manuscript of Russia's national epic, The Tale of the Host of Igor, was destroyed in the fire that consumed Moscow when Napoleon occu- pied the city in 1812. "The Stone Woman" Rough-hewn stone statues of male and female figures, usually six to eight feet tall, are scattered over the southern steppes of Russia. They are frequently found atop burial mounds and are believed to represent the ancestors of those who originally erected them: non-Slavic tribes, among them the Scythians, who occupied these areas as far back as the Iron and Bronze Ages. "The Poet" This poem was written at the request of V. Ia. Anfimov, a doctor working at a psychiatric facility outside Kharkov, where Khlebnikov sought refuge from mobilization during the Civil War. As part of his examination, the doctor proposed that the poet compose pieces on a variety of themes, among them "Carnival"—the title given to an early version of the poem. In his notebooks, Khlebnikov also refers to it by such titles as "Vernal Holy Days," "Rusalka," and "Rusalka and the Poet." The image of the rusalka is critical to an understanding of the poem as a whole. She is a mermaid-like figure, usually associated with rivers, who in classical Russian folklore is most fre- quently regarded as the incarnate spirit of a child who died unbaptized or a woman who drowned. Khlebnikov's rusalka is a figure perceived partly through this folkloric filter, but also through the filter of nineteenth-century Russian literature, where she is portrayed less ominously as a beautiful maiden who emerges from the water at night and combs her hair while reclining on a riverbank. For Khlebnikov she is first and foremost a symbol of language and thought in their "beyonsense," their prerational manifestations. Together with the Virgin Mary and the poet himself, she represents an anachronism in the positivist world of modern science and secular ideology. "Blue-petaled flowers 253 Notes to Pages 153-168 . . . Lada's devotion": Lada is the goddess of love, joy, and merriment in the largely artificial pantheon of Slavic gods created by nineteenth-century Russian ethnographers. "A diamond known as Kizel-W: an inexact rendering of the Arabic almaz-e kizil, "red diamond." "Night in the Trenches" This poem describes the prelude to battle and a brief skirmish at an early stage in the Civil War. The setting, the broad steppe lands of the south, takes on particular significance because this same land in pre- Christian times was a site of battles and burials, marked by the presence of large stone monuments, rough-cast female figures who stand as silent observers (see note to "The Stone Woman," above). This juxtaposition of contemporary and ancient reality is particularly significant in light of Khlebnikov's cyclical theory of time, transforming a political tableau into a meditation on the tragedy of historical recurrence. "Who once was nothing / will now be all": Khlebnikov is quoting here from the Internationale, mentioned a few lines earlier. "Driving out the chanting monks": Following the victory of the Bolsheviks, scores of monasteries were closed, the monks were dispersed, and the buildings were turned over to the military or municipal authorities for their own use. "His face has a Mongol cast": A portrait of Lenin, whose voice is dramatized in the monologue that follows. "I sent a team of scientists": In their attempts to discredit the Church, the Bolsheviks organized official disinterments of saints to prove to the local population that, contrary to the Church's claims, their bodies had not been miraculously preserved. "Your own rusalka blood": See note to "The Poet," above. "Our crowded Maidenfield": A Moscow region known for its medical facilities in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Rogneda: The pagan wife Prince Vladimir, Christianizer of Russia, known for her extraordi- nary beauty (d. ca. 1000). "Ltghtland" In the Russian the poem is titled "Ladomir," a noun that con- joins lad ("harmony," "concord") and mir ("world"). Khlebnikov originally titled the work "Insurrection." It is his most expansive Utopian vision, born of an antipathy toward the prerevolutionary past and a faith in the potential of poetry and technology to reform the world. "Let Lobachevskian space / stream from the flagpoles of night-loving Petrograd": The "reformed" space of Lobachevskian geometry—those spatial configurations that would permit the full logical elaboration of non-Euclidian geometry—functions as a meta- phor for Khlebnikov's own "reformed" concept of time. "The Time of the Takers . . . the Might of the Makers": In the Russian original, Khlebnikov creates a new word, tvorianin ("creator"), on the model of an existing word, dvorianin ("nobleman"). "This is the havoc that Razin unleashed": See notes to "The shining shower dripping from the oar" and "I saw the young man, the young prophet," above. "Let its building blocks be only the beats of your heart": Khlebnikov's Utopian projects included proposals to "effect the ex- 254 Notes to Pages 169- 17s change of labor and services by means of an exchange of heartbeats. Estimate every task in terms of heartbeats—the monetary unit of the future, in which all individuals are equally wealthy." He also suggested the use of heartbeats "as the units of measurement for the rights and obligations of human labor" (Collected Works I: 357, 360). "Workers in Hungary stretched out their hands to us": For a very brief period of time, from March 20 through August 1, 1919, a Communist regime existed in Hungary, raising hopes among the Russian Bolsheviks that a world revolution was imminent. "Like Perun, to be pieces of wood adrift in the Dnieper": Perun is the ancient Slavic god of thunder. Following the Chris- tianization of the Kievan state in 988, his idol, situated on an embankment overlooking the Dnieper, was torn down and thrown into the river. "Like the chest of the tsar, the last Romanov": On July 16, 1918, Nikolai Romanov and the entire royal family were executed by firing squad in Ekaterinburg. "How a castle of lace was the prize of a girl . . . Now the dancer's private residence / beats out a call to arms": The girl is Matilda Kshesinskaia, a well-known St. Petersburg ballerina and Tsar Nicholas II's mistress. In return for her services, she received a palatial residence from the Tsar. Following the February Revo- lution, the palace was nationalized, and became the headquarters of the Bolshevik Military Organization. "Germany's G fell away from its name": The removal of the "head" letters from Germany and Russia signify not the demise of the nations themselves but the removal of the political heads—the Aomanovs in .Russia and the Hohen- zollerns ("Gogentsollern" in Russian) in Germany. The "rise and extension of L" signifies not only the rise of Lenin, but also the establishment of a new "kingdom," Lightland. "The violin of Planet Earth": An unpublished entry from one of Khlebnikov's notebooks of this period reads, "For me the planet Earth is Picasso's violin made up of dark figures." "The face of Razin, sculpted by Konenkov, / like a holy book in the Kremlin": S. T. Konenkov's sculpture of Stenka Razin, unveiled in May 1919, stands before St. Basil's Cathedral on Red Square. The "holy book" may be a reference to a bas-relief entitled "To Those Fallen in the Battle for Peace and Brotherhood among the Nations," sculpted by Konenkov for the wall of the Senate Tower on Red Square and unveiled on the first anniversary of the October Revolution. Both works of art are examples of the monumental propaganda sponsored by the new Bolshevik regime. "And Shevchenko, who no longer fears the day": An allusion to an autobiographical tale by the great Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko. It de- scribes how a peasant lad who wishes to become an artist sketches the statues in St. Petersburg's Summer Garden at night, by the light of the midnight sun, in order to avoid being expelled from the grounds by those of higher social status. In Lightland, Shevchenko's peasant would not fear the light of day. "Qurrat al-'Ayn": A Persian poet and follower of Sayyid Ali Muhammad (the Bab), founder of the Bahai faith. She was executed in 1852 by Persia's conservative Islamic authorities on account of her revolutionary views. Her 255 Notes to Pages 17s-202 real name was Fatima Zarrin Taj Baraghani. "Qurrat al-'Ayn" is a traditional term of endearment used by teachers for exceptionally gifted students, and means "Solace of the Eyes." "The sayings of Tsong-kha-pa": A Lamaist leader (1357-1419), also known as Tson-K'a-pa, who was responsible for the reorgani- zation of the major Lamaist sect founded by Atisa. In the Tables of Destiny, Khlebnikov describes him as the "great teacher of the Mongols," the "Socrates of the wilderness of Asia." "To the land where Izanagi . . . beside Astarte, who worships Hokusai": See note to "The land where Izanagi," above. "At Vol- konsky's great house on Ostozhenko: The Volkonskys, one of Russia's wealthi- est families, owned a palace on Ostozhenko Street in Moscow; following the Revolution, it became the headquarters of the People's Commissariat for Education. "In our retreat at Krasnaia Poliana, / the burning spark of Nosar's revolution": Krasnaia Poliana was an estate outside Kharkov belonging to the Siniakova family (see notes to "Unbending as Boris Godunov's boyarina" and "My Campaigns," above)—an estate frequented by Khlebnikov, Nikolai Aseev, Boris Pasternak, and other prominent figures in the Futurist movement. G. S. Nosar (1870-1918) was a Russian revolutionary who chaired the Petersburg Soviet during the abortive revolution of 1905. "The rusalka hidden at the roots of the tree": See note to "The Poet," above. "Night Raid" The "raid" is most probably set in Petrograd following the Bolshevik coup. The protagonists are a group of Red marines looking for members of the White resistance. In the upper right-hand corner of the manuscript, Khlebnikov wrote: "7.XI.21. 3 + 3 ." The date of composition marks the fourth anniversary of the revolution, and the fact that Khlebnikov chose to express the passage of those four years in terms of the formula 36 + 36 (1,458 days, or almost exactly four years) is highly significant. According to his theory of historical cycles, politically and ideologically opposing events occur at intervals of 311 days. The poem presents a microcosmic instantiation of this theory: the murder of the young White sympathizer, Vladimir, is eventually followed by the revenge taken on the murderers by Vladimir's mother. The fiery death of the Red Marines at the end of the poem, in turn, stands in opposition to the revolutionary conflagration that brought the Bol- sheviks to power in 1917. The fact that the poem presents this picture of historical retribution without commentary made it ideologically suspect, and following its initial publication in the Collected Works it was excised from every subsequent collection of Khlebnikov's verse until 1986. "A rusalka. laughing": See note to "The Poet," above. "The Pugachev Sea": Emilian Pugachev was the leader of a major Cossack rebellion (1772-1773) during the reign of Cath- erine the Great. "The Chairman of the Cheka" This poem is profoundly autobiographical. Following the occupation of Kharkov by the Red Army in early December 1919, Khlebnikov was released from the psychiatric hospital where he had taken 256 Notes to Pages zoz- 214 refuge to avoid mobilization by the Whites. Returning to Kharkov, he met A. N. Andrievsky, a young mathematician and interrogator for the Red Army tribunals set up to deal with counterrevolutionary elements in the city. Khlebnikov took him to be an agent of the Cheka. For a time he lived with Andrievsky "in a communal room [with] five windows," along with the latter's mistress, Vera Demianovskaia, the wife of a prominent Soviet official (see note to "Now that the lilt of nightingales," above). Andrievsky's schizophrenic character, described in term of the Nero/Christ opposition in the poem, was reflected in the ambiguous nature of his activities: on the one hand he was responsible for defending the new revolutionary order, and on the other hand his apartment was a center of black-market operations. The words he sings while Russia burns ("We'll turn the Old World upside down, and then . . .") are from the Internationale. The references to the Cheka headquarters "at the end of a street named after a great writer" (Pushkin Street) and to the Cheka's activities are histori- cally accurate. The reoccupation of the city by the Bolsheviks in 1919 was followed by a reign of terror directed by a local Chekist, S. A. Saenko, who had a reputation for pathological cruelty. In later years Andrievsky vigorously denied ever having been associated with the Cheka, insisting that Khlebnikov had confused the Cheka with the Revolutionary Military Tribunal on which he served. "Cracking the Universe" "When many men died in a great deep of water . . . I made a promise": The son's vow repeats a pledge that Khlebnikov made when he learned of the Tsushima disaster. He writes in "Self-Statement": "I swore to discover the Laws of Time and carved that promise on a birch tree (in the village of Burmakino, Yaroslavl) when I heard about the battle of Tsushima" (Collected Works II: 8). The depiction of the universe as a skull (see also in this connection "You whose mind flowed," in this volume) can be traced to ancient Jainist cosmogony. The influence of Jainism can be detected in other poems as well—see, in particular, "Russia and Me" and "Asia, I have made you my obsession." "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet" There is no genuinely canonical version of the text. In addition to one complete rough draft, there are fair copies of various sections of the poem reworked by Khlebnikov following his return to Russia. The version translated here (T 348) is a composite that unites all known revised sections of the text with the unrevised passages of the rough draft. The title assigned to this version in Tvoreniia is "Tyrant without the T: Encounter" ("Tiran bez T: vstrecha"), but Khlebnikov refers to this poem most frequently as "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet." Khlebnikov wrote the poem during his sojourn in Iran as a propaganda officer for the Red expeditionary force that Lenin had dispatched to assist local revolutionaries. According to the memoirs written by Khlebnikov's compatri- 257 Notes to Pages 214-222 ots on the ill-fated expedition, the poem is heavily autobiographical. Sections 12 and 13 treat his wanderings on the Caspian Sea coast around the port city of Enzeli; sections 15-18 cover the expeditionary forces as they marched east through the province of Mazanderan toward Shahsavar on their way to Tehe- ran; section 19 describes the retreat toward Enzeli. Khlebnikov intended at one time to include some or all of the sections of "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet" in Zanßezi. The numerous non-Russian phrases that appear in the poem are transcrip- tions of what Khlebnikov would have heard in the provinces of Gilan and Mazanderan, along the southern coast of the Caspian Sea (northern Iran). The indigenous population speaks a dialect of Turkish, creolized with borrowings from Persian and Arabic. It is not always apparent from Khlebnikov's own transcriptions what a given word's linguistic provenance is. The title of the poem in the rough draft is "The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet." Gul-mullah means "flower priest" or, more precisely, "flower theologian" in Persian. Apparently the Iranians gave Khlebnikov this name because, with his unkempt beard and tattered clothes he looked very much like a Sufi holy man or dervish. "Hak! Hak!": In Persian and Arabic, an exclamation meaning "truth," as in "God is truth," repeated by dervishes collecting alms. "£ok pul! (^ok "Much money, many coins" (Turkish, Persian). "Ofana! Μοςαηα!": An excla- mation signifying joy or delight (Turkish). "The Kursk went chugging toward you": The Kursk is the ship on which Khlebnikov arrived in Enzeli in April 1921. "I am Razin read backward": Khlebnikov means "backward" both literally and figuratively. Razin's name in reverse reads nizar, a Russian dialectism meaning "hoi polloi"—characterizing the disenfranchised whose cause Razin championed. Metaphorically, Khlebnikov sees himself as Razin's antipode: whereas "Razin threw his bride overboard," he intends to rescue his beloved (see note to "I saw the young man, the young prophet," above). "Qurrat al-'Ayn . . . Tariha": See note to "Lightland," above. Tariha ("the pure") is another name for Qurrat al-'Ayn. "Your bridegroom" is probably a reference to the Bab, whom Tahira never met, but who, in apocryphal accounts of their lives, is represented as her betrothed. The Bab was strung from a pillar and executed by firing squad in 1850. "A tower of dark-blue stone ... by the bridge": The scene has now shifted from the port of Enzeli to the city of Rasht, a few miles to the southeast; here Khlebnikov describes the Parde Arak Bridge. "Only one A coin of low denomination (Turkish). "Raistumam doniya": More properly, Rais tumam-e-donya, Khlebnikov's rendering in Persian of "President of Planet Earth." "Ali became a President": probably a reference to Ali Razi, one of Khlebnikov's Persian comrades who worked for the divi- sional newspaper of the expeditionary force Krasny Iran (Red Iran). "A land where all men are Adams": The word adam means "man" in Persian. "Shira:" Opium dregs (Persian). "Where they give the silent moon / a resounding name— / Ay!": Ay is the word for both "moon" and "month" in Turkish; it is also the Russian folk designation for May (see notes to "It was in the merry 258 Notes to Pages 222 - 22g month of Ay" and "Why are these eyes forget-me-nots?" above), the month when Khlebnikov found himself in Iran. "Uruss dervish!": "Russian dervish" (Persian). "A shaggy lion . . . holding a scimitar": The entire section describes the royal seal of Iran. "Your friend's eyes" is an allusion to Khlebnikov's early mentor, the symbolist poet Viacheslav Ivanov (see note to "Zoo," above). "Khalkhal": See note to "Easter in Enzeli," above. "Chai-khane"tea-house" (Persian). "Marienhof and Yesenin": These two imagist poets were present in Kharkov in 1920, where they arranged a mock inauguration of Khlebnikov as President of Planet Earth. "A porcupine's quill gleamed in the light of Ay": The quill, which Khlebnikov used as his writing implement in Iran, becomes a metonym for his whole encounter with the culture; see "The Willow Twig" (Collected Works U: 150). «Karde?: Turkish for "comrade," "brother." "A black kettle, spitting in my face? / Black water? No, just Ali Mohammed": "Black water" is the euphemism for glaucoma in Persian. "Kerji": Persian word for operators of large flat-bottomed boats used on the Caspian Sea. "We row from Enzeli to Kazyan": Murdab Bay divides the port of Enzeli into two parts, one of which is Kazyan. "Autumns Passing in Piatigorsk" Piatigorsk, where Khlebnikov lived in No- vember and December of 1921, is a well-known spa located in the central Caucasus, on the southern slopes of Mount Mashuk. "Piatigorsk" itself means "Five Mountains"—a reference to the five peaks that surround the town, which are among those mentioned in the course of the poem (Beshtau; Mashuk; the twin peaks of Yutsa and Dzhutsa, called the two "Beetles"; Gold Kurgan; and Dubravny). The images of death throughout the poem are motivated not only by the seasonal context, but also by the common association of Piatigorsk with the Russian romantic poet Mikhail Lermontov. He was killed in a duel at the foot of Mount Mashuk in June 1841. 259 List of Poems Lyrics Harsh hush bends bow (Nem' lukaet lukom nemnym) 25 Where the winking waxwings whistle (Tam, gde zhili sviristeli) 25 Here I praise the brutal flight (la sl&vliu let ego nasilii) 26 Came a rush of whistling (S zhurchaniem-svistom) 26 The echoing gull planes over empty water (V'etsia zvonkaia chaika) 26 The streams of time (Vremyshi-kamyshi) 27 Cloudarias floated all forlorn (Oblakini plyli i rydali) 27 Snowfellow, tallfellow, bright beacon (Snegich uzyvnyi, belyi i dlinnyi) 27 You are my song, my dark-blue dream (Tebia poiu, mot sinii son) 27 Languor-wing flies in the middle of fable (Negol' sladko-nezbnoi skazki) His sweet lids close and shut away (Grob leunnostei mladych) 27 The freezing weather of debauchery (Studa besstydnykh neg) 28 Woe-mind, Slow-mind, and No-mind, three sisters, girls (Neum', razum' bezum'—tri sestry pliasali vmeste) 28 Wo-man and Wo man (Zhenun i zhenun) 28 My bag breaks (Iz meshka) 28 The death-dole of an old skull (I mertvostyn') 28 The bowl is banished from the long tables (Kubok sbit iz dlinnykh dosok) A herd of horses shod with hours (Sutkonoßikh tabun kobylits) 29 Snow is a dream of earth (Sneg son zemnoi) 29 No now. I'm like everybody! (None ia, kak vse) 29 The Dostoyology of racing clouds! (O, dostoevskiimo begushchei tuchil) ν Incantation by Laughter (Zakliatie smekhom) 30 Bo-beh-oh-bee is the lipsong (Bobeobi pelts'guby) 30 Who wants to hear a story (Komu skazatenki) 30 Grasshopper (Kuznechik) 31 260 List of Poems Enormous arboreal monster, hanging (Chudovishche—zhilets vershin) 31 On the island of Ezeli (Na ostrove Ezele) 31 Neward, we praise thee! (Tebe poem, rodun) 31 We chant and enchant (My charuemsia i churaemsia) 32 A Foppish Proposal (Opyt zhemannogo) 32 Brooding, dark, and elegant (Smußol, temen i iziashchen) 33 OK, Graylegs, time to set the plow (Polno, sivka, vidno, tra) 33 I swam across the Sudak Gulf (la pereplyl zaliv Sudaka) 3+ The Tangled Wood (Trushchoby) 34 We want to be familiars of the stars (My zhelaem zvezdam tykat') 35 I see them: Crab, Ram, Bull (Mne vidny—Rak, Oven) 36 Rutting elephants, battering ivory tusks (Slony bilis' bivniami tak) 36 People in love, making (Liudi, kogda oni liubiat) 37 The eyes of the Black (Ochi Oki) 37 A goblin grabbles in the greeny forest (Zelenyi lesbii—bukh lesinyi) 37 Let us all be heads of lettuce (Nash kochen' ochen' ozabochen') 38 I saw a tiger, he crouched by a wood (la videl babr' sidel u roshchi) 38 When horses die, they sigh (Koda umiraiut koni—dyshat) 38 The law of the seesaw argues (Zakon kachelei velit) 38 The naked staghorn rising in the woods (Kojjda rojja olenia podymaiutsia (nad zelen'iu) 38 Qua-People (Pa-liudi) 39 Numbers (Chisla) 39 The night is full of constellations (Noch', polnaia sozvezdii) 39 I don't need much! (Mne malo nado!) 40 The sticky sky smells blue-gray, it's the odor of udder (Nebo dushno i pakhnet siz'iu i vymenem) 40 The moon begins to flow (Mesiats plyvuchii) 40 Reflections of a Profligate (Razmyshlenie razvratnika) 40 In periwinkle potion (Ο chervi zemlianye) 41 I am borne on the back of an elephant (Menia pronosiat na slonovykh) 41 The Song of One Come to Confusion (Pesn' smushchennogo) 42 Rue: A Fable (Bekh: Basnia) 42 Fly! Little three-letter wordlet (Mukha! Nezhnoe slovo, krasivoe) 43 261 List of Poems I'm going out again today (Segodnia snova ia poidu) 43 A bunch of yellow buttercups (Liutikov zheltykh puchok) 43 Black king dance out front of the crowd (Chernyi tsar' pliasal pered narodom) 44 Genghis Khan me, you midnight plantation! (Usad'ba noch'iu— Chingiskhan'l) 44 A quiet perfume from the orchard (Tikhii dukh ot iablon veet) 45 These tenuous Japanese shadows (Ni khrupkie teni Iaponii) 45 Tell your kitten not to bite (ICotenku sbepcbesh': ne kusai) 45 Nations, faces, ages pass (Gody, liudi i narody. . .) 46 Beast + Number (Zver' + chislo) 46 Autumn this year is a rabbit affair (Eta osen' takaia zaiacb'ia) 47 A Vague Memory (Smutnoe vospominanie) 47 Herd of hoofsteps, ingots of elephants (Tabun shagov, chugun slonov) 48 My elbow brushed (Ia kosnulsia moim loktem) 48 Young girls, young men, remember! (Devy i iunoshi, vspomnite) 49 "Hey!" the wolf cries out in blood (Gde volk voskliknul krov'iu) 50 Bad News, April 8, 1916 (Pechal'naia novost', 8/IV/1916) 50 The King is out of luck (Korol' ν temnitse) 51 I am in Tsaritsyn, where (Gde, kak volosy devitsyny) 52 The too-often reviewed book of my face (Moia tak razßadana knijja litsa) 52 Palm Sunday (Verbnoe voskresenie) 52 Cloaked in schools of flying fish (Odetyi ν set' letuchikh ryb) 53 Battle in the Comics (Rot ν lubke) 54 Someday I'll forget about Swanland (Stranu Lebediiu zabudu) 54 Oh, if only Asia could dry my face (O, esli b Aziia sushila volosami) 56 Tatlin! Poet of propellers (Tatlin, tainovidets lopastei) 56 I (Ia) 56 On a Hill (Na kholme) 58 Unbending as Boris Godunov's boyarina (Segodnia stroßoiu boiarynei Borisa Godunova) 58 Is it the voice of the goddess of foam (Panna peny, panna peny) 59 The trumpets never squealed a signal for defeat (Ne vyli truby nabat 0 gibeli) 59 262 List of Poems Their faces by Maliavin (Maliavina krasivitsy, ν venke tsvetov Korovina) 60 You whose mind flowed (Ty zhe, chei razum stekal) 60 People in washhouses rush to scrub their souls (I liudi speshno moiut dushi ν pracheshnoi) 61 Moscow's a crazed old skull (Moskva—starinnyi cherep) 61 Yesterday I whistled: Coo! Coo! Coo! (Vchem ia molvil: "Gullia! ßullia'.") 61 The shining shower dripping from the oar (Kapaet s vesel siiaiushchii dozhd') 62 When Freedom comes, she comes naked (Svoboda prikbodit naßaia) 63 The people raise the rod of sovereign power (Narod podnial verkbovnyi zhezel) 63 A hundred and ten thousand seals weep (Sto desiat' ty stach tiulenei ßrnstiat) 64 Freedom (O svobode) 64 Wind whose song (Veter—penie) 65 White horses, white hearses (Belyi droßi, belyi drojji) 65 Warrior! You choose a cue from heaven's rack (Voinl ty vyrval u nebes kii) 66 The land where Izanagi (Tuda, tuda, gde Izanagi) 66 The sayings and sallies of spring (Vesny poslovitsy i pojjovorki) 66 Alive with glad tidings (Vesennego Κ or ana) 67 Why are these eyes forget-me-nots? (Zachem νgliadelkakh nezabudkP.) 67 Water eats at the rippling roots (Tochit derev'ia i tikho techet) 68 Whorlen of the worldwide will (No vracheso zamirnoi volt) 68 This whole day is full of blue bears, they (V etot den'golybykh medvedei) 68 A black crab on a white plate (I chernyi rak na belom bliude) 69 A congress of politic grackles (Sobor jjrachei osenii) 69 Crawling crying craven (Dikii khoron) 69 My Campaigns (Moi pokhody) 70 Now that the lilt of nightingales (I esli ν "Kharkovskie ptitsy") 70 Where the sun like ready money (Tarn ßde solntse chistoßanom) 70 It was in the merry month of Ay (Eto bylo ν mesiats Ai) 71 Tough Talk (Grubyi iazyk) 71 Sweet Talk (Nezhnyi iazyk) 71 263 List of Poems Night's color breeding darker blues (Synoveet nochei sineva) 72 You boot-stomping workers in the poetry factory (V tiazbelykb sapojjakb) 72 The City of the Future (Gorod budusbchego) 73 Asia, I have made you my obsession (O Azia, toboi sebia ia muchu) 75 Asia (Aziia) 76 The One, the Only Book (Edinaia knijja) 77 The Present Day (Sovremennost') 78 Two Moscow imagos (Moskva—kolymaga) 79 To Alyosha Kruchonykh (Aleshe Krucbenykb) 79 Someone wacky, someone nutty (Kto-to dikii, kto-to sbalyi) 79 Like a flock of sheep peacefully grazing (Kak stado ovets mirno dremlet) 79 The Neva knows the look in those Last Supper eyes (Tainoi vecberi glaz) 81 Girls are the ones (Devusbki, te, cbto shagaiut) 82 Evening darkens round (I vecher temets) 82 Easter in Enzeli (Paskba ν Enzeli) 82 Iranian Song (Iranskaia pesnia) 84 Night in Persia (Noch' ν Persii) 85 The Opium Smoker (Kuril'sbcbik sbiry) 86 An Oak Tree in Persia (Dub Persii) 87 A wild old hank of hair (Zbestoki starye triapki volos) 87 I saw the young man, the young prophet (Ia videl iunosbu-proroka) 88 I am a wave, I roll down (Ia—volna) 88 The smell of night, inhaling stars (Nocbi zapakb—eti zvezdy) 90 A stream of icy water (Rucbei s kholodnoiu vodoi) 91 Ra, who sees his own eye in the red rusty swamp water (Ra—vidiasbcbii ocbi svoi ν rzhavoi i krasnoi bolotnoi vode) 93 Attentively I read the springtime thoughts of the Divinity (Vnimatel'no cbi- taiu vesennie mysli boga) 93 Russia and Me (Ia i Rossiia) 94 Kruchonykh (Krucbenykb) 94 Burliuk (Burliuk) 95 I have come like a butterfly (Mne, babocbke, zaletevsbei) 97 264 List of Poems Weary wings of the dream stead (Ustalye kryl'ia mechtoga) 98 Fate hides her yawn, rolls over (Sud'ba zakryla son) 99 Babylove, don't your eyes ever get tired (Detusia! Esli ustaliglaza byt' shi- rokimi) 99 The year the girls first called me "Gramps" (V tot god, koßda devushki) 100 The lice had blind faith, and they prayed to me (Vshi tupo molilis' mne) roi Russia, I give you my divine (Mot belyi bozbestvennyi mozjj) 101 With the grabhooks of wholesale slaughter (Bagrami morov budu razbirat' staroe stroenie narodov) 101 Three years of civil war (Tri jjoda grazbdanskoi voiny) 101 Bow! Wow! Wow! (Gau! Gau! Gau!) 102 War and wildness part his hair (Gde volosy, razveiannye sech'iu) 103 The fault is yours, you gods (Delo vashe, bogi) 103 When I was young I went alone (la vysbel iunoshei odin) 103 People stared in horror; souls in anguish wept (Narod otcbaialsia. Zaplakala dusha) 104 Hunger (Golod) 104 The Tree (Derevo) no The air splits on the black branches (Vozdukh raskolot na cbernye vetki) 112 The Moscow of the Future (Moskva budusbchego) 113 Today Mount Mashuk is a hound dog (Segodnia Masbuk, kak borzaia) 114 The Solo Actor (Odinokii litsedei) 114 At the backwood whistle-stop (Na glukhom polustanke) 115 Dinner (Obed) 115 Don't Mess with Me! (Ne sbalit'!) 116 Let the plowman leave his furrow (Pust' pakhar', pokidaia boronu) 117 The Future (Budushchee) 118 Suppose I make a timepiece of humanity (Esli ia obrashchu chelovechestvo ν chasy) 118 OK, Graylegs (Nu, tashcbisia, Sivka) 119 Cresting spines (I pozvonochnye khrebty) 121 Three F's, three Μs, three words (Trizhdy Ve, trizhdy Em) 121 Who? (Kto?) 122 Acknowledgment (Priznanie) 122 265 List of Poems You feel my summons (la prizyvaiu vas shashkoi) 123 To You All (Vsem) 123 Hey, holy man! (Sviatche bozhii!) 124 I'm not just some carnival barker (Ne chertikom maslenichnym) 125 Refusal (Otkaz) 126 The Road I Took (Donga chad a milogo) 126 Once more, once more (Esbche raz, esbche mz) 127 Longer Poems Zoo (Zverinets) 131 Venus and the Shaman (Shaman i venera) 136 The Stone Woman (Kamennaia baba) 144 The Poet (Poet) 147 Night in the Trenches (Noch' ν okope) 160 Lightland (Ladomir) 168 Night Raid (Nochnoi obysk) 183 The Chairman of the Cheka (PredsedateF Cheki) 202 Cracking the Universe (Vlom vselennoi) 208 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet (Truba Gul'-mully) 214 Autumns Passing in Piatigorsk (Shestvie osenei Piatijjorska) 229 266 Russian Index of Titles Aleshe Kruchenykh, 79 Aziia, 76 Bagrami morov budu razbirat' staroe stroenie narodov, 101 Bekh: Basnia, 42 Belyi drogi, belyi drogi, 65 Bobeobi pelis' guby, 30 Boi ν lubke, 54 Budushchee, 118 Burliuk, 95 Chernyi tsar' pliasal pered naro- dom, 44 Chisla, 39 Chudovishche—zhilets vershin, 31 Delo vashe, bogi, 103 Derevo, 110 Dctusia! Esli ustali glaza byt' shi- rokimi, 99 Devushki, te, chto shagaiut, 82 Devy i iunoshi, vspomnite, 49 Dikii khoron, 69 Doroga chada milogo, 126 Dub Persii, 87 Edinaia kniga, 77 Eshche raz, eshche raz, 127 Esli ia obrashchu chelovechestvo ν chasy, 118 Eta osen' takaia zaiach'ia, 47 Eto bylo ν mesiats Ai, 71 Gau! Gau! Gau!, 102 Gde volk voskliknul krov'iu, 49 Gde volosy, razveiannye scch'iu, 88 Gde, kak volosy devitsyny, 52 Gody, liudi i narody . . ., 46 Golod, 104 Gorod budushchego, 73 Grob leunnostei mladych, 27 Grubyi iazyk, 71 I chernyi rak na belom bliude, 69 I esli ν "Kharkovskie ptitsy", 70 I liudi speshno moiut dushi ν pra- cheshnoi, 61 I mertvostyn', 28 I pozvonochnye khrebty, 121 I vecher temets, 82 Ia, 56 Ia i Rossiia, 94 Ia kosnulsia moim loktem, 48 Ia pereplyl zaliv Sudaka, 34 Ia prizyvaiu vas shashkoi, 123 Ia slavliu let ego nasilii, 26 Ia videl iunoshu-proroka, 88 Ia videl, babr sidel u roshchi, 38 Ia vyshel iunoshei odin, 103 Ia—volna, 88 Iranskaia pesnia, 84 Iz meshka, 28 Kak stado ovets mirno dremlet, 79 Kamennaia baba, 144 Kapaet s vesel siiaiushchii dozhd', 62 Kogda umiraiut koni—dyshat, 38 Kogda roga olenia podymaiutsia nad zelen'iu, 38 Komu skazatenki, 30 KoroP ν temnitse, 51 Kotenku shepchesh': ne kusai, 45 Kruchenykh, 94 267 Russian Index of Titles Kto-to dikii, kto-to shalyi, 79 Kto?, 122 Kubok sbit iz dlinnykh dosok, 29 Kuril'shchik shiry, 86 Kuznechik, 31 Ladomir, 168 Liudi, kogda oni liubiat, 37 Liutikov zheltykh puchok, 43 Maliavina krasivitsy, ν venke tsvetov Korovina, 60 Menia pronosiat na slonovykh, 41 Mesiats plyvuchii, 40 Mne malo nado!, 40 Mne vidny—Rak, Oven, 36 Mne, babochke, zaletevshei, 97 Moi belyi bozhestvennyi mozg, ior Moi pokhody, 70 Moia tak razgadana kniga litsa, 52 Moskva budushchego, 113 Moskva—kolymaga, 79 Moskva—starinnyi cherep, 61 Mukha! Nezhnoe slovo, krasivoe, 43 My charuemsia i churaemsia, 32 My zhelaem zvezdam tykat', 35 Na glukhom polustanke, 115 Na kholme, 85 Na ostrove Ezele, 31 Narod otchaialsia. Zaplakala dusha, 104 Narod podnial verkhovnyi zhezel, 63 Nash kochen' ochen' ozabochen', 38 Ne chertikom maslenichnym, 125 Ne shalit'!, 116 Ne vyli truby nabat ο gibeli, 59 Nebo dushno i pakhnet siz'iu i vymenem, 40 NegoP sladko-nezhnoi skazki, 27 Nem' lukaet lukom nemnym, 25 Neum', razum' i bezum'—tri sestry pliasali vmeste, 28 Nezhnyi iazyk, 71 Ni khrupkie teni Iaponii, 45 No vracheso zamirnoi voli, 68 Noch' ν okope, 160 Noch' ν Persii, 85 Noch', polnaia sozvezdii, 39 Nochi zapakh—eti zvezdy, 95 Nochnoi obysk, 183 None ia, kak vse, 29 Nu, tashchisia, Sivka, 119 Ο Azia, toboi sebia ia muchu, 75 Ο chervi zemlianye, 41 Ο svobode, 64 O, dostoevskiimo begushchei tuchi!, 29 O, esli b Aziia sushila volosami, 56 Obed, 115 Oblakini plyli i rydali, 27 Ochi Oki, 37 Odetyi ν set' letuchikh ryb, 53 Odinokii litsedei, 114 Opyt zhemannogo, 32 Otkaz, 126 Pa-liudi, 39 Panna peny, panna peny, 59 Paskha ν Enzeli, 82 Pechal'naia novost', 8/IV/1916, 49 Pesn' smushchennogo, 42 Poet, 147 Polno, sivka, vidno, tra, 33 Predsedatel' Cheki, 202 Priznanie, 122 Pust' pakhar', pokidaia boronu, 117 Ra—vidiashchii ochi svoi ν rzhavoi i krasnoi boiotnoi vode, 93 Razmyshlenie razvratnika, 41 Ruchei s kholodnoiu vodoi, 91 S zhurchaniem-svistom, 26 Segodnia Mashuk, kak borzaia, 114 Segodnia snova ia poidu, 43 Segodnia strogoiu boiarynei Borisa Godunova, 58 Shaman i Venera, 136 Shestvie osenei Piatigorska, 229 Slony bilis' bivniami tak, 36 268 Russian Index of Titles Smugol, temen i iziashchen, 33 Smutnoe vospominanie, 47 Sneg son zemnoi, 29 Snegich uzyvnyi, belyi i dlinnyi, 27 Sobor grachei osenii, 69 Sovremennost', 78 Sto desiat' tysiach tiulenei grustiat, 64 Stranu Lebediiu zabudu, 54 Studa besstydnykh neg, 28 Sud'ba zakryla son, 99 Sutkonogikh tabun kobylits, 29 Sviatche bozhii!, 124 Svoboda prikhodit nagaia, 63 Synoveet nochei sineva, 72 Tabun shagov, chugun slonov, 48 Tainoi vecheri glaz, 81 Tam gde solntse chistoganom, 70 Tam, gde zhili sviristeli, 25 Tatlin, tainovidets lopastei, 56 Tebe poem, rodun, 31 Tebia poiu, moi sinii son, 27 Tikhii dukh ot iablon veet, 45 Tochit derev'ia i tikho techet, 68 Tri goda grazhdanskoi voiny, 102 Trizhdy Ve, trizhdy Em, 121 Truba Gul'-mully, 214 Trushchoby, 34 Tuda, tuda, gde Izanagi, 66 Ty zhe, chei razum stekal, 60 Usad'ba noch'iu—Chingiskhan'!, 44 Ustalye kryl'ia mechtoga, 98 V etot den' golybykh medvedei, 68 V tiazhelykh sapogakh, 72 V tot god, kogda devushki, 100 V'etsia zvonkaia chaika, 26 Vchera ia molvil: "Gullia! gullia!", 61 Verbnoe voskresenie, 52 Vesennego Korana, 67 Vesny poslovitsy i pogovorki, 66 Veter—penie, 65 Vlom vselennoi, 208 Vnimatel'no chitaiu vesennie mysli boga, 93 Voin! ty vyrval u nebes kii, 66 Vozdukh raskolot na chernye vetki, 112 Vremyshi-kamyshi, 27 Vsem, 123 Vshi tupo molilis' mne, 101 Zachem ν gliadelkakh nezabudki?, 67 Zakliatie smekhom, 30 Zakon kachelei velit, 38 Zelenyi leshii—bukh lesinyi, 37 Zhenun i zhenun, 28 Zhestoki starye triapki volos, 87 Zver' + chislo, 46 Zverinets, 131 269 English Index of Titles Acknowledgment, 122 The air splits on the black branches, 112 Alive with glad tidings, 67 Asia, 76 Asia, I have made you my obses- sion, 75 At the backwoods whistle-stop, 115 Attentively I read the springtime thoughts of the Divinity, 93 Autumn this year is a rabbit affair, +7 Autumns Passing in Piatigorsk, 229 Babylove, don't your eyes ever get tired, 99 Bad News, April 8, 1916, +9 Battle in the Comics, 54 Beast + Number, 46 A black crab on a white plate, 69 Black king dance out front of the crowd, 44 Bo-beh-oh-bee is the lipsong, 30 Bow! Wow! Wow!, 102 The bowl is banished from the long tables, 29 Brooding, dark, and elegant, 33 A bunch of yellow buttercups, 43 Burliuk, 95 Came a rush of whistling, 26 The Chairman of the Cheka, 202 The City of the Future, 73 Cloaked in filaments of flying fish, 53 Cloudarias floated all forlorn, 27 A congress of politic grackles, 69 Cracking the Universe, 208 Crawling crying craven, 69 Cresting spines, 121 The death-dole of an old skull, 28 Dinner, 115 Don't Mess with Me!, 116 The Dostoyology of racing clouds, 29 Easter in Enzeli, 82 The echoing gull planes over empty water, 26 Enormous arboreal monster, hang- ing, 31 Evening darkens round, 82 The eyes of the Black, 37 Fate hides her yawn, rolls over, 99 The fault is yours, you gods, 103 Fly! Little three-letter wordlet, 43 A Foppish Proposal, 32 Freedom, 64 The freezing weather of debauch- ery, 28 The Future, 118 Genghis Khan me, you midnight plantation!, 44 Girls are the ones, 82 A goblin grabbles in the greeny for- est, 37 Grasshopper, 31 The Gul-Mullah's Trumpet, 214 Harsh hush bends bow, 25 Herd of hoofsteps, ingots of ele- phants, 48 270 English Index of Titles A herd of horses shod with hours, 29 Here I praise the brutal flight, 26 Hey, holy man!, 124 "Hey!" the wolf cries out in blood, 49 His sweet lids close and shut away, 27 A hundred and ten thousand seals weep, 64 Hunger, 104 I, 56 I am a wave, I roll down, 88 I am borne on the back of an ele- phant, 41 I am in Tsaritsyn, where, 52 I don't need much!, 40 I have come like a butterfly, 97 I saw a tiger, he crouched by a wood, 38 I saw the young man, the young prophet, 88 I see them: Crab, Ram, Bull, 36 I swam across the Sudak Gulf, 34 I'm going out again today, 43 I'm not just some carnival barker, 125 In periwinkle potion, 41 Incantation by Laughter, 30 Iranian Song, 84 Is it the voice of the goddess of foam, 59 It was in the merry month of Ay, 71 The King is out of luck, 51 Kruchonykh, 94 The land where Izanagi, 66 Languor-wing flies in the middle of fable, 27 The law of the see-saw argues, 38 Let the plowman leave his furrow, 117 Let us all be heads of lettuce, 38 The lice had blind faith, and they prayed to me, 101 Lightland, 168 Like a flock of sheep peacefully graz- ing, 79 The moon begins to flow, 40 The Moscow of the Future, 113 Moscow's a crazed old skull, 61 My bag breaks, 28 My Campaigns, 70 My elbow brushed, 48 The naked staghorn rising in the woods, 38 Nations, faces, ages pass, 46 The Neva knows the look in those Last Supper eyes, 81 Neward, we praise thee, 31 Night in Persia, 85 Night in the Trenches, 160 The night is full of constellations, 39 Night Raid, 183 Night's color breeding darker blues, 72 No now. I'm like everybody, 29 Now that the lilt of nightingales, 70 Numbers, 39 An Oak Tree in Persia, 87 Oh, if only Asia could dry my face, 56 OK, Graylegs, 119 OK, Graylegs, time to set the plow, 33 On a Hill, 58 On the island of Ezeli, 31 Once more, once more, 127 The One, the Only Book, 77 The Opium Smoker, 86 Palm Sunday, 52 People in love, making, 37 People in washhouses rush to scrub their souls, 61 The people raise the rod of sover- eign power, 63 People stared in horror; souls in an- guish wept, 104 271 English Index of Titles The Poet, 147 The Present Day, 78 Qua-People, 39 A quiet perfume from the orchard, 45 Ra, who sees his own eye in the red rusty swamp water, 93 Reflections of a Profligate, 40 Refusal, 126 The Road I Took, 126 Rue: A Fable, 42 Russia and Me, 94 Russia, I give you my divine, 101 Rutting elephants, battering ivory tusks, 36 The sayings and sallies of spring, 66 The shining shower dripping from the oar, 62 The smell of night, inhaling stars, 90 Snow is a dream of earth, 29 Snowfellow, tallfellow, bright bea- con, 27 The Solo Actor, 114 Someday I'll forget about Swan- land, 54 Someone wacky, someone nutty, 79 The Song of One Come to Confu- sion, 42 The sticky sky smells blue-gray, it's the odor of udder, 40 The Stone Woman, 144 A stream of icy water, 91 The streams of time, 27 Suppose I make a timepiece of hu- manity, 118 Sweet Talk, 71 The Tangled Wood, 34 Tatlin! Poet of propellers, 56 Tell your kitten not to bite, 45 Their faces by Maliavin, 60 These tenuous Japanese shadows, 45 This whole day is full of blue bears, they, 68 Three Fs, three Ms, three words, 121 Three years of civil war, 101 To Alyosha Kruchonykh, 79 To You All, 123 Today Mount Mashuk is a hound dog, 114 The too-often reviewed book of my face, 52 Tough Talk, 71 The Tree, no The trumpets never squealed a sig- nal for defeat, 59 Two Moscow Imagos, 79 Unbending as Boris Godunov's boyarina, 58 A Vague Memory, 47 Venus and the Shaman, 136 War and wildness part his hair, 103 Warrior! You choose a cue from heaven's rack, 66 Water eats at the rippling roots, 68 Weary wings of the dreamstead, 98 We chant and enchant, 32 We want to be familiars of the stars, 35 When Freedom comes, she comes naked, 63 When horses die, they sigh, 38 When I was young I went alone, 103 Where the sun like ready money, 70 Where the winking waxwings whis- tle, 25 White horses, white hearses, 65 Who wants to hear a story, 30 Who?, 122 Whorlen of the worldwide will, 68 Why are these eyes forget-me-nots?, 67 A wild old hank of hair, 87 Wind whose song, 65 With the grabhooks of wholesale slaughter, 101 Wo-man and Wo-man, 28 272 English Index of Titles Woe-mind, Slow-mind, and No- mind, three sisters, girls, 28 The year the girls first called me "Gramps", 100 Yesterday I whisded: Coo! Coo! Coo!, 61 You are my song, my dark blue dream, 27 You boot-stomping workers in the poetry factory, 72 You feel my summons, 123 You whose mind flowed, 60 Young girls, young men, remem- ber!, 49 Zoo, 131 273 Credits "The lice had blind faith" and "Russia, I give you my divine" were originally published in Partisan Review 52, no. 4 (1985). "I'm going out again today" and "I have come like a butterfly" were originally published in Parnassus / Poetry in Review, Fall-Winter 1983. "Night's color breeding darker blues," "Water eats at the ash grove," "Once more, once more," and "Let the plowman leave his furrow" appeared in The Nation, September 24, 1983. "Genghis Khan me, you midnight plantations," "I see them—Crab, Ram, Bull," and "Zoo" were originally published in the Paris Review 9 (Spring 1985). "Autumn that year was a rabbit affair" appeared in the New York Review of Books 32, no. ι (October 10, 1985), and is reprinted with permission from the New York Review of Books, copyright © 1985 by Nyrev, Inc. The following six poems were originally published in Sulfur 7 (1983): "Wind whose song," "Bow! Wow! Wow!," "Bo-beh-oh-bee is the lipsong," "Crawling crying craven," "The law of the seesaw argues," and "Incantation by Laughter." 274 Produção e Capa: ALEXANDRE RUDYARD BENEVIDES Revisão: MARIA DA GRAÇA BERMAN Todos os direitos reservados © EDITORA CORTEZ & MORAES LTDA. R. Min . Godoy , 1002 - 05015 - São Paulo - SP - Te!. (011) 628987 Impresso no Brasil Printed in Brazil 1978 CONTEúDO POESIA , ANTIPOESIA , ANTROPOFAGIA.. . . ... . 7 1. UM LANCE DE "Df:S" DO GRANDE SER- TÃO . ..... .. ............ .. . . ....... ... . 9 II. MÁRIO FAUSTINO , O ÚLTIMO "VERSE MAKER" . . ... .. . . .. . .. .. .. . ........ . .. . 39 III . DA ANTIODE À ANTILIRA . .... .. . .... . 49 IV. POESIA CONCRETA: MEMORIA E DESME- MORIA ........ . ............. . . . .. .. . . .. 55 V. POESIA E/OU PINTURA ...... . ......... 71 VI. SEM PALA VRAS . .. .... .. ......... .. .... . 83 VII. DA AMf:RICA QUE EXISTE: GREGORIO DE MATOS .. . .. . . . .... . .............. . 91 Regra de Bem Viver, Que a Persuasões de Alguns Amigos Deu a Uns Noivos Que se Casavam. . . . 97 Vocabulário . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102 VIII. REVISTAS RE-VISTAS : OS ANTROPOFA- GOS .. .. . .. ... .. .. . . . . .... . .. . . .... .. . . 107 NOTA INFORMATIVA . ... . . . " . . ... .. ... . . . . . .. 125 OBRAS DO AUTOR . . ... .... . . .. .. . . .. .. ... . . . 127 5 4 POESIA CONCRETA: MEMóRIA E DESMEMóRIA 1 1 No livro Cultura Posta em Questão, 2 que tem como tema principal a "morte cultural da arte", o poeta Ferreira Gullar , a pretexto de "contribuir para a desmistificação do conceito de poesia" e desfazer suspeitas acerca da coerência de sua posi­ \;ão atual, conclui suas considerações com uma longa análise de seu próprio livro A Luta Corporal e de sua participação no mo­ vimento da poesia concreta. Apres moi le déluge . .. "Para manter a análise num nível conveniente de objetividade adotei I ) tratamento na 3.a pessoa, quando me refiro a mim mesmo n)lno autor de A Luta Corporal", diz o poeta. E com essa \imples mudança gramatical de personalidade parece acreditar- s\: imunizado contra quaisquer excessos de benevolência no 11" 11 auto-"review" de 30 páginas. Todavia, em que pese a al­ I\'rnção de perspectiva pronominal, ouso levantar algumas dú­ vidas sobre a imparcialidade dos juízos do crítico Ferreira (illlI r a respeito do poeta do mesmo nome. E, mais ainda, Vl' o-me na contingência de pôr em questão a memória de tal I I li o, quando, no retrospecto que faz da atuação do poeta I. Este depoimento , escrito em 1966, estava programado para .11 I na revista Invenção. Interrompida a publicação da revista, no ll " (dez. 1966 - jan. 1967), permaneceu inédito. . FERREIRA GULLAR, Cultura Posta em Questão, Rio de Janeiro , I 'Ivll wçã o Brasileira, 1965. Na relação das obras do autor, constante )10 ~~(\ livro, omite-se, estranhamente, a coletânea de poemas concretos III" ( lIJI.L AR publicou em 1958 sob o título de Poemas. 55 homônimo, se refere, laconicamente, a uma carta que me teria enviado em 22.4.1 <; 55, para dela tirar ilações que favoreceriam uma pretensa clarividência do poeta Ferreira Gullar no alvo­ recer do movimento de poesia concreta. Ora, eu também conheci o poeta, embora por certo não tão bem como o crítico que dele fala hoje. Vivi "ab ovo" as peripécias da elaboração da poesia concreta entre nós. De mim partiu o convite a GuIlar para que participasse da exposição que realizamos em São Paulo , no Museu de Arte Moderna, em 1956 (em suas conversas íntimas com o poeta, o crítico deve saber disso). E o que é pior. Tenho ainda a carta que o poeta me escreveu. E outras cartas. E cópias das que lhe escrevi. Tudo isso me convence de que a memória do crítico na l.a pessoa não corresponde estritamente aos fatos que viveu o poeta na 3.a pessoa. É, se posso dizer sem ofensa, uma me­ mória parcial (no sentido de parte e no outro), cujas omissões me vejo forçado a preencher, à luz dos documentos escritos, em homenagem aos fatos. Não tenho o hábito de revelar, a menos que autorizado pelo autor, o teor de cartas particulares, ainda que de cunho literário; mas a ambígua referência que faz o poeta à carta que me dirigiu, não só me autoriza como me impõe, mesmo, o dever ético de divulgá-Ia, a par do depoimen­ to em que contesto as conclusões que dela pretende extrair, tantos anos depois, o seu remetente. De resto, julgo que a publicação das cartas que trocamos Gullar e eu, em 1954-55, só poderá ser útil para o conhecimento dos fatos relacionados com o advento da poesia concreta. O poeta, afinal, só terá que me agradecer, embora o crítico possa ser levado a meditar sobre a relatividade das trocas de posição pron ominal, quando o que se julga é a própria obra. 56 Diz Ferreira Gullar, em seu livro, no ponto que nos toca: "Em princípios de 1955, sou procurado por Augusto de Campos, que me fala das experiências poéticas, que juntamente com seu irmão, Haroldo . e Décio Pignatari, estavam fazendo em São Paulo . Tratava-se de uma poesia inspirada, como estru­ tura, na forma musical de Webern. Mais tarde , recebi a revista Noigandres n.o 2, em que haviu poemas de Augusto impressos em cores. Escre­ vo-lhe uma carta criticando os poemas, consido­ rando-os uma experiência interessante mas frustro - da. Digo-lhe que o problema fundamental da poe­ sia era menos o verso que o caráter unidirecional da linguagem - o nó da questão era a sintaxe (Carta a Augusto Campos, 22.4.1955). Essas ob­ servações seriam ouvidas pelos poetas paulistas, pois, a partir de então, o problema da sintaxe ,e o caráter unidir ecional da linguagem passam a inte­ grar a sua teoria ." A carta a que alude o poeta (perdoe-me ele esta insigni­ ficante correção) é de 23, e não de 22 de abril. Antes houve outras. Uma, de 5, outra de 22 de março, ambas respo ndidas por mim. Não é possível apresentar aqui todas elas. Por ora, o leitor terá que se contentar com a carta de abril e alguns trechos da minha resposta e das cartas anteriores. Procurei, sim, o poeta Ferreira Gullar, em princípios de 1955. Dele recebera um bilhete, datado de agosto de 1954, pedindo-me que entregasse o seu livro A Luta Corporal a Cyro Pimentel e Reinaldo Bairão e oferecendo-me o seu endereço. No comentário que escreveu sobre o livro ("A Luta com a Palavra", Diário de São Paulo, 21 . 10.1954) assinalava Cyro Pimentel: "Nessa linha de arrojo verbal, de poesia espacial, de auto matismo psicológico, não é Ferreira Gullar muito original: já em 1950, Décio Pignatari punha em prática muitas dessas conquistas da poesia moderna ." Antes ainda, em outro abril - de 1954 - recebera eu próprio aquele mesmo livro, com uma dedicatória mais do que amável: "Ã beleza e gravidade da expressão de Augusto de ampos". Procurei, pois, o poeta. Era ele, fora do grupo Noi­ gandres, criado em 1952, o único poeta brasileiro de vanguar­ da de que eu tinha conhecimento. Embora A Luta Corporal me parecesse um livro de altos e baixos e me desagradassem os S lIS desvarios surrealistas e o seu extremado individualismo, que Décio Pignatari classificara de "exibicionismo das entra­ nha do gênio", responsável pela publicação de tantos poemas Impublicáveis, apreciava nele o que possuia de dissonante e de r belde em relação à bem posta "geração de 45". Por essa . I ca, eu me correspondia com a escritora Lucy Teixeira, ami- I pessoal de Gullar. Além disso, Oswald de Andrade , a quem, no última visita que lhe fiz, com Pignatari, eu havia mostrado III un. do poemas da série poetam enos, publicara, poucos dias I p is do nosso encontro, no "Correio da Manhã" de 28.8. 57 J953, um de seus Tel efonemas (Genle do Sul), em que profeti­ camente, nos aproximava a todos: "Há uma geração de novís­ simos no Brasil que nad a tem que ver com os Loand as e os Moambas dos suplementos . Oliveira Bastos anunci a-se um crítico . Um crítico enfim! Há o poeta Carlos de Oliveira que me fala de Luci Teixeira e no poeta Goulart (sic). E Flávio de Aquino . Há aqui mesmo em São Paulo, menino s que pes­ quisam - Décio Pignat ari, Augusto e Haroldo de Campos ; Ruy Nogueira, Paulo Ces ar da Silva e outros. Felizmente es­ tamos nos afastando daquele berrei ro incivil e cretino dado como show pela revista "Orfeu". Eu tinha, portanto , a espe­ rança de que o contacto com Gullar haveria de ser útil. Como o foi, efetivamente. E talvez mais para Gullar do que para mim. Àquela altura, Gullar se achava numa fase de grande perplexidade . Anunciara que não escreveria mais poesia. Uma revista do Rio noticiava: "o poeta Ferreira Gullar, conside­ rando sua experiência poética encerrada com "A Luta Corpo ­ ral", encaminha-se para o terreno da novela. " (R evista da Se­ mana, n,o 38) . Encontrei-o francamente desorientado . O co­ nhecimento de nossas experiências foi para ele um choque e um estímulo, que o ajudaram a s air do caos. Quando me avistei com Gullar , o Noigandres 2 estava em fase final de impressão. Os poemas em cores (da série poeta­ menos), a que se refere Gullar, haviam sido escritos em 1953 . Mas sua edição, dispendio síssima, foi protelada mais de uma vez por falta de verba . Para poder imprimí-Ios, finalmente, numa tiragem de apenas 100 exemplares , tivemos Haroldo e eu que renunciar à publicaç ão de muitos outros poemas; al­ guns deles - como Orfeu e o Discípulo , de Haroldo, escrito em 1952 e divulgado na revista "Habitat", n.O 21 (março-abri l de 1955) - , das primeira s experiências de poesia espacial rea­ lizadas entre nós. Por sugestão de Geraldo de Barros, que então integrava ruptura - a equipe dos pintores concretos paulistas -, eu conseguira fazer provisoriamente, com carbonos de vá­ rias cores, cópias datilografadas do poetamenos, que circula­ vam pelo nosso grupo, pelos pintores liderados por Waldemar Cordeiro e pelos jovens compositores da Escola Livre de Mú­ sica. Em janeiro de 1954, no V Curso Internacional de Férias, realizado pela Pro-Arte , em Teresópolis , Décio Pignatari apre­ sentou, juntamente com L. C. Vinholes, Damiano Cozzella e outros, uma primeira audição pública do poema em cores lygia fingers , para vozes alternadas, ilustrando uma de suas confe- 58 I J1 'ias, que tinha e te lílUlo: "A forma na poe ia moderna: as I'Ilndcs conquistas formais: Mallarmé, Joyce, Pound , Cum­ mlngs. Situação da moderna poesia brasileira." O mesmo con­ Junto de poemas figurava num livro maior de inéditos, sob o (!tulo de poeLamenos (1951 -53), com que concorri, em 1954, li prêmio de poesia "Má rio de Andrade". Sabendo disso, es­ crevia Gul!ar em sua carta de 5 de março: "Que o júri, por lIll1U iluminação , dê a você os 25 mil". Foram inúteis, porém, Os votos de Gullar. Eu e Haroldo, que também concorria com A.\' Disciplinas, sob o pseudônimo de Anaxiforminx, só chega­ mos até as semi-firrais. Do júri fazia parte o poeta Cassiano Ricardo que, então, ainda não havia feito suas reflexões sobre II poesia de vanguarda. . . O prêmio acabou sendo dado ao livro de um representante da "geração de 45" com um título bem expressivo dessa tendência: Corcel de Espumas. Na carta de 22 de março, Gullar volta ao assunto ("Lamento o resul­ tado do P. de Poesia, mas não esperava outra coisa.") , e, acusando o recebimento do Noigandres 2, que saíra, finalmen­ te, em fevereiro de 1955, com cyropédia, ou a educação do principe (1952), de Haroldo de Campos, e o meu poetamenos , termina dizendo: "Gostaria de comentar acerca de tuas expe­ riências, mas talvez isso se fizesse mais fácil para mim se me desses uma explicação detalhada e precisa do que pretendes. Era possível, mesmo agora, opinar. Mas tenho trabalhado de­ mais e não sobra tempo para pensar, organizar as impressões das várias leituras que fiz dos poemas. Explica-me: as relações da experiência com a música; a função da cor; o critério das variações das cores, etc. Espero." Escrevi a Gullar (1.4 .1955) explicando-lhe o sentido da experiência e enviando-lhe os artigos que publicara em 20 e 27 de março daquele ano, no "Diário de S. Paulo": Poesia, Es­ trutura e Poema, Ideograma, os primeiros a antecipar a for­ mulação da poesia concreta entre nós. Dizia eu naquela carta: "Os arts. esclarecem bastante , acredito , os meus poemas e tam­ bém os do Haroldo, e a posição estético-estratégica de todo o "grupo" Noigandres, ao estabelecer uma "aceitação de he­ rança" que não é ou não pretende ser fruto de uma mera in­ clinação pessoal, mas uma observação objetiva (exame + com­ paração) da evolução histórica da poesia. MALLARMÉ (Un Coup de Dés) - POUND - JOYCE - CUMMINGS. ( . . . ) ESSES nomes ~ão, segundo entendemos, MAIS imptantes da mesma forma q para o desenvolvimento das artes plásticas e 59 visuais Malevitch, o "De Stijl", um Gabo ou um Calder podem ser mais imptantes q pintores de classe como Matisse, Chagall ou mesmo o genial Picasso, ou um escultor como Henry Moore. Da mesma forma q um Webern é mais imptante q um Bartok ou um Hindemith, grandes compositores, e, de um pto de vista mais concentrado ainda, + impte. q o próprio Schoenberg, seu mestre." A resposta de Gullar é a carta de 23 de abril, a que alude parca e parcialmente em Cultura Posta em Questão. Veremos a seguir, como foi essa resposta. 2 Eis como reagiu o poeta Ferreira Gullar ao envio de Noigandres 2 e do poetamenos. 3 Dizer apenas que criticou os poemas, considerando-os "uma experiência interessante mas frustrada", não dá, nem de leve, a medida de quão interessada foi .aquela crítica e de quão interessante foi por ele julgada a experiência; a ponto de o meu interlocutor escrever que o pro­ blema fundamental da nova poesia . lhe parecia expresso em tais poemas e manifestar por eles "o maior respeito". :É dizer pouco, para não dizer nada. Mas nada melhor do que confrontar as atuais ' restrições mentais do poeta, formuladas em tão medidas e comedidas pa­ lavras, com as calorosas, abundantes e até humildes "observa­ ções" de outrora: "Rio de Janeiro , 23 de abril de 1955 Caro Augusto de Campos: Por duas vezes (,t ma antes e outra depois de sua carta e artigos) estivemos, Bastos, M. Pedrosa (e eu), reunidos, em casa deste último, <iêndo, examinando e discutindo a respeito de seus poemas. Essa espécie de comissão tinha algumas de­ ficiências: nem um dos três conhece os poemas de Pound >- só o Mário conhece o Finnegans Wake (do qual ouviu uma gra­ vação na voz do próprio Joyce) e eu só conheço o Ulysses, que estou acabando de ler na tradução da NRF. A música de Webern é também desconhecida dos três. Não obstante o livro 3. Noigandres 2, São Paulo, 1955, incluindo "Ciropédia ou a Edu­ cação do Príncipe", de HAROLDO DE CAMPOS e o meu "poetamenos". 60 foi mexido e remexido, lido a três vozes, etc. Com a vinda dos artigos pudemos entrar mais seguramente no exame e nas considerações. Enfim, posso fazer, acerca dos poemas, as ob­ servações que se seguirão e que refletem um pouco as dis­ cussões na casa do Mário. V. usa a cor vermelha para assinalar as linhas da estru­ tura, conforme sua indicação. Mas, ao que me parece, essas linhas não conseguem ser por si mesmas, as vigas do poema. É como se V. as elegesse tais, arbitrariamente, porque, na ver­ dade, a interferência dos outros temas fragmenta de tal ma­ neira essa viga, e se fragmentam eles a si próprios, que, ao fim da leitura, nós, leitores, concluímos só a desintegração que você prepara - isso, porque a leitura não consegue se "orga­ nizar", realizar a unidade do poema : ela resulta uma viagem sobre destroços. Talvez se V. usasse menos temas em cada poema, simplificando-lhes assim a estrutura, V. possibilitaria maior desenvolvimento ao tema principal, dando-lhe tempo para existir e para, assim, segurar, como uma viga mestra, a totalidade do poema. É possível que V. pretenda organizá-lo (e é isso que vejo em seus poemas) de uma forma puramente dinâmica e de tal maneira que todas as partes participem, em igualdade, da totalidade do poema, da sua estrutura, como os elementos de um quadro de Mondrian. Mas isso não me pa­ rece possível em poesia. Não me parece porque a poesia se realiza no tempo e não no espaço, como a pintura. Mondrian pode erguer uma estrutura onde haja essa simultaneidade de função "os elementos, porque também é possível perceber, de uma vez, essa estrutura: a apreensão se faz num só ato percep­ tivo: ela se realiza. Mas com o poema isso não acontece. O poema flui. Enquanto eu paro para atender ao novo tema que intercepta o principal, e o outro, e o seguinte, e volto ao primeiro, eu os esfacelo a todos, e me perco. Aliás, o poema, visto na página, dá a ilusão dessa simultaneidade. E é possível mesmo que ele se realize para você, que, fonte, não necessita de percorrê-lo, de decifrá-lo, e que o poema dispense, por se refletir no campo subjetivo donde ele saiu, a "significação" de que nós leitores necessitamos, não para entendê-lo mas para lograr uma agregação dos seus elementos numa totalidade di­ nâmica, viva - porque a dinamicidade, aqui, necessita, além da proximidade espacial dos elementos, de uma corrente alu­ siva, qualquer que seja, que dê ao todo uma espécie de iman­ tação, que o faça significante. A metáfora, velho instrumento 61 da poesia, não é mais que um mecanismo armado para disparar numa espécie de movimento retroativo que envolve, instanta­ neamente, o tempo gasto na sua fabricação; ela é uma reali­ zação da simultaneidade, pela recuperação e eliminação do "passado ": ela apaga as palavras que a precipitaram . Como V. informa em seu artigo, Pound usa de um outro processo igualmente eficaz, ou mais, de expressão poética: a justaposição de "coisas" ou ideogramas, que estabelecem entre si uma li­ gação significativa profunda. Essa ligação só se consegue gra­ ças ao fato de que cada uma das "coisas" aproximadas está prenhe de sentido, e que assim precipitam uma relação que não se faz apenas no campo perceptivo, mas também, e sobretudo, subjetivamente, como no pensamento simbólico primitivo e na linguagem da forma, de que fala Cassirer. :f: nesse campo que, a meu ver, a linguagem poética se ombreia, em dinamicidade, irradiação e síntese, à linguagem pictórica e à linguagem mu­ sical modernas. :f: evidente que a poesia, para chegar a isso, recorre aos elementos arquetípicos, as cristalizações da lingua­ gem (poética e coloquial), aos símbolos arcaicos, as alusões ao mundo exterior, e assim jamais se liberta da subjetividade e das limitações inerentes a linguagem verbal :. o que, no entanto, M. Bill consegue na escultura e Gildewart na pintura. A causa é óbvia: as artes plásticas trabalham com elementos que são "valor" independente das significações de emprésÍimos e de re­ ferência : a cor é uma sensação, um ser que vive por si; assim, o espaço, o traço, a forma . A palavra não : ela é um complexo de som-SENTIDO-forma, e é o sentido o seu elemento prin­ cipal, pois é dele que ela tira a sua existência própria - o sentido que é uma alusão ao mundo exterior. E, mais, por isso, enquanto a natureza dos elementos plásticos possibilita uma total coincidência de trabalho e expressão - desde que eu mova o lápis, esse trabalho é "fala completa" - a palavra reclama um campo significante para que ela se mova. Eis por que desligar a palavra de quaIc uer de seus elementos é matá-la - é fazê-IQ um simples ser ót co ou auditivo - é atirá-la ao mundo da pintura ou da músi< !l. A poesia depende de que se mantenha , de qualquer maneir ', a unidade desses três elemen­ tos, muito embora qualquer de: ~ s, em momentos diversos, assu­ ma a predominância . Aliás, u jogo da sucessão da predomi­ nância de cada um desses elementos é um dos mais ricos re­ cursos da expressão verbal. 62 Creio ser a Sintaxe, que é o elemento principal da lin­ guagem discursiva, o ponto crucial, o problema fundamental da nova poesia. E ele me parece expresso nessa tentativa de' dinamização que você impõe aos seus poemas. Não creio ser outra, senão ultrapassar o desenvolvimento oni-direcional (sic) a que a sintaxe submete a linguagem, a intenção de Mallarm é em UN COUP DE DÊS (preocupação que já se vinha esbo­ çando em seus poemas anteriores) . Mas Mallarmé não elimina a sintaxe: ele procura quebrar-lhe a tirania oni-direcional (sic), inserindo, nos intervalos de tempo, novas "frases" , e outras nos intervalos destas, num seccionar infinito que lembra o teorema de Zenão, e lembra Kafka, e o espaço cubista de alguns qua- . dros de Juan Gris. Ele compreende que eliminar o tempo na linguagem é calar-se ou fazer o caos - aceita essa fatalidade e a trai. V. tentou o contrário, e para isso usou temas curtos - lygia - e, por isso, vários, certamente com o intuito de subs­ tituir o desenvolvimento linear do poema, o fluir, por um mo­ vimento circular, anulador (aparente) do tempo. Circular, mas não como em UN COUP DE DÊS, onde o poema flui, e onde O tempo é recuperado pelo retomo ao ponto de partida. Você quis não sair do ponto de partida, e como isso seria ficar em lygia, V. deu a esse "ponto de partida" o raio do campo visual, (como numa dilatação do presente) - a página -e dentro desse "agora" realizou o poema. Mas esse "agora", cabendo mais que uma palavra, mais que uma frase, implicava ainda um tempo-espaço que era preciso eliminar como "fluir". Aqui o problema roça Mondrian , e foi também com horizon­ tais e verticais, com interseções que as neutralizam, (como no Victory Boogie Woogie, de M.) que você tentou resolvê-lo. E voltamos às considerações anteriores: Mondrian consegue uma pura pulsação cromático-espacial, que se realiza em si mesma, porque as cores se bastam como elementos visuais de expressão. Mas, '1S palavras? Você tira às palavras seu caráter de pala­ vras, e não lhes dá outro. Na ânsia de vencer as limitações da linguagem verbal como linguagem verbal, V. se rendeu ao grá­ fico. A significação se disseminou, se volatilizou, perdeu-se . E é você quem denuncia essa submissão ao gráfico, ao reduzir a palavra lygia a um simples l, que só pertence ao vocábulo como elemento gráfico, e que só se liga ao vocábulo na me­ dida em que nós nos limitamos a vê-lo, porque se o lemos - éle - nada mais o liga a lygia. Tenho a acrescentar que essas considerações não preten­ dem demovê-lo , mas pôr, objetivamente , em quest ão certos problemas que me parecem vitais para a experiência que V. faz, e pela qual tenho o maior respeito. Agradeça por mim ao Haroldo o livro, que também é dele. Também os poemas dele foram discutidos por nós. Reconheço nele um a grande força verbal, se bem que uma certa frieza e às vezes rebuscamento. O Bastos está com os artigos, passando a máquina, para o Diário Carioca, onde os transcreverá . O B. falou-me que encontrara o Oswaldino Marques com um recorte de POESIA , ESTRUTURA, dizendo que o lera e que estava muito inte­ ressado, gostara muito, etc. Est a devia ser mais longa e mais explícita. Mas não há tempo. " Gostaria que V. responde sse as objeções." Inteligente e interessante como é, a carta de GulIar mos­ tra como ele foi "provocado" pela experiência, e ao mesmo tempo, denota as suas dificuldades para compreender alguns dos aspectos básico s da nova poesia. A maioria de suas obje­ ções seria repetida, com menos brilho, contra nós e contra ele, pelos opositores da poesia concreta. Preso, ainda, a classifica ­ ções tradicionais, Gullar considerava o tempo e a sintaxe como "fata lidades " a que nos devíamos curvar, sob pena do silêncio ou do caos. Confundia a fragmentação e a espacialização das palavras com a eliminação do seu significado. Mostrava-se mais lúcido, é certo, quando falava no "caráter oni-direcional " (uni­ -direcional, como retifiquei em minha resposta) "da linguagem ". Mas ao expressar-se assim apenas redenominava numa fórmula pessoal e instigante, embora incorreta - porque a linguagem, como tal, não possui necessariamente esse caráter de mão única (vejam-se as línguas isolantes, como o chinês), aquilo que nós, por nosso turno, já identificávamos numa postulação mais am­ pla e, penso eu, mais precisa , ao falarmos numa consciência de estrutura em contraposição à organiza ção meramente linear e aditiva tradicional; ao invocarmos, como exemplo, o "método ideogrâmico" de Pound, baseado na sintaxe interna dos carac­ teres chineses; ao tomarmos como lema a frase de Apollinaire: "é preciso que nossa inteligência se habitue a compreender sin­ tético-ideogramicamente em lugar de anaIítico-discursivamente." Não passam de veleidades, pois, as afirmações de GuIlar de que sÓ a partir de sua carta é que o problema da sintaxe e do "cará ter unidirecional da linguagem " vieram a integrar a teoria dos paulistas. 64 Ao contrário, Gullar é que, em contacto com as expe­ riências de Noigandres 2 e de outros poemas inéditos a ele exi­ bidos por mim, passou, e não sem perplexidade, a considerar seriamente os novos problemas que tais experimentos poéticos suscitavam e a vislumbrar aspectos construtivos onde antes só enxergava a destruição da linguagem, saindo do beco sem saída em que se encontrava. 3 Respondi às considerações de Ferreira Gullar com uma carta, em que dizia desde logo que aceitava o debate amplo de idéias e q ue suas objeções me pareciam inteligentes e pertinen­ tes à discussão dos problemas despertados pelos poemas, mes­ mo quando eu com elas não concorda sse. Procurei demons­ trar -lhe a insuficiência da caracterização tradicional da poesia como arte que se realiza no tempo, acentuando que as artes evoluíam no sentido de uma superação das noções de tempo e espaço, em consonância, aliás, com a própria ciência moderna. Espaço e tempo - afirmei-lhe - são noções integrantes . "Se não se pode dizer que o tempo esteve jamais alheio à pintura (o ritmo - não há outra palavra - das linhas e formas na arquitetura como na pintura de qualquer época, com maior ou menor acentuação, cria um tempo), ou inversamente que o es­ paço é inexistente em música, nota-se mais agudamente nas últimas experiências de uma como de outra arte, uma verda­ deira interpenetração dessas duas noções, a espacialização do tempo, em música, e na pintura a temporalização do espaço . Não se trata de uma "anulação (aparente) do tempo" ou do espaço, mas de uma sua superação por um espaço-tempo reali­ zável do ponto de vista psico-físico e portanto real." Dei-lhe exemplos: "Em Mondrian mesmo, que, como diz Brest, "não escapa do círculo de ferro da geometria euclidiana e por isso, não obstante os elementos espaciais que por via simbólica in­ troduz, não inclui o tempo em sua dinâmica simples de equi­ líbrios", é possível discernir num quadro como o "Victory B. Woogie" o problema tempo em ação. Em música, a partir de WEBERN, o espaço assume a posição inversa. Em Messiaen, em Cage e nos jovens compositores eletrônicos (como atestam os ensaios de Boulez, Fano, Phillipot e outros) o espaço é uma decidida preocupação. Cf. o trecho Fano em meu art. , justi­ ficando-se a expressão de musica espacial q leio em J. Carlos 65 Paz ou as suas considerações sobre estruturas rítmicas q "res­ pondem + a um conceito de espaço sonoro q de desenvol­ vimento no tempo". Mostrei, ainda, que a descrição, segundo a qual Mallarmé "compreende que eliminar o tempo na lingua­ gem é calar-se ou fazer o caos", não atendia exatamente à natureza do problema proposto por UN COUP DE DÊS, afir­ mando: "O problema, insisto, não é eliminar o tempo, propo­ sição obviamente absurda porque impossível, mas superar a noção de tempo por outra mais complexa e dinâmica, e que é até mais fiel à realidade: o espaço-tempo. Mallarmé valori­ zando o silêncio no branco do papel e a própria configuração visual do poema, fragmentando prismaticamente a idéia, CRIA um problema de espaço no tempo." E citei, a propósito, um trecho do estudo "Mallarmé et la Musique du Silence", de Aimé Patri ("La Revue Musicale" n.o 210, janeiro de 1952) que vinha a calhar : "A utilização da página dupla e dos dife­ rentes corpos tipográficos permite ao poema o manifestar-se no espaço em lugar de desenvolver-se no tempo, sem que o dina­ mismo próprio deste seja em nada abalado: o alto e o baixo, a direita e a esquerda, o minúsculo e o corpulento, a reta e a curva se substituem ao antes e ao depois. O tempo não é, porém, destruído , mas integrado no espaço, como se se tratasse por antecipação, nesta nova mecânica racional, de uma geome­ tria quadri-dimensional, de um Espaço-Tempo: a dimensão do tempo figurado no espaço se torna imaginária e as linhas do universo compostas de pontos-eventos se substituem aos movi­ mentos oratórios (a bem dizer se trataria antes de uma mecâ­ nica ondulatória, com suas ondas de probabilidade, mas isto nos levaria muito longe) ." Àquela altura, Gullar ainda não havia compreendido as possibilidades da utilização estrutural e sintática do espaço gráfico, que mais tarde iria procurar desen­ volver em seus poemas neo-concretos. Tratei, igualmente, de apontar o equívoco em que ele incorria ao afirmar que eu "desligava a palavra de seus ele­ mentos", que eu "tirava às palavras o seu caráter de palavras, enquanto linguagem verbal", o que era positivamente inverí­ dico, pois que meus poemas eram construídos com palavras (e não apenas com sons) afetadas em pequena porcentagem por cortes e fusões vocabulares - palavras que não prescin­ diam do significado. Assim, o poema lygia fingers , mencionado por Gullar, era uma representação ideogrâmica do tema da mulher amada, realizado através da justaposição associativa e cumulativa de substantivos (mãe, figlia, sorella) ao adjetivo fe- 66 tina e suas variações semânticas (fingers, digital, dedat, grypho, tince); a palavra lygia (nome próprio de mulher) era reiterada fragmentariamente ou sob a forma de anagrama no corpo de outras palavras (fe-ly-na) (figlia) (onl y ) (Ionely), para dar um efeito de ubiqüidade à presença feminina, culminando na úitima letra do poema, i, que remetia como um da capo musical, circularmente, ao começo. Ora , vinha Gullar e dizia que aque­ le i só se liga visualmente ao vocábulo, porque se o lemos - éle - nada mais o liga ao nome lygia. Era, à evidência, um falso argumento. Rebati-o mostrando que em sua própria carta Gullar se valia de recurso semelhante de expressão: "Dizer que o éLe distante e morto do alfabeto, e o "meu" L, integrado numa estrutura relacional, são a mesma coisa, me soa como uma operação de difícil e até forçada abstração. Provo : V. escreve em sua carta "O Bastos", e duas linhas depois, "O B." . Poderia eu ler e entender esse B . apenas como a letra bê? Não. Esse B. eu o associo de imediato ao Basto s precedente. É uma forma de grafia dinâmica, a abreviatura: Bastos está contido naquele B. Igualmente reclamo a compreensão do todo para aquele L." Isto, sem esquecer que o i do poema represen­ tava o fonema respectivo e não a letra éLe, como forçadamente pretendia Gullar . Estava claro que, inclusive do ponto de vista do significado, a letra funcionava como redução dinâmica, co­ mo a breviação semântica e sonora a que o leitor era conduzido em dificuldade pela reiteração , sublinhada ainda pelo uso da cor vermelha. Como disse a Gullar , "não afasto o elemento significação de minha poesia; procuro dinamizá-lo dentro de uma estrutura verbivocovisual onde atuem em toda a sua ex­ tensão, com o máximo de rendimento possíveL os elementos todos do poema." Gullar não treplicou . Os fatos subseqüent es demonstraram quem estava com a razão. As dúvidas de Gullar quanto à viabilidade da nova poesia acabaram sendo respondi­ das, na prática , por nós e por ele próprio , com a poesia con­ creta. Em 1955, três poemas da série poetamenos (inclusive o l gia fingers em que eu, segundo GuIlar, me havia "rendido ao ráfico") eram apresentados, numa oralização para 4 vozes mistas, sob a regência de Diogo Pacheco ("Ars Nova"), no Teatro de Arena , em São Paulo . O espetáculo, estreado no dia 21 de novembro e repetido no dia 5 do mês seguinte, le­ vava o título de "música e poesia concretas" e assim foi noti­ ciado' em "O Estado de São Paulo" na véspera da primeira uudição. Fiz, pessoalmente, a apresentação dos poemas, que 67 começava assim: "Em sincronização com a terminologia ado­ tada pelas artes visuais e, até certo ponto , pela música de van­ guarda, diria eu que há uma poesia concreta ." Em dezembro de 1956, organizamos em São Paulo a 1.a Exposição Nacional de Arte Concreta, juntamente com os pin­ tores do grupo de Waldemar Cordeiro. Do Rio foram convi­ dados, além de vários artistas plásticos , os poetas Ferreira GuIlar, W.ademir Dias Pino e Ronaldo Azeredo (que passou a integrar o grupo Noigandres) e o crítico Oliveira Bastos. GulIar compareceu com alguns cartazes de O Formigueiro, um poema caótico programado para 50 páginas, onde fazia uso abundante da fragmentação de palavras e da espacialização gráfica, embora mantive sse a sintaxe tradicional (as letras reu­ nidas formavam frases "unidirecionais", como: "a formiga tra­ balha na treva", etc.). Na explicação escrita que divulgou en­ tão, dizia GuIlar: "Tudo aqui se passa no silêncio." Tinha-se rendido ao gráfico? E falava "num processo que lembra o dos anúncios luminosos", sem mencionar que a idéia provinha diretamente do meu "interessante, mas frustrado" poetamenos, em cujo prefácio se lia: "mas luminosos ou filrnletras, quem os tivera?", e das explicaçõe s que a respeito da estrutura do poema eu lhe dera por carta: "com luminosos se resolveria facilmente o problema, apagando, acendendo, mostrando visões sucessivas parciais e totais, como em certos anúncios. " (carta de 1-4-55). Em suma, GuIlar adotava, na prática , nossos postulados, se bem que continuasse ainda voltado mais para a destruição do que para a construção, como o demonstrava O Formigueiro, com sua estrutura incontrolada e sua temática ultra-subjetiva; de qualquer forma, era já um resultado da provocação literária da vanguarda paulista. Num artigo para a revista MEC (Mi­ nistério de Educação e Cultura), n.o ôe março-abril de 1957, intitulado "Poesia Concreta ", Gullar demonstrava acatar nossas teorias e o nosso hoje, para ele, malsinado "elenco de autores", declarando textualmente:: "A poesia concreta, que acaba de romper as paredes da experiência de um grupo para se tornar um acontecimento, uma revolução , funda-se no trabalho sobre a linguagem poética, é o fruto de pesquisas que, partindo das conquistas válidas da poesia dita moderna (MaIlarm é, Joyce, Pound, Cummings, Oswald de Andrade, Drummond, João Ca­ bral de Melo Neto), rompeu com a sintaxe discursiva, unidi­ recional, trazendo em compensação para o campo da expressão poética as estruturas pluridimensionais, criadas pela relação vi­ sual dos elementos verbais e a exploração de suas cargas so- 68 noras." Depois, nossos caminhos se foram apartando. Veio, finalmente, a "cisão", forjada, jornalisticamente, no Suplemento Dominical do Jornal do Brasil. Gullar acrescentou-se um "neo" e um "não", mas não deixou de continuar "concreto" .. . Agora, quando o autor de A Luta Corporal parece querer abjurar as idéias de outrora, embora de certo modo as valorize, indiretamente, revivendo fatos e episódios relacionados com a sua e a nossa participação no movimento da poesia concreta, não posso deixar de oferecer meus préstimos para o reaviva­ mento de sua memória talvez desgastada pelo tempo. 'Contri­ buindo para esclarecer o verdadeiro estágio literário do poeta, por volta de 1955, quem sabe até favoreço, pela revelação de suas resistências ao movimento de vanguarda que então se for­ mava, o desfazimento das suspeitas acerca da "coerência" de sua posição atual. Não cabe, aqui, o exame dessa posição. Direi, apenas, que o que me desagr ada nessa proclamação da morte cultural da arte e da sua ressurreição na base de possíveis populismos nacional-socialistas ou realistas-sociais é o perigo da reincidên­ cia nas teses gêmeas e solidárias da "arte degenerada" (nazista) e da "arte decadente " (stalinista). A história recente nos mostro u aonde tais teses levam a arte e a cultura . De minha parte, prefiro ficar, mesmo contra a maré, com o lema de Maiacóvski: "Não pode haver arte revolucionária sem forma revolucionária " . GuIlar anuncia também que voltou ao silêncio. Se é para valer, lamento-o sinceramente. Mas o que menos me convence , nessa sua nova ameaça rimbaldiana, é a fala. O pregão do silêncio. Silêncio bem falante, para não dizer bem editado . Rimbaud calou-se sem fazer o elogio de si mesmo. Partiu para o contrabando . Nunca mais quis saber de poesia. Um dos melhores poetas do nosso modernismo virou embaixador no Ceilão. Nunca mais se ouviu falar dele. Maiakóvski , sufocado e sabotado pelos proletcultores stalinistas, preferiu matar-se a i próprio a matar sua arte. Calar-se como Rimbaud ou como Maiakóvski é uma coisa. Mas incendiar a metrópole das artes, para terminar chorando o grande poeta que o mundo perdeu, lembra mais a atitude do imperador romano. O silêncio apre­ goado perde toda a seriedade . :f: suspeito como as meias-ver­ dades. Sibilino como os lapsos de memória. E não tarda muito n ser quebrado. (1966) 69